AN ENDEAVOR AFTER Further Union BETWEEN CONFORMING and NONCONFORMING
PROTESTANTS, In several Particulars.

By a Minister of the Church of England.

Printed in the Year, MDCXCII.

An Endeavor after further Union between Conforming and Nonconforming
Protestants.
1. THE Nonconforming Brethren scruple subscribing this Clause in the 20th
Article of the Church of England, The Church has Power to decree Rites or
Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of Faith. I conceive that here is
nothing dissonant from the Principles and Practice of the Nonconforming
Brethren themselves. The foresaid Clause has two Parts; one supposes that the
Church has Power to decree Rites or Ceremonies; the other supposes that the
Church has Authority in Controversies of Faith. I begin with this latter
first. By the Church I understand the Society of Faithful People in Christ
Jesus, the Body of Christ. This Society must needs have Ministerial Authority
in Controversies of Faith, as is plain from 1 Cor. 2.15. But he that is
spiritual judges all things; yet he himself is judged of no Man. Now the
Church is a Spiritual Society, consisting of Men endued with the Spirit of
Christ, whereby they are capable of discerning spiritual things spiritually,
and consequently of discenning, judging, and deciding each Man for his own
Soul, what is of Faith, and what is not of Faith. This Reason is plainly hinted
in the following Verse in these Words, We have the Mind of Christ; that is, we
who are godly in Christ Jesus, have spiritual Understanding in the things of
Christ; we know his Voice, and follow him, and turn from the Voice of
Strangers. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they
are of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the World, 1 John
4.1. Now the Church is Christ's Beloved; and here she is commanded not to
believe every Spirit, but to try the Spirits whether they are of God; because
many false Prophets are gone out into the World. But she may not presume to try
the Spirits, if she have no Authority to try them; and she cannot have
Authority to try the Spirits, and to discern between the Voice of Christ and
the Voice of Antichrist, but she must needs have Authority in Controversies of
Faith. Do not the Nonconforming Brethren reject Socinianism, Arianism,
Pelagianism, the Popish Mass, and other the like Heresies and Delusions? By
what Authority do they reject them, and embrace the contrary Truths, and oblige
all their Flocks so ^o do, if really the Church has no Authority in
Controversies of F^^^h? It is then plain from their own Principles and
Practice, that they do well allow the Church to have Authority in Controversies
of Faith, that is, Ministerial Authority dependent on, and subject to Christ
her Head: which is the plain meaning of the Article, as is manifest from the
whole Tenor thereof, and the rest of the Articles subscribed by the
Nonconformist Brethren themselves.

2. Then for the other Branch, That the Church has Power to decree Rites or
Ceremonies, that is, decent and useful Rites or Ceremonies, circa Sacra, about
holy Things. That there are such, the Nonconformists will not deny. I instance
in the taking of an Oath; this is a Sacred Thing, a Religious Act, and a part
of God's Worship pertaining to Natural Religion, common to us and Heathens,
unalterably fixed by God as touching the Substance thereof, but not as touching
the external Form and Manner of taking it; here is a Latitude left by God. And
there may be innocent Variety; diverse Countries may have diverse Fashions, and
the same godly Man and Church of God may see cause to vary the Rite and
Solemnity of Swearing. As Abraham, Genesis 14.22. swore with his Hand lifted up
unto the Lord, the most high God. At another time he made his Servant swear
with his Hand put under the Thigh of Abraham his Master, Genesis 24. Those who in
the late Times in these Nations took the solemn League and Covenant, swore with
their right Hand lift up to Heaven: But now both Conforming and Nonconforming
Protestants, generally in England and Ireland, and, as I suppose, in Scotland
also, swear with their right Hand laid upon the Bible, as a Rite or Ceremony
not unlawful. Again, it is well known that the French Protestant Ministers do
use to preach with their Hats on, but the Protestant Ministers in England,
Scotland and Ireland, (not to name other foreign Churches) do use to preach
with their Hats off. Now Preaching the Gospel is a sacred Thing, a religious
Act, as all agree; and the Nonconformists will not deny but that for Substance
it is unalterably fixed by God, but whether with the Hat on or off is not
precisely determined by him. Here there may be innocent Variety, it is clearly
a Rite or Ceremony about a religious Act; one Church has this Rite or
Ceremony, another Church has another Rite or Ceremony quite contrary, and yet
both Ways lawful before God in the Judgment of the Nonconformist Brethren
themselves. For in things of this nature Custom creates a Law, otherwise the
Apostle had argued very weakly; But if any Man seem to be contentious, we have
no such Custom, neither the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11.16.

3. Again, giving notice to the People by the ringing or tolling of a Bell at
what time to assemble for God's public Worship, as also the testifying of our
Joy and Thankfulness to God on a 5th of November, by ringing of Bells, and by
Bonfires, and on the like extraordinary Days of Thanksgiving, are clearly Rites
or Ceremonies, circa Sacra, about holy Things, no where prescribed by God, and
yet held lawful and useful by the Nonconformist Brethren themselves. And
therefore they must needs own that the Church has Power to decree innocent,
useful and decent Rites or Ceremonies, circa Sacra, about holy Things, there
being clearly some such. Ceremonies or Rites in use among all the Churches of
Christ, approved by the Nonconformist Brethren, no where ordained by God; it
being sufficient as to things of this nature, that they are no where forbidden
by God, and being established by general Usage and Custom of the Church where
we live, that is equivalent to a Decree, and proves that the Church has Power
from Christ to begin and introduce such laudable and useful Rites and
Ceremonies, as to continue the Use and Observation thereof. Nee Disciplina ulla
est in his melior gravi prudentique Christiano, quam ut eo modo agat, quo agere
viderit Ecclesiam ad quamcunque forte devenerit. Quod enim neque contra fidem,
neque contra bonos mores injungitur, indifferenter est habendum, and pro eorum
inter quos vivitur Societate servandum est. August. Epist. 118. ad Jan.

4. It being thus plain that the Church has Power to decree Rites or
Ceremonies, and that these may not be the same in all places; then not only
this part of the 20th Article of the Church of England, but also the whole 34th
Article, as being for substance the same more largely expressed, must needs be
sound, and consonant to the Principles and Practice of the Nonconformist
Brethren, and may safely be subscribed by them. The Words of the 34th Article
are these; It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all Places,
one, or utterly like: for at all times they have been diverse, and changed,
according to the diversity of Countries, Times, and Men's Manners; so that
nothing be ordained against God's Word. Whosoever through his private Judgment,
willingly and purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the
Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be ordained and approved
by Common Authority, ought to be rebuked openly, (that other may fear to do the
like) as he that offends against the common Order of the Church, and wounds
the Consciences of the weak Brethren. Every Particular or National Church has
Authority to ordain, change and abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church,
ordained only by Man's Authority, so that all things be done to edifying.

5. If we desire a public Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England
touching this matter, there is that of Mr. Thomas Rogers, perused, and by the
lawful Authority of the Church of England allowed to be public. He in that
Exposition declares, that the Church has no Power to appoint what Rites or
Ceremonies she will: for she must decree none which be, either, for their own
Nature, impious; -- or for Use, superstitious; -- or for their Weight,
over-heavy, and grievous to be born; -- or for their Worthiness, in the Eyes of
the Ordainers, either of equal Price, or of more account than the very
Ordinances of God; -- or against the Liberty of Christians, and to the
entangling of them again with the Yoke of Bondage: or last of all, any way
contrary to the Commandments, Word, and Will of God. But the Rites, Ceremonies
and Constitutions of the Church, they must make altogether, and tend both to
the nourishing and increase of Love, Friendship, and Quietness among
Christians, and also to the retaining of God's People in the holy Service,
Worship and Fear of God, according to the Rule of the Apostle, -- Let all
things be done honestly, and by Order. All Churches Reformed consent hereunto.
So Mr. Thomas Rogers, page 105, 106. No Nonconforming Brother will gainsay this.

6. The Articles do not say that the Church has Power to decree the Cross in
Baptism, nor is any Man obliged by his Subscription to them, to declare that
she has, but only such humane Rites or Ceremonies circa Sacra, as be decent,
useful, and no way contrary to God's Word. Whether the Cross in Baptism, and
the Surplice in particular be decent, useful, and no way contrary to God's
Word, is a Question of another nature, and does not come into the present
Debate. For if it should be supposed that the Church has no Power to decree
the Cross in Baptism, and the Surplice, as being inconvenient, and no way
necessary; yet will it not thence follow that she has no Power to decree such
other Rites and Ceremonies circa Sacra, as are confessedly expedient and
useful, as to swear with the right Hand lift up to Heaven, or laid upon the
Bible, and to give notice to the People at what time to assemble for public
Worship by ringing or tolling of a Bell. Even Dr. Ames himself, whom no one
acquainted with Church Affairs, can suspect to have been partial in this
matter, and too favorable to humane Ceremonies circa Sacra, does acknowledge,
that if there be no Error in humane Appointment touching the Place and Hour of
God's public Worship, and the like things, ( Constitutio illa habenda sit
quasi simpliciter divina. Medull. Theol. l. 2. c. 14. number. 28.) that
Constitution is to be held, as it were, simply Divine: For that the Church do
assemble for God's public Worship at that Hour, which, all things considered,
is most convenient, he grants is God's Will. Now the ringing or tolling of a
Bell, is in the Judgment of Nonconformists themselves, and all other sober
Persons, an apt Mean, a prudential Ceremony, Rite, or Token of Man's
Appointment, For notifying to the Congregation at what Hour to assemble, like
the use of the Silver Trumpets under the Law, Numb. 10. And therefore the Hour
so appointed being meet and convenient for God's public Worship, according to
Dr. Ames's Concession in the foresaid Place, Agnosci debet quasi a Deo
constituta, it ought to be acknowledged, as it were, appointed by God, and
consequently the foresaid humane Ceremony whereby the Hour is notified. Which
is sufficient for my present Purpose, that there is nothing at all in the 20th
and 34th Articles of the Church of England, repugnant to the Principles of the
Nonconformists, but a full Agreement between both Sides as to this part of
Subscription.

7. For my part, I think that the Church has no power to decree the Cross in
Baptism, or any the like humane Ceremony therein. My Reason is, because Baptism
it self is a Divine Ceremony, and the Cross is a humane Ceremony; and the
Church has no power to decree and annex a humane Ceremony to a Divine, it
being plainly superfluous and unnecessary, there is neither Precept nor Example
in all the Book of God to warrant such a Decree. The Church has no Power but
for Edification, 2 Cor. 10.8. and 2 Cor. 13.10. She may impose none but
necessary things, Acts 15.28. such as be some way necessary to Order, Unity, or
Decency in God's Service, which the Cross in Baptism antecedently to humane
Imposition, is not. It is necessary that Baptism be done in a fit Place, at a
meet Hour, by one authorized, in a decent Garment, in a sit Posture, with fit
Words, and decent external Reverence and Solemnity; but there is no necessity
at all of the Cross, or any the like humane Ceremony in Baptism. Neither the
Light of Nature, nor the Institution of Christ, nor the Practice of the
Apostles and first Churches planted by their Ministry, and recorded in
Scripture for a Rule and Pattern to all succeeding Churches to the end of the
World, do warrant any such Decree and Imposition. All needful Circumstances,
all that is any way requisite to the orderly, decent, laudable, holy, just, and
exemplary dispensing and partaking of Baptism, may be observed without the
Cross, or any the like humane Ceremony. To say the contrary, is to reproach the
Institution of Christ and his Apostles, and the Churches planted by their
Ministry, and to set the Wisdom of Man above the Wisdom of God, and bring in
Arbitrary Government into the Church, and lay a Foundation for numberless
unnecessary humane Ceremonies in God's Worship, as in the Papacy, and great
Evils and Desolations in the Church, by inflicting doleful Penalties upon
worthy and good Men, who out of Conscience refuse Conformity to such
unnecessary Decrees, as the Event does sadly manifest. But that it is unlawful
to use the Cross in Baptism, while imposed by the Supreme Authority of the
Nation under pain of Deprivation, is more than I can prove, neither will I judge
conscientious Nonconformists who meekly dissent.

8. Again, the Nonconforming Brethren scruple Subscription to the 35th Article
of the Church of England touching Homilies: which Article stands upon two
Points. First, that the two Books of Homilies contain a godly, and wholesome, and
necessary Doctrine. Secondly, that therefore they judge them to be read in
Churches by the Ministers diligently and distinctly. The former Point I cannot
think the Nonconforming Brethren, who have read the Homilies, will deny. The
Article does not say that there is nothing in any of the Homilies savouring of
humane Weakness and Imperfection: for the main they may and do contain a godly,
wholesome and necessary Doctrine, though there may perhaps be in them some
tolerable Defects, as is incident to most good Books not divinely inspired, and
even to the best Translation of the holy Scriptures. Touching the latter Point,
the Nonconforming Brethren, by their Subscription to the 6th Article, must
needs own and allow, that the Apocrypha-Books ( as Hierom says) the Church
does read for Example of Life, and Instruction of Manners; but yet does it not
apply to stablish any Doctrine. This plainly intimates that they are not
against all reading of other Books than the Bible in the Church, due
distinction being put between the one and the other. Neither will they condemn,
but rather approve the French Protestant Churches heretofore, who in the want
of daily Pastors, did in many Places use to read both privately and publicly
Mr. Calvin's Sermons upon Job, as Mr. Beza in his Preface to them does relate.
And we may well think that this and no other was the Intention of the Composers
of this Article, and of the Homilies, as thinking it better, in the want of
Pastors qualified with ministerial Gifts and Ability, to compose edifying
Sermons-daily and continually of their own, that the People have sound and
godly Sermons of others composing, read to them in public, than be without all
public Instruction. This Sense will well stand with the Words of the Article,
and it is agreeable to the Opinion both of Conforming and Nonconforming
Brethren. And therefore as to this also I may well conclude that there is no
difference between the two Parties.

9. There is but one more Article unsubscribed by the Nonconforming Brethren,
and that is the 36th concerning the Book of Ordination. Touching which, if the
Episcopal Brethren will own the Nonconforming Brethren, ordained by Presbyters
without a Bishop, to be true Ministers of Christ, and their Ordination to be
valid, and will cordially embrace them as Brethren and Fellow-Ministers, as in
Conscience they are bound, all other Matters will either be accorded; or what
cannot be fully accorded, may be tolerated with mutual Brotherly Love to each
other, according to that Apostolical Canon; Let us therefore, as many as be
perfect, be thus minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall
reveal even this unto you. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let
us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same thing, Phil. 3.15, 16. But if
the Episcopal Brethren shall judge the Nonconforming Ministers, ordained by
Presbyters without a Bishop, to be no Ministers of Christ, and their Ordination
to be null, and their Baptism, Preaching, dispensing the Lord's Supper, and all
other their Ministerial Acts to be mere Nullities, then there is no hope of
Accord, nor of Toleration with mutual Brotherly Love; a Schism there is, and
like to be. Concerning which I will set down a Passage which I find related by
Mr. Clark in the Life of that eminent Nonconforming Minister Mr. Greenham. On a
time the Bishop of Eli sent for him to appear about his Nonconformity, at which
time the Bishop told him that there was a great Schism in the Church, asking
him where the Blame was to be laid, whether upon the Conformists or
Nonconformists? To which he readily answered, that it might lie on either side,
or on neither side: For (said he) if they loved one another as they ought, and
would do all good Offices each for other, thereby maintaining Love and Concord,
it lay on neither side; otherwise which Party soever makes the Rent, the Schism
lies upon their score. The Bishop was so pleased with this Answer, that he
dismissed him in peace.

10. They who repute Men ordained by Presbyters without a Bishop, to be no
Ministers, and their Ministerial Acts to be Nullities, are not regular Sons of
God's Church in England, but a Sect, Combination, and Party of Men in it, who
are tainted and defiled with an uncharitable Principle, contrary to one Article
of the Christian Faith, The Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints. For
God's Church in England does own and embrace the Protestant Ministers in
Holland, France, Helvetia and Geneva, ordained by Presbyters without a Bishop,
to be true Ministers of Christ, and the Churches guided by them to be true
Churches: This has been the constant Doctrine of God's Church in England all
along from the beginning of the Reformation to this day. And unless we so hold,
we yield the Cause to the Papists, and overthrow the Protestant Cause. The
Papists ask, Where was our Church before Luther? To which the Answer has been
often made, That wheresoever upon Earth God had a People believing in the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, retaining Baptism and the Lord's Supper,
for Substance sound and good, and living righteously, soberly and godly, there
was our Church. We are sure from God's Word, and the sound Belief of all
Christian People, that such a Church God had upon Earth before Luther, and will
have to the End of the World. We do not derive our Church and our Ministry from
Rome, and the Roman Papacy, but from Christ and the holy Scriptures, and the
Evangelical Covenant, by the Tenor whereof, upon our sincere Repentance and
Incorporation into Christ by lively Faith, all things become ours, whether
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death, or things
present, or things to come; all are ours, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. And consequently
whatsoever is true, just, good, any way useful to God and Christ Jesus, and the
Souls of Men, among Papists, Jews. Turks and Heathens, that becomes ours for
spiritual Uses to our Souls. In leaving the Papacy we have not left Christ and
his Church, but we have left Idolatry, false Worship, Superstition, and the Way
of Damnation, and are become a found part of, and joined to that holy Catholic
Church, which is the Mystical Body of Christ, the blessed Company of all
faithful People, built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone. Upon this Divine Foundation all
the Protestant Churches stand; and they who deny Ordination by Presbyters
without a Bishop to be valid, must (will they, nill they) fall in with the
Principles of the Papists against the whole Reformation, because the Cause is
common.

11. The Ministry of the Nonconforming Brethren does not stand by the late Act
for Toleration, but by God's Word: that Act does only privilege and secure them
from Penalties and Prosecutions at Man's Bar. They in their Consciences judge
some things imposed by the Act of Uniformity, flatly sinful, though they honor
and love conscientious and worthy Conformists, who think otherwise. Whether
they err or not, is not the Question in order to Peace; all the while it is
certain that some things imposed are in their own nature no way necessary to
Holiness, to Order, to Unity, to Decency in God's Service, to Edification, to
Peace; all which may well be, and consist, without the things imposed, in the
Judgment of Christ and his Apostles, and the first Churches planted by the
Apostles for a Pattern to all succeeding Ages, and in the Judgment of all other
impartial Christians, yea and of Adversaries themselves.

12. The Nonconforming Brethren may well be subject to the Bishops and their
Courts, as Officers appointed by the State, touching things that concern the.
Office, so far forth as they require nothing in their Judgment sinful: for
Subjection so far, is not inconsistent with, but rather according to their own
Principles. In like manner, the Episcopal Brethren in Scotland, who now are the
Nonconforming Party there, may well be subject to the Presbyterian way of
Discipline, as an Ordinance appointed by the State, so far forth as nothing is
imposed on them, which in their Judgment is sinful: for Subjection so far is
well consistent with their own Principles. Supreme Magistrates being appointed
by God to be nursing Fathers to the Church, and to rule all Estates in their
Dominions by the Sword, all, both Bishops and Presbyters, in their Dominions
must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake, both
to the King as supreme, and to such as act legally under him.

The Validity of Ordination by Presbyters without a Bishop.
1. ORdination by those who succeed the Apostles of Christ in the most
necessary and principal part of their Office, must needs be valid. But we will
give our selves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word, Acts
6.4. This is clearly the most necessary and principal part of the Apostles
Office, because it has the greatest Aptness and Tendency by Divine
Institution, to convert and edify Souls, to breed and increase in them saving
Faith, to enlarge and add to God's Church, to destroy the Works of the Devil,
and make all Persons holy and happy through the gracious Concurrence of the
Holy Ghost. Now it is notorious and undeniably evident, that many Presbyters do
give themselves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word: And
therefore Ordination by them without a Bishop, must needs be valid.

2. God's gracious Promise is, I will give you Pastors according to mine Heart,
which shall feed you with Knowledge and Understanding, Jer. 3.15. This is an
Evangelical Promise fulfilled by God to Multitudes of Christian People in many
parts of the World; they are blessed by him with Pastors according to his
Heart, ordained by able and faithful Presbyters without a Bishop, such Pastors
as do feed them with heavenly Knowledge and Understanding, whose Labors in the
Ministry God does graciously and abundantly succeed and prosper with the
Conversion, Confirmation, and Edification of Souls. Satan does implacably hate
their Ministry; and they who are not converted and edified by it, are left
without excuse, and cannot but be convicted in Conscience that the Ministry of
such Pastors is Divine and from above.

3. Christ, when he puts forth his own Sheep, he goes before them, and the
Sheep follow him; for they know his Voice. And a Stranger will they not follow,
but will flee from him; for they know not the Voice of Strangers. -- My Sheep
(says he) hear my Voice, and I know them, and they follow me, John 10.4, 5, 27.
Now in many parts of the Christian World Christ does govern, feed, and
discipline his Sheep, that is, his Saints, by the Ministry of Pastors ordained
by Presbyters without a Bishop. The Sheep of Christ have spiritual Wisdom and
Sagacity, whereby they are capable of discerning spiritual things spiritually,
and can perceive that the Word in the Mouth of such Pastors is the Word of God,
and the Voice of Christ; they are sure that it is so by its Divine and Heavenly
Effects upon their Hearts, causing them to hate all known Sin, and shun the
Occasions thereof, to love Righteousness, to do justly, and love Mercy, and
walk humbly with their God; to esteem very highly in Love for their Work's sake
all faithful Ministers, and such as labor in the Word and Doctrine, and to
turn from all such as by their Fruits do plainly show themselves to be Wolves
in Sheeps Clothing, Men never sent of God, Subverters of Peoples Souls.

4. God bids the Prophet Ezekiel to tell the Children of his People, and say
unto them, When I bring the Sword upon a Land, if the People of the Land take a
Man of their Coasts, and set him for their Watchman, etc. Ezekiel. 33.2. This
plainly intimates that it belongs to the People, as having Souls incomparably
precious, which God has commanded them diligently to keep, and has given them
charge of, with wise Care, according to the general Rules of God's Word, to
take a fit Man, and set him for their Watchman, Guide and spiritual Pastor.
Accordingly the People in many parts of the Christian World, do take a fit Man
ordained by Presbyters without a Bishop, and set him for their Watchman and
spiritual Guide, and partake of his Ministerial Labor and Oversight, with
great Profit to their Souls: and therefore his Ordination must needs be valid.

5. God's Word is, Let the Presbyters that rule well, be counted worthy of
double Honor, especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy
5.17. Whence it is plain that such as labor in the Word and Doctrine, are the
most eminent Ministers of Christ, and Pillars of God's Church, because double
Honor is especially due to such, and not to such as do not labor in the Word
and Doctrine, though they rule well: for though double Honor is due to them
also, yet it is not especially and eminently due to them that rule well, but to
them that labor in the Word and Doctrine. Now laboring in the Word and
Doctrine is a thing in its own nature common to the Bishop and the Presbyter,
as all agree; and it is manifest in Experience, that many Presbyters are
eminent Laborers in the Word and Doctrine, and many Bishops in the Christian
World are not; they neither labor in the Word and Doctrine, nor rule well, but
rule very ill, and teach Idolatry, false Worship, the Doctrine of Seven
Sacraments, Salvation partly by Grace, and partly by Merit of Works; with
holding the Cup in the Lord's Supper from the People, Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, God's Service in a Tongue not understood by the People;
they kill God's Saints, thinking they do him Service in so doing; this do the
Bishops in Popish Countries. And therefore certainly, according to God's
unchangeable Law, and the Grounds of Religion, Ordination by Orthodox, Godly
and Exemplary Presbyters, who labor in the Word and Doctrine, must needs be
more Valid, more Divine, more Apostolical, and more Honorable than Ordination
by such Bishops as neither rule well, nor labor in the Word and Doctrine, but
they rule very ill, and are Antichristian. God's Word is, Them that honor me,
I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel
2.30. God judges Ministers according to their Works, not by bare Names, and
Titles, and Robes, and worldly Grandeur, and Princes Favor, and earthly
Riches, and things common to good and bad Men, but by inward real Worth, and
Ministerial Ability and Fidelity, honoring those who honor him, and those
more abundantly, who more abundantly honor him, and are by his Grace
Evangelically worthy of Honor. Ephesians. 5.1.
Now we are to be Followers of God as dear Children; and as in other Points, so
particularly in the Point of Ordination, prefer a Presbyter who labors in the
Word and Doctrine, before a non-labouring Bishop.

6. The Apostle says, Other Foundation can no Man lay, than that is laid,
which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. Ordination by able and faithful Presbyters
without a Bishop, is built upon this Foundation, and so it must needs be valid,
firm and immovable. It is done publicly with Fasting and Prayer, with the
laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14.
with due Trial and Probation of the Person to be ordained, with the Liking and
Consent of the People, with sound Belief in God the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, with express or implicit Renunciation of Arianism,
Socinianism, Pelagianism, Popish Idolatry and Superstition, and all other
Antichristian Sects and false Ways of Salvation, with separation of the Person
ordained for the Work of the Ministry all his Days, with no Imposition of any
thing flatly sinful, with public Profession of the Sufficiency and Perfection
of the holy Scriptures for the making of us complete in all the Will of God,
thoroughly furnished unto all good Works by the special Grace of Christ, with
Authority not to be a Minister to this or that particular People only, but to
be a Minister of Christ related to the whole Church on Earth in general, and
specially to that particular People to which he has Call; and all this with
the Concurrence, Countenance and Protection of the higher Powers in Scotland,
Holland, Helvetia, Geneva, New England, and many other parts of the Christian
World. If this be not valid Ordination, there is no such thing as valid
Ordination; it must needs be valid in the Judgment of all such as approve the
23d Article of the Church of England.

7. They who maintain that Ordination by Presbyters without a Bishop is not
valid, proceed upon this Supposition, that the Church of God is a Political
Society, consisting of two parts essentially, a ruling and a ruled Part; that
while Christ was upon Earth, he was the governing Part, but he leaving the
Earth, ordained the Apostles to be his Lieutenants, and Peter the Foreman of
them all; that Bishops succeed the Apostles as to the Government of the Church
Universal upon Earth, Subesse Romano Pontifici omni humanae Creaturae,
declaramus and definimus omnino effe de necessitate Salutis. Bonif. 8. in
extrav. de majorit. and obed. cap. anam sanctam. Col. 212.
and are Christ's Ecclesiastical Lieutenants; and that the Bishop of Rome is
Episcopus primae Sedis, the Chief and Foreman of all the Bishops; that this
Hierarchy and Institution is Divine, and all who do not comply with it are
guilty of damnable Schism, and so dying, cannot be saved.

8. I shall freely grant, that if really the Church of God be, what they
suppose, a Political Society, consisting of two Parts essentially, a ruling and
a ruled Part, then all the rest is unavoidable, and I shall be obliged to turn
Papist, and I promise so to do. But if this first Point, which is the
Foundation and Cornerstone of their Fabric, fail, and prove ruinous, then
their whole Cause, as built on it, must needs fall with it; and (will they,
nill they) they must confess that Ordination by Presbyters without a Bishop is
valid, and that their Separation from, and opposing themselves against such
Ministers, and the Churches governed by them without a Bishop, as an
Ecclesiastical Lieutenant, is a very great Sin, and their Charge of Schism will
recoil, and light upon themselves.

9. I overthrow the Foundation of their Hierarchy by this invincible Argument:
If the Church of God be a Political Society, consisting of two Parts
essentially, a ruling and a ruled Part; then there can be no difference between
Moses and Christ, between the Law and Grace, and then the Christian Religion is
destroyed; For the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus
Christ, John 1.17. Moses under God was Political Ruler of the Church in the
Wilderness, which was the Church of God. He commanded them a Law to observe,
which he had received from God, Moses commanded us a Law, even the Inheritance
of the Congregation of Jacob. And he was King in Jeshurun. Deuteronomy. 33.4, 5.
with Sanctions of Rewards and Punishments, assuring Happiness to the faithful
Observers of it, and denouncing God's Curse and Vengeance against the
unfaithful Breakers of it. But Moses being but a mere Man, and not God, being
also himself a Sinner, a Child of Adam conceived and born in Sin, and by Nature
a Child of Wrath even as others, and not sufficient of himself, without God's
special Grace, to think a good Thought, he could not give Repentance and Pardon
of Sin, and the Spirit of Adoption, either to himself or any other; he could
not by supernatural Grace write the Divine Law in the Heart of any, and shed
abroad God's Love in the Heart, and make it holy: this is utterly above Moses
and the Law to do and effect. For if there had been a Law given, which could
have given Life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law. But the
Scripture has concluded all under Sin, that the Promise by Faith of Jesus
Christ might be given to them that believe. Gal. 3.21, 22.

10. But now Jesus Christ is not another Moses, a bare Political Ruler and
governing Part of God's Church, but he is the Word made Flesh; that Man in whom
dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily, equal in respect of his Deity
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, the Purchaser of the Church with his own
Blood; and he gives Repentance and Pardon of Sin, and Perseverance, and
Salvation, to Abel, Abraham, Moses, David, Peter, Paul, and the rest of the
Elect in all Ages; -- Quia tametsi Christus non ideo ad nos venit, ut tanquam
alter Moses novae legis pondere nos premeret, sed ut jacentes sub onere legis
auxilio gratiae sublevaret, etc. Bellarm. de Verbo Dei, l. 1. c. 3.
these are the holy Catholic Church, the Mystical Body of Christ, the blessed
Company of all faithful People; and so Christ is truly all in all, which no
mere Political Ruler and governing Part can be. 1 Cor. 1.30. Col. 3.11. 1 Cor.
12.6.

11. All sound Writers, all both Protestants and Papists agree, that Political
Society, Rule and Government, is common to Christians and Heathens. For all
Political Government is either Monarchical, or Aristocratical, or Democratical.
But the Government of God's Church is none of these, because all these are
Forms and Kinds of Civil Government common to Christians and Heathens, to godly
and ungodly Men, as all confess. But the Church of God cannot consist in any
thing common to Christians and Heathens, to godly and ungodly Men, because it
is a Special Society subsisting by the special Grace of God in Christ, and by
special Laws supernaturally written in the Hearts of all regenerate Men, who
are the Church of God, the Mystical Body of Christ, a select Society differing
in Kind and Substance from all ungodly, faithless and impenitent Men, as Light
does from Darkness, and Christ from Belial, and a Man from a Beast, and a
living Man from a dead Man.

12. Though Christ make great use of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors
and Teachers in the Government of his Church, and without Ministers ordinarily
the Church cannot subsist; yet Christ himself is sole Head, Lord and Husband of
the whole Church, and every Part thereof; only his Voice is to be heard in the
Church, for his Sheep know his Voice, and follow him and no other, John 10.4,
5, 27. He does not govern the Church as a worldly Monarch and Political Ruler,
by Bishops as his Deputies and Lieutenants. But he dwells in the Hearts of his
Saints by Faith, and is graciously present with all his faithful ones to the
end of the World; and where two or three are gathered together in his Name,
there is he in the midst of them. And where is Christ the Head, and real Saints
his Members by Faith and holy Invocation, there is God's Church both Name and
Thing. But they who despise, contemn, and shut their Ears against the Voice of
Christ by his Ministers, cannot be said to be gathered together in Christ's
Name, but in their own Name.

13. As in defining a Man, he is not to be defined barely by what is common to
a Man and a Beast, or to a living and a dead Man: so in desining the Church of
God, it is not to be defined barely by what is common to real Saints and
Hypocrites, to sound and unsound Professors. For if you so define it, you leave
out the principal thing, and that is godly Sincerity, Divine Faith working by
Love, this being to the whole Church, and to every Part and Member thereof,
what the Soul is to the Body, without which it is a dead Corpse. For he is not a
Jew, Romans 2.28, 29.
which is one outwardly; neither is that Circumcision, which is outward in the
Flesh: but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and Circumcision is that of the
Heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose Praise is not of Men but of
God. Hypocrites and unsound Professors, as to external religious Order, and
Communion in the Word, and Prayer, and Sacraments publicly, are of the Church,
but they are not the Church; like as they are not all Israel, Romans 9.6.
which are of Israel.

14. Hence it is evident that all those, and only those, in England, which
believing in God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, repent truly of their
Sins, and live justly, soberly and godly, in hope of eternal Salvation by
Christ, are eminently God's Church in England: for these dying in the Lord, go
to Heaven, where they are for ever Members of the Church Triumphant, although
when they were upon Earth, they might by too many be counted and called
Schismatics, Heretics, Men not fit to live, and used as the World is
accustomed to use God's Holy ones, whom it hates. But God's Judgment and the
World's Judgment do vastly differ. And all those in England who are by
Profession Christian People, and are void of godly Sincerity and heavenly
Regeneration, whether they be Protestants or Papists, Conformists or
Nonconformists, Bishops or Presbyters, Pastors or People, Rulers or Ruled,
(that does not alter the Case) they are for the present Children of the Devil,
under the Wrath and Curse of God, and liable to eternal Damnation; and
therefore they are no sound Members of God's Church, and consequently no sound
Members of God's Church in England; they are but equivocally Church-People, as
a dead Man may be called a Man, and an adulterous Wise a Wife, and a traitorous
Subject a Subject; they are but as Cham in Noah's Ark, as Judas among the
Apostles, as Tares among the Wheat: They profess that they know God, Tit. 1.16
but in Works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and unto every
good Work reprobate, And therefore such as so die, without heavenly Repentance,
most certainly go to Hell, and are for ever cut off from God's Church both
Militant and Triumphant.

15. Hence also it is evident that the distinction of God's Church into
Universal and Particular, Invisible and Visible, Ruling and Ruled,
Representative and Represented, Political and Mystical, Organized and
Unorganized, Congregational and not Congregational, Diocesan, Provincial,
National and Patriarchal, as into two or more Kinds, is Atheological, and
repugnant to the Nature of God's Church, which is the Mystical Body of Christ,
and therefore it cannot admit of two Kinds: For as there cannot be two Heads to
one Body, so there cannot be two Bodies to one Head. But if the Church, which
is the Body of Christ, be distinguishable into two Kinds, then it is no longer
one holy Catholic Church, one Body of Christ, but two contrary Bodies to one
Head, which is monstrous. By the same reason that you distinguish the Church
of God into two Kinds, you may distinguish it into more, into three, four, a
hundred, a thousand Kinds, and so in infinitum; there can be no Stop, there
must needs be endless Multiplicity, and consequently no such thing as the
Church of God, no real difference between the Church and the World, Saints and
Infidels.

16. There is no such thing as a universal Church on Earth, distinct from all
particular Churches. For the whole, as distinct from all the Parts, is only
Notion and Conceit, as a Man in the Moon, or Castle in the Air, a mere Fiction.
If there should be here and there a Christian by himself alone, in some
Wilderness or Cave, remote from all humane Society and Converse for some time,
or in a Ship at Sea among Infidels, or as Daniel in the Lions Den, or Jeremy in
the Dungeon, or Joseph sold for a Slave into Egypt among Heathens, remote from
all Churches, he would be instar Ecclesiae, instead of a Church to himself. For
God being supposed graciously present with him, all Wants are made up in God;
he is all, not as exclusive of Instruments, Means, and second Causes, where
they may be had: but where they cannot be had, through no fault of ours, but
through God's most wise and holy overruling Providence, and he be graciously
with us, and talk with us by the invisible Operation of his Word and Spirit,
and in the multitude of our sad Thoughts within us delight our Souls with his
heavenly Comforts, here is God's Church; This is none other but the House of
God, and this is the Gate of Heaven, Genesis 28.17.

17. There are Multitudes of particular Churches upon Earth, as the Churches in
England, in Scotland, in Ireland, in Holland, in Germany, and other Places,
which have particular Guides and Pastors set over them, and are distinguished
one from another by convenient local Bounds and Limits, and Diversity in some
external Modes and Customs and Rites, tho they all agree in the Substance and
Foundation of true Religion. Hence according to Scripture we say, The Church of
God at Ephesus, the Church of God at Corinth, the Churches of Galatia, meaning
all the Christian People at Ephesus, all the Christian People at Corinth, and
so forth. But this is no proof that God's Church is two, Universal and
Particular: like as it is no proof that the Body of a Man is two Bodies,
because it is one Body consisting of many Members; and that England is two
Kingdoms, because it is one Kingdom consisting of many Counties, Cities, Towns
and Villages.

18. The Church of God is plain and visible to such as believe the Gospel, as
is the Sun at Noonday to all that are not blind. But who so blind as those
that will not see? If Men wilfully shut the Eyes of their Minds by Unbelief,
and call Darkness Light, and Light Darkness, the Church of God the Synagogue of
Satan, and the Synagogue of Satan the Church of God, they may deceive
themselves, they cannot deceive him. For the Foundation of the Lord stands
sure, having this Seal, The Lord knows them that are his. And let every one
that names the Name of Christ, depart from Iniquity. 2 Timothy 2.19.

19. We see those Men and Women, who are by Profession Christians, and of the
Church, they are as visible as any other People upon Earth. But that which
makes them sincere Christians inwardly before God, we see not, but believe; for
Faith is the Evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. And it is only sincere
Christians which are the Church of God, so as to be in a State of Salvation.
Our own godly Sincerity we may be infallibly sure of; the Spirit it self
bearing witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God, Romans 8.18.
But we cannot be infallibly sure of the Sincerity of any other in particular,
neither is such Assurance necessary.

20. Again, those who deny Ordination by Presbyters without a Bishop to be
valid, suppose that God's Church does not consist wholly and only by the Divine
Laws, but partly by the Divine Laws, and partly by Humane Laws. But this is a
great Error, repugnant to the Nature of God's Church: for the Church is not
partly the Church of God, and partly the Church of Man, but it is absolutely
and entirely the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood;
Act. 20.28.
and therefore it consists by the Divine Laws only, not as exclusive of
wholesome and useful Humane Laws; these are subservient, but they add no
Perfection to the Divine Laws; they do not, they cannot by themselves bind the
Conscience: for the Conscience of Man cannot be bound save by something
superior to it, which no humane Law by it self can be. Indeed we are bound to
be subject to the higher Powers, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience
sake, and peaceably to observe and conform to humane Laws not repugnant to
God's Law. But this Bond and Tie upon the Conscience does not arise from Man's
Law, but from God's Law, only this is superior to the Conscience. The Church
is absolutely and entirely the Body of Christ, his Wife and Spouse, and not
partly the Body of Christ, his Wife and Spouse, and partly the Body, Wife and
Spouse of this or that Man, or number of Men. And therefore she is to be wholly
governed by the Laws of Christ her only Head and Husband, and by no other. But
then the more observant she is of Christ's Laws, and obedient to his Divine
Commands, she will be the more observant of Second-Table-Duties, and careful to
render to all, both Superiors, Equals and Inferiors, their just Dues, and all
that lies in her to live peaceably with all Men, and to give no Offense to any;
because all these are Duties laid upon her by the Divine Laws.

21. The Voice of God's Church, and every part thereof, is, Psalm. 62.5, 6.
God only is my Rock and my Salvation. Not partly God, and partly Man, Bishops,
Presbyters, Princes, Parliaments, Convocations, Synods, an Arm of Flesh, humane
Laws, Canons and Decrees. But God only is my Rock and my Salvation, he is
alsufficient, he is all in all; while we cleave only and wholly to him, and
observe his Laws, and keep in his good Way, we are safe and happy, no Evil can
befall us, because he is Almighty to protect and provide for us, and give us
every good thing, and will not fail so to do. But if we trust partly in God,
and partly in Man, and ascribe any the least part of the Glory, belonging to
God and his Law, to Man and his Law, and contend that the Being and Well-being
of the Church, from first to last, does not consist by God's Law only, but
partly by his Law, and partly by Man's Law; then we are guilty of spiritual
Idolatry and Adultery, we debase God, and deify Man; we make God and Man
coequal and coordinate Causes of the Churches Peace and Safety both temporal
and eternal, which is a transcendent Vice, and plucks up all true Religion by
the Roots, and makes God's Church adulterous, partly Christ's Wife, and partly
the Wife of the Pope, of this or that humane Lawmakers, which Christian Ears
cannot bear to hear.

22. Again, the same Adversaries of the Validity of Ordination by Presbyters
without a Bishop, are constrained to hold them by a Popish distinction between
the Power of Order and the Power of Jurisdiction, confessing that by God's Law
the Bishop and the Presbyter have equal Authority as to the Power of Order, but
not as to the Power of Jurisdiction. But this Doctrine and Distinction God's
Law has not, and therefore it may not be received. For the present Dispute
does nearly touch that great Article of our Faith, The holy Catholic Church,
the Communion of Saints. And it is a sure Rule, consented to by all sound
Divines, that as to Articles of Faith, no Doctrine or Distinction, not
contained in God's Word, may be admitted. But God's Word has not this Doctrine
and Distinction, but the contrary; it fully assures us that the Power of Order
is all the Power which Christ communicated to his Apostles and their
Successors, it being abundantly sufficient, through his gracious Assistance and
Concurrence, for the ordering, guiding, governing and disciplining of the
Church unto the end of the World. And what Power of regular Jurisdiction is in
Bishops distinct from the Power of Order, is not Divine, but Humane, from Man's
Law, and not from God's Law. And therefore if it should be supposed that
Ordination by Presbyters without a Bishop is an Error, as being against an
innocent Law of Man; yet is it not therefore null and invalid: for though it
ought not to be done, yet being once done, it is firm and valid, because done
by those, who by God's Law are confessed to have Power to do it, being equal
with the Bishop as to the Power of Order; it being very absurd, and a
Contradiction in adjecto, that those should have Power to order, who have no
Power to ordain; and that those should have equal Power to order, who have not
equal Power to ordain.

23. True it is, that besides that fixed Pastors of each particular Church,
there were in the primitive Times the Apostles, as general Overseers, who did
use to visit the Churches, and took care of them. But this was no Act of
external Jurisdiction distinct from the Power of Order, but what may innocently
and safely be done by an eminent Presbyter qualified with Gifts and Graces for
the Work, of his own free accord, according to the general Rules of God's Word.
Mr. John Dury a Scottish Presbyter, in the Reign of King Charles I. made it his
business for thirty Years together, purely upon a Christian Account, and of his
own free Heart, without all color of external Jurisdiction, to visit the
transmarine Churches Lutheran and Calvinistical, and by writing, personal
Conserence, and unwearied Travels, to reconcile them touching Predestination,
Christ's Ubiquity, and the Sacrament; tho the Success was not answerable,
through the unreasonable Stiffness of the Lutheran Party. And in the Reign of
King Charles II. Mr. Thomas Gouge, a Nonconforming Presbyter, did for several
Years together in Person use to visit all the Counties in Wales, purely upon a
Christian Account, at his own Charge, without all show of external
Jurisdiction, having the Bible for his Warrant, and the Glory of serving God
and doing Good, for his Reward, making it his business to promote Religion and
Learning. An Apostolical and most blessed Work, and not without great Success.

24. True it is, that the Distinction between Bishop and Presbyter is of great
Antiquity and large Extent. But that in the time of Cyprian it imported more,
than with us at this day does the Distinction between the Dean and Chapter of
each Cathedral Church, between the Warden and Fellows of Manchester, between
the Parish-Minister and his Curate, will not be easily proved. Now all know
that all these are but one Order in the Ministry, and this Inequality is not at
all inconsistent with the Principles and Practice of the Presbyterian Brethren.

25. Finally, the great Principle of those of the Church of England, who hold
Ordination by Presbyters without a Bishop to be invalid, is this, that to every
Church there ought by God's Law to be a Bishop; and no Bishop, no Church
ordinarily. Now either they will stand to this their Principle, or they will
not. If not, then they undo their whole Cause, and stultify themselves. If yea,
then also their Cause cannot stand: for they will not deny the Parish-Churches
to be true Churches. But these in England are more than nine thousand, and the
Diocesan Bishops are but some six and twenty. Can six and twenty Men be Bishops
to more than nine thousand Churches, if to every Church there must be a Bishop?
Either then you must grant that the Parish-Churches are not true Churches, and
then Separation from them is a Duty, and you yield the Cause to the Brownists:
Or, if you admit them to be true Churches, upon your own Grounds you must needs
yield that the several Parish-Ministers, who are but Presbyters, are as true
Bishops as they are Churches; and then Ordination by them without a Diocesan,
must needs be valid; and Diocesan Bishops are no Bishops of God's making. This
then is the Issue of the Matter, that the Parish-Ministers who are but
Presbyters, are Bishops of God's making, and Diocesan Prelates are Bishops of
Man's making.

The Nullity of all external Jurisdiction in the Church, not derived from, and
dependent on the State.
1. THere cannot be external Jurisdiction without external Supremacy. For all
Jurisdiction does necessarily import a Supreme, in whose Sentence and Decision
all contending Parties are to acquiesce, and from whom there can be no Appeal.
Therefore there cannot be external Jurisdiction without external Supremacy. Now
under God all external Supremacy is in the State. Let every Soul be subject
unto the higher Powers, Romans 13.1. that is, those who bear the Sword, as is
afterward declared, ver. 4. and the Context plainly shows. Submit your selves
to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake: whether it be to the King, as
supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the
Punishment of Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do well: 1 Pet. 2.13,
14. Herewith agrees the old Oath of Supremacy, and the 37th Article of the
Church of England, unanimously subscribed by the Episcopal and Presbyterial
Clergy.

2. To set up a contrary external Jurisdiction and Supremacy in the Church, is
to overthrow the Nature of the Church, and to undermine the State, and to act
contrary to the Example of Christ and his Apostles, and to imitate that Man of
Sin, the Son of Perdition, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4.

3. Christ himself, considered as Man, in the Days of his Flesh, and State of
Humiliation, had no external Jurisdiction; he exercised none, he claimed none,
but disclaimed it, saying, My Kingdom is not of this World, John 18.36. Man,
who made me a Judge, or a Divider over you? Luke 12.14. It belonged not to him
to exercise external Jurisdiction, but to be a Minister of the Circumcision for
the Truth of God, to confirm the Promises made unto the Fathers, Romans 15.8. He
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his Life a Ransom
for many, Mat. 20.28. And therefore in Obedience to God, and out of Love to us,
he owned and submitted to the Jurisdiction of the Roman President in Judea; He
humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross,
for a Pattern to all his Followers and Disciples, and to show that his Kingdom
was not of this World: Phil. 2.8. John 19.11. 1 Pet. 2.21.

4. All external Jurisdiction is necessarily either supreme or subordinate. But
Christ, considered as Man, in his State of Humiliation, had neither. Not
supreme: for if you suppose him to have external supreme Jurisdiction, you make
him a mere Man, a worldly Monarch, the same for Kind with Caesar, and then he is
not the true Messiah. Not subordinate: for if you suppose him to have external
subordinate Jurisdiction, so also you make him a mere Man, a worldly Deputy and
Lieutenant, the same for Kind with Pilate, having all his Power from Caesar, and
then he is not true Christ.

5. The Apostles of Christ renounced all manner of external Jurisdiction, as
well knowing that the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above
his Lord, Mat. 10.24. Christ as Man, in his State of Humiliation, having no
external Jurisdiction, he could communicate none to his Apostles. After his
Resurrection he says to them, As my Father has sent me, even so send I you,
John 20.21. Now the Father sent Christ as Man, in his State of Humiliation,
completely furnished with spiritual Wisdom, Grace, Holiness, Power, Authority,
and Ability for the Work of the Ministry, but without all external
Jurisdiction, it no way suting with his Person and Office. The Apostles
contented themselves with Ministerial Authority, as Stewards of the Mysteries
of God, without all external Jurisdiction: Not for that we have Dominion over
your Eaith, 2 Cor. 1.24. They had no Dominion over the Faith and Consciences of
God's People, neither over their Bodies, nor over their Souls, and therefore no
external Jurisdiction.

6. Hence the Apostle Paul, in a Point of Controversy between him and the Jews
touching the Way of Religion, who prosecuted him before one of the Roman
Lieutenants in Judea, justly appealed to Caesar, as under God sole Supreme over
Paul and his Accusers, and the whole Roman Empire, as to external Jurisdiction,
Acts 25.11.

7. King Solomon did rightly in deposing the High Priest Abiathar for his
Crimes, and setting Zadok, a worthy Man, in his room, 1 Kings 2.26, 27, 35.
Which had not been justifiable, if Abiathar had had supreme and independent
Power and Jurisdiction: for par in parem non habet potest at em, one supreme
and independent Power can have no Authority over another equally supreme and
independent.

8. Church and State are truly distinct, but they are not two independent and
sovereign Powers. For the Church is the Body of Christ, wholly dependent on him
as to inward spiritual Power and Jurisdiction, and wholly dependent on the
State as to external Power and Jurisdiction. Whilst she keeps her self thus
humble, lowly and dependent, she is glorious in the sight of God, the Gates of
Hell cannot prevail against her, she is safe and quiet from fear of Evil. But
when once she affects to be independent, and assimes to her self sovereign
Power over Men's Souls and Consciences inwardly, and, in ordine ad spiritualia,
over Men's Bodies, Estates and Civil Liberties, outwardly, she becomes Papal and
Antichristian, the Synagogue of Satan, and not the Church of God.

9. We read of an Assembly and Consultation of the Apostles, and Presbyters,
and Brethren at Jerusalem about Circumcision, Acts 15. and of Decrees ordained
by the Apostles and Presbyters there, Acts 16.4. But we read of no external
Jurisdiction exercised in this Assembly, here was no President but Christ, no
Moderator but the Holy Ghost: Here was Order, Decency, Ministerial Authority,
Wisdom, Holiness, the Presence of Christ exercising inward spiritual
Jurisdiction in the Souls of the Apostles themselves, and the rest of the
Assembly, and awing their Consciences inwardly with his Fear, but external
Jurisdiction there was not any. If indeed Caesar had presided in Person, as once
Constantine did in the Council of Nice, or if he had deputed some Agent or
Lieutenant to preside in his Name and Stead, and to give Imperial Sanction to
the Decrees, then there would have been external Jurisdiction exercised: but
there being no such Sanction, there could be no external Jurisdiction, it was
an orderly Assembly, wherein Christ was graciously present by the invisible
Operation of his Word and Spirit, but no Juridical Court.

10. Mr. Gillespy, an eminent Asserter of the Presbyterian Way in Scotland, in
his Aaron's Rod, Book 2. chap. 6. in the Contents of the Chapter, confesses,
That if Princes and Magistrates be the Officers of Jesus Christ the Mediator,
it will do much in the Decision of the Erastian Controversy. Now it is certain
de fide, that they are: For all Power in Heaven and on Earth is given unto
Christ our Mediator, Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. Mat. 28.18 Phil. 2.8, 9, 10.
and his Kingdom rules over all the Angels, and over all Earthly Princes and
Magistrates, and all other Men on Earth, for the good of Militant Saints, and
in order to the carrying on the great Work of Redemption by Faith in the Souls
of Sinners.

11. Jus divinu^ regiminis Ecclesiastici. p. 43. Mr. Jeanes of the Fullness of
Christ p. 43.
Tho Heathen Princes and Magistrates by the bare Light of Nature cannot know
Jesus Christ our Mediator; yet they are bound to know God, and to glorify him
as God, to be just, and to rule in the Fear of God, to be godly themselves, and
all that in them lies to promote Godliness in their Dominions and
Jurisdictions, to protect the Good, and be a Terror to the Wicked; parcere
subjectis, and debellare superbos. Now in these things consists the Kingdom
of Christ our Mediator.

12. Tho the Church on Earth can subsist without a Christian Magistracy, as it
has done many a time; yet it cannot in an ordinary way subsist without a
Magistracy: for without Magistracy Humane Society cannot subsist; there will be
no Order, no Government, no Restraint of Sin; Mankind will not be a Society,
but a Rout of lawless, belluine, and ungoverned Men. No Society, no
Ecclesiastical Society, and consequently no Church. Therefore Jesus Christ our
Mediator, and God in and by him, is the Author of Magistracy, as a thing very
useful for the Good of Mankind in general, and of the Church Militant in
special. And therefore those do greatly mistake, who hold that Magistracy is
but an Accident to the Church; quod potest adesse vel abesse absque
subjectinteritu.

13. The Gospel may be taken two ways, strictly and largely. Taken strictly, so
it means God's Gift of Christ, and Life eternal in him, to all the Elect
through Faith; and thus Princes and Magistrates have not their Authority by the
Gospel. Considered largely, so it comprizeth the Principles, Rules and Maxims
of Natural Religion, common to us and Heathens, and whatsoever is useful to
Humane Society, and to the uphold of Order, Godliness, and true Religion among
Men; and thus Princes and Magistrates have their whole Office and Authority by
the Gospel.

14. Tho under Christ our Mediator the Prince has Imperial, Independent, and
Supreme Power over all in his Dominions, as to coercive Rule by the Sword; yet
still he is under Christ the Mediator, and accountable to him, who is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, and at the great Day will sit in Judgment upon all
the Princes and Potentates of the Earth, and the Good he will adjudg unto
everlasting Joy, and the Wicked unto everlasting Fire.

15. Dr. Parker, afterward Bishop of Oxford, in his Book of Religion and
Loyalty, par. 1. p. 28. says, It is but a crude Expression (not to call it
profane, because it is so common by customary Mistake) to affirm, that Kings
are Supreme Governors under Christ. They are, and ever were so under God, but
so as to be superior to Christ, as Christ is Head of his Church within their
Dominions: for as Head of his Church, he ever owned himself subject to the
Temporal Powers. There are others Mr. Bu^rough's Irenicum p. 21. Mr Pe^^^
Reformed Catholic^ in the (...) concerning Supremac^
who hold the Kingdom of Christ to be twofold, one as he is God, and another as
he is Mediator. These are great Errors.

16. As Christ is but one Person, the Word made Flesh, one Immanuel, in whom
dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily; so the Kingdom of Christ is but
one, ruling over the whole World in general, for the Good of Militant Saints in
special. And tho Christ as Man, in the Days of his Flesh, and in his State of
Humiliation, owned himself subject to the Temporal Powers; yet as now he is,
and since his Ascension has been in his State of Exaltation at God's right
Hand in Glory, he is, has been, and ever will be Superior to all Temporal
Powers. It is Christ purposed to be Mediator, who raised up Moses, Joshua,
David, Cyrus, Alexander the Great, and the rest of Kings and Princes under the
Old Testament, and was the Author of Magistracy then: and it is the same
Christ, who being Mediator, according to his eternal Purpose, raised up
Vespasian, Titus, Trajan, Constantine, Charles the Great, Q. Elizabeth, and the
rest of Kings and Princes since his Ascension, and who is the Author of
Magistracy under the New Testament. Tho the Mediator be Man, yet not a mere and
bare Man, but that Man in whom dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily,
Col. 2.9. And he only is Mediator.

17. Bp Andrews holds but one Place wherein external Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction is founded, and that is Mat. 18.17. Tell it unto the Church: but
if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man. By
these Words he supposes the major Excommunication appointed of Christ. ^ortura
^orti, p. 41
De exteriore foro ibi agitur; exterioris fori jurisdictio, illo, nec alio loco
fundata est; there Christ treats of the exterior Court; the Jurisdiction of
the exterior Court is founded in that Place, and no other.

18. Certu^ hoc ^uidem in ^heologia, receptu^ (...), omni^^s; Non (...) venisse
^hristum, (...), qui jam ^te ad^ntum su^^ crat, ^^do vel ^^turae, vel ^olitiae,
eu^ ^el inver^et, vel ^erteret: (...), and ^ictu^ ma^^ redde^^. Id. ib. p. 43.
But herein Bp Andrews contradicts himself, and the unanimous Judgment of all
sound Divines, who hold it for a sure Axiom, that the Gospel does not make
void, but establish Civil Order and Government, founded in Nature and Natural
Religion, common to us and Heathens. Christ came not to alter, unhinge, and
overthrow the mutual Ties and Offices of Husband and Wife, Parents and
Children, Master and Servant, Prince and People; but rather by his Example, and
the Effusion of his Grace upon his Disciples and Followers, to render them more
sacred and inviolable. But how can this consist with his supposed Institution
of a new exterior Court, and a new exterior Jurisdiction in the Church,
superior to, and not dependent upon the State? For such a new exterior Court,
Supremacy and Jurisdiction, is plainly Papal, inconsistent with, and repugnant
to the supreme Authority of Kings and Princes, and Sovereign Civil Rulers, in
their several Territories and Dominions.

19. And therefore it is evident, that in these Words, Tell it unto the Church;
but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man,
Christ instituted no exterior Court, no exterior Jurisdiction in the Church.
But this is one of those Divine Rules which concern the inward Court of the
Heart, and the Jurisdiction of Christ there: for this and the like holy Rules
and Laws he does by supernatural Grace write in the Hearts of God's Elect, who
are his Church, the Mystical Body of Christ, and thereby does teach and enable
them to shun the Society of obstinate and unreformable and incorrigible
Sinners, and to put a due difference between the Precious and the Vile,
Penitent and Impenitent ones, to use their best endeavor privately and
publicly to draw a scandalous Brother to Repentance and holy Amendment; and if
after all, he will not be amended, to leave him to God. So that this whole
Precept concerns the Conscience and inward Man, and the sovereign Jurisdiction
of Christ over the Heart inwardly, and does not at all concern external
Jurisdiction, nor give any color for the founding of a new external Tribunal,
and external Jurisdiction in the Church, superior to Civil Supremacy, and the
Authority of sovereign Princes; no such Thought could come into Christ's Heart.

20. Finally, all Jurisdiction is necessarily either spiritual and internal, or
temporal and external. Spiritual and internal Jurisdiction is the absolute
Prerogative of Christ, and of God in and by him, and is not communicable to any
mere Creature. Tho Christ make great use of Bishops, Pastors and Ministers in
his Church; yet he himself is sole Head of it, and sole Lord and King of the
Conscience and inward Man. He dwells in the Hearts of his People by Faith, and
all both Angels and Men owe absolute Subjection to him, and to his supreme
Jurisdiction, for the everlasting Good of Militant Saints. Temporal and
external Jurisdiction is communicated by Christ to such in each Nation as bear
the Sword, and are supreme Governors under him: and so what external
Jurisdiction is regularly exercised by any in the Church, is not from Christ,
but from the State; and therefore the Jurisdiction of all the Ecclesiastical
Courts in England, is not by Divine, but Humane Law, dependent on the King and
Parliament. And all Protestant Divines agree, that Jesus Christ the Mediator is
Author of Magistracy; but many of them, I confess, hold, that he is not so as
he is Mediator, but as he is God. Do but set aside this one very little word
as, and we are all agreed against Arians, Socinians, and all other Impugners of
Christ's Deity and supreme Authority.

The Bishops are not Spiritual, but Civil and Temporal Lords, and their Courts
accordingly Civil and Temporal Courts.
1. THat they are Civil and Temporal Lords is evident, for that they are made
Lords by the King and State, as truly as the Temporal Lords, those I mean who
really are so, and are so called. But no earthly King or State can make a
Spiritual Lord, none but God and the Lord Jesus Christ can do that.

2. The Office of a Bishop, as the Office of an Apostle, is common to a Peter
and a Judas, to godly and ungodly Men. But nothing common to godly and ungodly
Men, can be a ground of spiritual Lordship and Dominion: because every ungodly
Man, while such, is a spiritual Slave, a Slave of Sin, a Bondslave of Satan.
And as no Man can in the same instant be both alive and dead, both godly and
ungodly; so can no Man in the same instant be both a spiritual Lord and a
spiritual Slave, because they are contradictorily opposite.

3. Spiritual Lordship and Dominion is founded in heavenly Grace, and in
spiritual Worth and Merit. And thus all godly Men and godly Women are spiritual
Lords, ^ev. 1.5, 6. ^al. 3.28.
in such sort as they are spiritual Kings and Priests unto God. There is
neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither Bond nor Free, there is neither Male
nor Female: for they are all one in Christ Jesus. All things are theirs, (...)
Cor. 3. ^1, 22, 23.
whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death, or
things present, or things to come; all are theirs, and they Christ's, and
Christ is God's. So that if Bishops be godly Men, then they are spiritual
Lords, not because they are Bishops, but because they are godly, in common with
all other godly Men: But if they be ungodly Men, then they cannot be spiritual
Lords.

4. Bishop Bonner and Bishop Gardener, in the Reign of Queen Mary, were Civil
and Temporal Lords, made and upheld by the State; and so now are the Popish
Bishops in France: and Civil Honor is due to them, as to any other Temporal
Lord made and upheld by the State. But spiritual Lords they are not, but
spiritual Slaves, lorded over by base and impotent Lusts, because they do like
the Idolatrous Worshippers in Israel in the time of the Prophet Elijah, who did
halt between God and Baal; so do the Popish Bishops, they join Idolatry with
the Worship of the true God, and adhere to, and confederate with the
Antichristian Bishop of Rome against God's true Church and People: and those
Words of the Apostle may be truly applied to them; Their Feet are swift to shed
Blood: Destruction and Misery are in their Ways, and the Way of Peace have they
not known: There is no Fear of God before their Eyes. (...) 1
And if such Men be spiritual Lords, then I confess I know not what spiritual
Lordship and Dominion is.

5. Christ at his Ascension gave some, Apostles; and some, Prophets; Ephesians. 4.11
12.
and some, Evangelists; and some, Pastors and Teachers. But none of these, in
respect of their Office and Calling, were spiritual Lords, but Ministers of the
Gospel, appointed and given by Christ for the Work of the Ministry; which is a
thing very different from lording over God's Heritage, plainly forbidden by the
Holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 5.3.

6. God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, 1
Cor. 12 28
thirdly Teachers. By which it is plain that the Apostles are the chiefest
Ministers in the Church, and so acknowledged by all, Bishops cannot be
superior to them. But the Apostles were not spiritual Lords in respect of
their Office. Let a Man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor.
4 1
and Stewards of the Mysteries of God, and not as of spiritual Lords. And
again, Not for that we have Dominion over your Faith. 2 Cor. 1.24
But if in respect of their Office and Function they were spiritual Lords, then
they must needs have Dominion over our Faith, and be Lords and Masters of it no
less than Christ. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. To us Christians
there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 8.6. who is the sole Lord and Master
of our Faith, as being the Author and Finisher thereof, Heb. 12.2.

7. Elijah being a Man of God, an eminent Prophet, and a Person of
extraordinary Note and Renown with all God's People in Israel, because of his
extraordinary Worth, therefore good Obadiah did well in performing to him
extraordinary civil Reverence and Honor: 1 King. 18.7.
for he fell on his Face, and said to Elijah, Art thou that my Lord Elijah?
This was more than ordinary Worship and Reverence, and yet it was but Civil.
For if it had been more than Civil, no doubt but Elijah would have refused it,
and checked him for it, like as Peter did Cornelius, and the Angel John.

8. When Cornelius met the Apostle Peter, and fell down at his Feet, Acts
10.25, 26.
and worshipped him, as though he had been a spiritual Lord, and more than a
Man, Peter tacitly reproved him for it, and refused such kind of Worship,
saying, Stand up, I my self also am a Man. So when the Apostle John fell down
to worship before the Feet of the Angel, Rev. 22.8 9
he forbad him, saying, See thou do it not, for I am thy Fellow Servants: --
worship God. Thereby plainly intimating, that Religious and Spiritual Worship
is due to none but God, and that more than Civil Worship and Reverence may not
be given to the highest Angel, to the most noble Creature, as being but our
Fellow Servants, and not God. But if Bishops were, in respect of their Office,
Spiritual Lords, then we should be bound to adore them as God, and as the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is true God, equal with the Father; which would be Idolatry.

9. Our Savior perceiving this Sin of Papal Lording over God's Heritage, to be
creeping in among the Apostles, presently called them unto him, Mat. 20.25 26,
27, 28.
and said, Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over
them; and they that are great, exercise Authority upon them. But it shall not
be so among you: but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your
Minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your Servant. Even
as the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give
his Life a Ransom for many.

10. Dr. Gr. Williams, in his Book of the True Church, p. 899. holds that these
Words of Christ do most plainly prove a Superiority and Inferiority among these
Ecclesiastical Governors. Indeed these Words do not hinder but that the
Apostles were bound to strive with holy Emulation to excel one another in
inward Heavenly Grace; and Virtues, in Faith, in Hope, in Love, in Humility, in
Meekness and Lowliness of Mind, and laboring in the Word and Doctrine for the
Conversion of Souls, and the Enlargement of God's Church by the Increase of
Believers: like as the Apostle Paul did exceed and go beyond all the other
Apostles in Ministerial Labor and Diligence, himself truly says, I labored
more abundantly than they all, 1 Cor. 15.10. But nothing can be more plain than
that Christ in the forementioned Words does absolutely forbid the Apostles all
Lording and Domination over one another, all Striving and Competition for
Ecclesiastical Rule, Authority and Jurisdiction over one another, all
Affectation, Claim and Exercise of Imperial Power over one another: for they
were all equal in Office, Brethren in the Ministry, Fellow-Apostles; no one was
Pope and Monarch over the rest, neither might be.

11. If Bishops were Spiritual Lords, in respect of inward spiritual Worth and
Goodness, then they would be Spiritual Lords while they are but Presbyters, and
before they are made Bishops: For first they are Presbyters, which the
Advocates for Prelacy suppose to be an Order or Degree in the Ministry
inferior to a Bishop. Now it is plain, that what inward spiritual Worth and
Goodness is in the new-made Bishop, it was in him before he was Bishop, even
whilst he was a Presbyter. But no one did repute him a Spiritual Lord while he
was but a Presbyter, though he was a good and worthy Man. His assuming of the
Episcopal Office adds no inward spiritual Worth and Goodness to his Soul, it
being but a thing common to worthy and unworthy Men. Mr. Prideaux in his
Introduction for reading all sorts of Histories, page 67. divides the Bishops
of Rome into seven Ranks, 32 good Bishops, 33 tolerable Archbishops or
Patriarchs, 38 usurping Nimrods, 40 luxurious Sodomites, 40 Egyptian Magicians,
41 devouring Abaddons, and 20 incurable Babylonians.

12. It is then plain, that Lord-Bishops are so by Humane Law, and not by
Divine Law; they are made by Man, and not by God; their Office, Power and
Authority, as they are Lord-Bishops, is Humane, and not Divine; I say not that
it is unlawful, but that it is not Divine; many things are lawful, which yet
are not Divine: as the Offices of Constables, Head-Constables, Sheriffs,
Mayors, Lord-Chancellors, and Keepers of the Great Seal, are all lawful; and
yet they are not Divine and Evangelical, but Humane and Civil.

13. Lord-Bishops being but Civil and Temporal Lords, of Man's making, their
Courts cannot be Spiritual Courts, but only Civil and Temporal. By Permission
of the King and Parliament, they hold their Courts, not expressly in the King's
Name, but in their own Name. Yet are they nevertheless but Civil and Temporal
Courts, deriving their Authority from, and dependent on the King and
Parliament, which under God are the highest Judicature in this Nation, from
whom there lies no Appeal save to God. But there lies an Appeal from the
highest Ecclesiastical Court in the Nation to the King and Parliament. The
contrary Doctrine brings in foreign Jurisdiction, and sets up the Papacy, and
is destructive both of Church and State.

14. Many of the Nobility and Gentry of England, and others of the Laity, hold
Courts, not expressly in the King's Name, but in their own Name. And yet no one
doubts but that they are Civil and Temporal Courts, derived from, and dependent
on the Crown; and there lies an Appeal from them to a superior Civil Court.

15. True it is, that in the first Ages of the Church after Christ's Ascension,
the Holy Ghost by Paul reproves the Christians at Corinth, for going to Law
with one another, before the Heathen Judges, about worldly and secular Matters,
there being then no Christian Magistracy: I speak to your Shame. Is it so, that
there is not a wise Man amongst you? 1 Cor. 6.5^
no not one that shall be able to judge between his Brethren? Upon which it is
like the Christians from thenceforth did desist from going to Law with one
another, before the Heathen Judges, about small Matters pertaining to this
Life, and chose some judicious and understanding Christian as an Umpire or
Arbitrator, for the ending and deciding of their litigious Causes about worldly
Matters; which continuing for some hundreds of Years unto the Reign of
Constantine the first Christian Emperor, it is very likely that he by his
Imperial Sanction confirmed the aforesaid Apostolical Decree, and the Way of
the Primitive Churches ending and deciding their Suits about secular Matters,
pursuant to, and grounded on the same; and did enlarge and add to it, and so
made it an Ecclesiastical Court, and called it the Bishops Court, and the Judge
thereof the Bishops Chancellor, or the Chancellor of the Ecclesiastical Court.
But before this Sanction by the Emperor, it was no Ecclesiastical Court,
neither had it any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; it was only a prudential
Institution, without all external Jurisdiction.

16. The King of England is by God's Grace a Christian King. Being so, he must
needs be a Christian; and, as such, he is a Member of God's Church in England,
in common with all other Christian People therein; and he is no more, he is not
Head thereof: for only Christ is Head of God's Church in England, like as he is
sole Head of the whole Church on Earth; it being a Contradiction to be sole
Head of the whole, and not of every Part. Considered as a King, so he has no
more Power and Jurisdiction over the Church and its Causes, than he would have
if he were a Heathen King; his being a Christian does not enlarge and add to
his Regal Power, but only qualify him, supposing him truly godly, with Grace
and spiritual Wisdom, to use his Regal Power aright for God, which a Heathen
King cannot.

17. The King is sole Supreme, under God and Christ the Mediator, over all the
Souls in the Nation, as to coercive Rule by the Sword; yet is he limited by
fundamental Laws, whereby the Rights of Prince and People mutually consist, and
which he is bound inviolably to observe. But all his Power is only Civil and
Temporal, and not Spiritual; and therefore he can grant no Spiritual
Jurisdiction, he can create no Spiritual Office. For no Effect can exced its
Cause, neither can the Streams differ in kind from the Water in the Fountain.

18. The King and Parliament will meekly and reverently hear a common Presbyter
or Minister preach the Gospel, and be awed by the Word in his Mouth as the Word
of God, and not the Word of Man, though Man be the Preacher; and they will
reverently own and submit to Baptism and the Lord's Supper dispensed by him, as
Divine, and not Humane Institutions. Convincing Evidence will go along with the
Preacher's Word, being scriptural, sound, good and faithful; whereby it will
evidence it self to be Divine, and from above, to all such as believe; it will
to them be the Savor of Life unto Life; and the rest who do not believe, yet
will stand condemned by it, and it may be, with Felix, tremble under it, as
being, through their own Sin, the Savor of Death unto Death to them. Here it
is plain, Jesus Christ, as sole Lord of the Conscience, does by the Ministry of
a weak Man, a co^^^^ Presbyter, exercise Spiritual Lordship and Jurisdiction
over the King, and all the Lords and Commons inwardly, in each one's Bosom,
over such as are good willingly and in Love, over such as are wicked against
their Will: for if wicked ones might have their Will, they would all be above
God, and lord over him at their pleasure.

19. But now if this or that Ecclesiastical Court should claim to it self
sovereign and independent Jurisdiction, and should summon the King and
Parliament to appear at its Tribunal, under pain of Excommunication, would they
think themselves obliged to obey, and make their Appearance, and be uncovered,
and submit to the Sentence of the Ecclesiastical Judge, as some of the Roman
Emperors have done to the Pope, even to the holding of his Stirrup, and letting
the Pope tread upon the Neck of the Emperor? I trow not.

20. By which it is plain that the Lordship and Jurisdiction of the Bishops and
their Courts, is not Spiritual, but Civil and Temporal; Humane Law ordains it,
and Humane Law may take it away; lawful it may be, but Divine it is not. But
the Evangelical Ministry consisting in Authority to preach the Gospel, to
dispense the Sacraments, to labor in the Word and Doctrine, to oversee the
Flock of Christ, and perpetuate the Church to the End of the World; this
Evangelical Ministry, which is common to the Bishop and the Presbyter, is not
Humane, but Divine; it is not Civil and Temporal, but Spiritual and
Supernatural; it does not subsist by an Arm of Flesh, but by the Word of God,
against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail: for Jesus Christ who is the
Author of it, is the Living God, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, (...) and
the only Potentate, who will have a Church upon (...) Number of faithful Ones,
with whom he has promised to be unto the End of the World. Hitherto he has
made good his Word, and been too hard for all his Adversaries. Psalm. 2
Blessed are all they that trust in him.

21. If indeed the Church of God were not a Spiritual, but a Political Society,
then all both Bishops and Presbyters must needs be Spiritual Lords and
Ecclesiastical Monarchs. But it is as certain that the Church of God is a
Spiritual, and not a Political Society, as it is certain that it is the Church
of God by Faith in Christ, and not the Church of Man.

22. (...) be Processus in infinitum, infinite Proceeding. For (...), we must
needs come to some first in whom the Church (...) was penitent Adam and Eve,
the common Parents of us (...) it is not to be doubted but that God after their
Fall gave them Repentance and Pardon, through Faith in Christ the promised
Seed, and so made them a spiritual Society, and the first Church of the
Redeemed, as Dr. Field in his first Book of the Church, chap. 4. shows,
agreeably to God's Word, and the Grounds of Religion, Genesis 3.15. But Adam and
Eve, two Persons, one Husband and one Wife, could not be a Political Society,
because they were a Conjugal Society, as they were Husband and Wife, and a
Spiritual Society, as they were true Believers in Christ the promised Seed;
both which Societies differ in kind from Political Society, as all agree.

23. Upon the increase and multiplication of sincere Converts, and Persons
regenerate, there was a continnal Addition to the Church of such as should be
saved, Acts 2.47. The Incarnation, Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of
Christ does not alter the intrinsecal Nature of God's Church, which is the same
for substance in all Ages, the Saints before Christ being saved through Faith
in him as promised, and the Saints after Christ being saved through Faith in
him as exhibited, he being the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb.
13.8. The Apostles Commission was not to make a new Church, differing in kind
and substance from what had been before, but to preserve that Church which was
already in being, and which Christ left on Earth at his Ascension, and by their
Apostolical Labors to enlarge and add to it, and to make believing Jews and
Gentiles one holy Society in Christ, not a Political Society, ruled by the
Apostles as Ecclesiastical Monarchs and Spiritual Lords, but a Heavenly
Society, ruled by the Apostles as spiritual Guides and Overseers, through Faith
in Christ, the sole Lord and Head of the Church.

24. Anciently God led his People like a Flock, by the Hand^ (...) Moses and
Aaron, Psalm. 77.20. And so he leads his People now (...) ^lock, by the Hand of
the Prince and the Pastor, the Prince as Political Governor, ruling by the
Sword; and the Pastor as Spiritual Governor, ruling by the Word, by holy
Doctrine, by dispensing Baptism and the Lord's Supper according to Christ's
Institution, by making himself an Ensample to the Flock. So that tho the Pastor
be a Ruler and Governor, yet he is not a Political Governor, he is not an
Ecclesiastical Prince, a Spiritual Lord, an ambitious Prelate, but a Minister
of Christ. And to make the Pastor by Divine Law a Political Governor of the
Church, is to make him a Pope, an Antichristian Subverter of the lawful
Supremacy of the Prince, and a sacrilegious Invader of the Sovereignty of God,
by whom Princes rule, Prove. 8.15.

25. It is very evident that the Apostles themselves were but Presbyters, tho
they were not ordinary and common Presbyters; they were furnished with
extraordinary Gifts and Graces for the Work of the Ministry, and infallibly
inspired in the execution of their Office, that (...) might be Master Builders
in God's Church. But still they were b^^ Presbyters, though extraordinary and
preeminent ones: and therefore Peter, the first and Foreman of all the
Apostles, writing to ordinary and common Presbyters, styles himself
Com-Presbyter, their Fellow-Presbyter, 1 Pet. 5.1. And if those Bishops of our
time, who claim to be Successors of the Apostles, and superior in Office,
Power and Authority to common Presbyters, would but join Apostolical Wisdom,
Meekness, Goodness, Piety, Love to the Truth, Labor in the Word and Doctrine,
and Constancy in Well-doing, with Apostolical Power and Superiority, we would
all reverence them as Apostles of Christ, as Divine Officers, as most worthy
Instruments of God's Glory, and think all the Churches happy in their Ministry.
But while they contend for Apostolical Power, Preeminence, and Superiority by
Divine Right, as to the Government of the Church in ordinary, and suffer common
Presbyters and Curates to excel them in the most principal part of the
Apostolical Office, which is laboring in the Word and Doctrine, and lay the
Peace and Unity of God's Church upon weak and beggarly Elements, Gal. 4.9. upon
things no ways necessary to Holiness, and Unity in Christian Faith, Hope and
Love, and had rather be a Sect and Party by themselves, than unite with their
Christian Brethren upon Apostolical, Divine and Scriptural Terms; in truth they
undo their own Cause, grieve the Hearts of the Righteous, encourage the Wicked,
and give great advantage to the Papists, and bring our Nation low, and greatly
sin against God and their own Souls.

26. It (...) Rule and Maxim consented to by all, that in aequali jure melior
(...) possidentis, where two or more are Competitors for a thing and one only
can have it, it is to be adjudged to him that is in possession, that so there
may be an end of all Strife, and the Course of the World may be in quiet. Now I
would know of those Protestant Brethren, who condemn the Papacy, and yet
contend that the Universal Church on Earth is a Political Society consisting of
two Parts, a ruling and a ruled Part, which was the sole supreme ruling Part of
the Universal Church on Earth at the beginning of the Reformation by Luther? 1.
They cannot say and prove that Christ was: for Christ is God, and God cannot be
a bare ruling Part; because a Part, as such, is imperfect, is not all In all
But God cannot be imperfect, he cannot but be infinitely perfect, all, all, 1
Cor. 15.28. He works all in all, 1 Cor. 12.6. Of him, (...) through him, and
to him are all things, Romans 11.36. To make him a mere Political Ruler, and
governing Part of the Church is to make him a mere Man, a worldly Monarch, an
impotent, base and precarious God. 2. Of necessity the Bishop of Rome was the
sole supreme ruling Part of the Universal Church, Episcopus primae Sedis, as
Peter among the Apostles, chief Ecclesiastical Monarch: for no other laid claim
to the Ecclesiastical Supremacy, no other was in possession of it: and
therefore upon the Principles of those Brethren against whom I now argue, the
Protestants universally, and the Church of England particularly, were guilty of
damnable Schism and Rebellion, in breaking of from, and setting themselves
against the Papal Supremacy, and are bound to turn Papists as of necessity to
Salvation, and to the Being and Unity of the Universal Church; which, according
to their Principles, cannot consist without a ruling Part, without a Political
Governor, that is, in plain English, without a Pope.

27. But if this Principle of theirs, that the Church of God is a Political,
and not a Spiritual Society, fail and prove ruinous, as it needs must, or I am
deceived in the Grounds of Religion, and do not understand the Points of the
Catechism; then the Ordination of Presbyter, by Presbyters without a Bishop,
can never be pro^^^ ^alid. And those of the Church of England, who hold the
(...) Ministers, because ordained by Presbyters without a Bishop, to be no
Ministers of Christ, and consequently the (...) to be Nullities, do greatly err
(...) one (...) holy Catholic Church, the (...) all such other (...)
ordination by a Bishop, (...)

FINIS.

