A Second LETTER TO THE AUTHOR of a Book, Entitled, An Answer to W. P. his Key
about the Light within.
From Edmund Elys, sometime Fellow in Bal. Coll. in OXFORD.
SIR,
I Grant that if I should expose to Public View any Assertion of yours in your
Private Letter to me, that you your self in the same, or in equivalent Terms
have not declared to the World, you might have some Pretense to charge me with
Incivility: But certainly there cannot be the least Appearance of any Grounds
for such a Charge in this, that I endeavor before all the World to convince
you and your Adherents of the Falsehood of this Conceit, That there is not a
tittle in all the Scripture that points at Christ, as a Light within every
Man's Conscience. This you could not say (I speak as in HIS Presence, who is
Ready to judge the Quick and the Dead) but by the Instigation of the Prince of
DAR^^^^^. If it be Evident in the Holy Scripture that CHRIST is the True and
Eternal GOD, it is Evident that He is a Light within every Man's Conscience:
For GOD IS LIGHT, LIGHT INFINITE: So that there can be no Spiritual, or
Intellectual ILLUMINATION, but what comes directly, and immediately from GOD.
By CONSCIENCE we are to understand the Knowledge of the Law of GOD, of that
which GOD Commands us to do, or to refrain from Doing, joined with the
Knowledge of our own Conformity, or Difformity thereunto. By Light within the
Conscience we are to understand That, by which we see, or perceive clearly, and
Effectually what it is that GOD Commands us to do, or refrain from Doing: And
by which we perceive our own Obedience, or Disobedience, our Conformity, or
Difformity to the Will of GOD. The Effect of this Sight, or Perceivance is the
EXCUSING, or ACCUSING of our selves in the Sight of GOD, from which arises our
Delight in GOD through an effectual Apprehension of his Goodness, or Veneration
of Spirit for being Repugnant to his Holy Will, the Fountain of All
Intellectual Complacency, and Satisfaction.

I desire you would Read all the Papers which have been Published for me; which
are Sold by Thomas Northcott, in George yard, in Lombard Street. I also desire
you would peruse a Treatise, Entitled, The Spirit of Truth Vindicated, Written
by my Honored Friend W. P. in which you will see the most Horrid and
Detestable Falsehood of one of those Absurd, and Contradictory Calumnies, viz.
That he is a PAPIST, yea, that he is a JESUIT, And that he is a SOCINIAN.
Whether he be a SOCINIAN let any Man judge after he shall have read these
Words, in the beginning of that Treatise: I cannot but esteem it a peculiar
Providence of Mercy from the Most High GOD, to us his poor despised People,
though an Instance of great Unkindness in our Adversary, that after our several
Years pressure, under the heavy Calumnies of being involved with a Socinian
Confederacy, he should so suffer it to come to pass, that without the least
Provocation given on our Parts, one of that sort of Men should become our
Compurgator, indeed our best Advocate in pleading against us; for whilst he
goes about to detect the Quakers of an Erroneous Spirit, it is to be supposed
that he denies them any share in his; and therefore no Socinians.

I desire that in all your Disputes with me, or Mr. PENN, About the Light
within, you would most Seriously Consider that within a very short Time You,
and He, and I must give an Account of All our Thoughts, Words, Actions, and
Omissions to the LORD Our GOD, who has been pleased to reveal Himself unto us
in the Holy Scripture under the Appellation of LIGHT, and LOVE.

I am Your Servant, And the Servant of All Men, In the Love of the Truth,
Edmund Elys.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the Writing of this I have seen Mr. PENN's Reply, in which I find you
have no Just Cause to make any such Reflection on him, as if he had
Contradicted himself, and me, in that we both have said that CHRIST is The
Light within Man. You say W. P. Blames you for fasly and unfairly representing
the Quakers Faith in this point, because you say the Quakers say that the Light
within is God, and Christ. Mr. PENN's Words are these, Reply, P. 53, 54. Now
though with a fair Adversary, one might say without Offense, that God, or Christ
is The Light within Man, yet it is not the common way of our Expressing our
selves. To be sure we have no such meaning in that way of speaking, as some
Adversaries strain, our Words to, as if God, and Christ were Comprehensible in,
and by Man, to render us Absurd, and Blasphemous. I entreat you to consider how
great a Multitude in this Kingdom have provoked the Wrath of GOD by
Calumniating this Gentleman, Clamouring against him as if he was a PAPIST, yea
a JESUIT. Is it Popery to assert that the Principal RULE of Faith to a Sincere
Christian is That, which Almighty GOD has WRITTEN in the Hearts of All Men?
This the People called Quakers do affirm; and in this I fully Concur with them:
And, I say, for want of a due Belief of this The whole World lies in
Wickedness.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Northcott in Georgeyard in Lombard Street. 1697.


