A REPLY TO AN ANSWER Lately Published to a BOOK Long since written by W. P.
Entitled, A Brief Examination and State of Liberty Spiritual, etc.

By Thomas Ellwood.

2 Timothy 3.13. Evil men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and
being deceived.

Romans 16.17. Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and
Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.

Printed, and Sold by T. Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane, in
Shoreditch, 1691.

THE PREFACE.
IN the Year 1681. there was a small Treatise published by a Friend, under the
Title of A Brief Examination of Liberty Spiritual, etc. The occasion of writing
that Treatise was, a sense the Author thereof had, and an Observation he had
made, how much the Nature of that true Spiritual Liberty was misunderstood by
some, and the Name thereof abused by others in the Profession of the Truth;
who, under pretense of being left to that Liberty in themselves, and to their
own Freedom therein, both took liberty to do such things as were inconsistent
with that true Liberty, and with the Principle of Truth which they professed;
and, despising those useful, good and necessary Helps and Means which the Lord
has provided, and furnished his Church or People with, for the preventing and
keeping out such Disorders, Evils and Scandals, as the unruly Nature of man,
through such a mistake of true Liberty, might and would bring in, did reject
the Counsel; Admonition or Reproof of their Brethren, with a What have thou to
do with me? Leave me to my own Freedom. To reclaim (if it might be) those that
were thus deceived, and prevent others from being so, the Author being pressed
in Spirit for Zion's sake, and for the Peace of Jerusalem, and having a deep
Sense (as himself expresses) of the working of the Enemy of Zion's Peace to
rend and divide the Heritage of God, did write the forementioned Treatise for
the Establishment of the Faithful, Information of the Simple-hearted, and
Reproof of the Arrogant and High-minded; as his Title Page sets forth. As that
Treatise had its Service and Acceptance with the Faithful and Simple-hearted:
So it has passed hitherto (for between nine and ten Years) free from the Cavils
(at least Public) of the Arrogant and High-minded, till now that of late some
of them, who are of a restless Spirit (and to whom it is uneasy to be, or to
let others be quiet) have singled out that Book for a fresh Butt to shoot at,
make that a new Occasion to renew Contention, and revive the old Controversy.
In order to this they have very lately published a Book, in Answer (as is
pretended) to several material Passages in that Book. That Answer has in the
Title Page the Letters J. H. as standing for the Author's Name. But since I
have no certain knowledge who is meant by those two Letters, and I find the
general style of the Answer, both in the Preface and Book it self, to run in
the first Person Plural [We] which, by the Advertisement at the End of the
Preface, I am told may be understood in respect of those of the same mind with
the Author of that Book, I chose in my Reply, to entitle the Adverse Party to
it, without regard to any particular Person.

They labor much, throughout their Book, to fasten an ugly Imputation or
Charge upon the Author of that Treatise they pretend to Answer, of endeavoring
to bring in a blind Obedience, an implicit Faith, Conformity before and without
Conviction, a Dependence on Men instead of a Dependence on God, endeavoring to
obtrude or set up Opinion, or the likeness of Truth, instead of Truth, etc. How
far from Truth this Charge is, the following Reply is intended to manifest. How
far from true Christianity a man must be that could be guilty of all this, is
manifest of it self. The Adversaries therefore, that they might not hereby too
much disgust such of their Favorers, as have not wholly cast off all good
thoughts of him they thus traduce, make as if they would in Charity excuse the
Author from doing those things knowingly; pretending to believe him both a
better Man, and more a Christian. But how unlike Christians they have dealt
with him, in Answering his Book, the following Reply will in part discover.
Here in their Preface, for the reason of his doing the things they slanderously
tax him with, they assign his being deceived through the mysterious working of
the Enemy; which that it may not seem strange, they wish their Reader to
consider how many have been deceived thereby, both great and small, and some at
times hurried into things grossly Evil, as killing their Fellow Creatures, and
yet at the same time think they did God service. But as no good Christian ever
did so: So, by the Comparison they have made, they sufficiently show what a
sort of Christian they in reality esteem him to be.

Their Preface is so much, both for matter and manner, of the same Piece with
their Book, that much of what is in the Preface, will be taken notice of in the
Reply to the Book; to which therefore, for avoiding needless Repetitions, I
refer. Yet because they have loosely scattered through their Preface many
unsound Expressions, which perhaps may not so fitly be handled in the Reply, I
will briefly touch a few of them here; As

Their calling the likeness of Truth a Third thing, besides what is Evil and
Good, and saying that it stands betwixt Evil and Good (though they bring it in
with as [As we may say] will not hold weight, but unsound. For that which is
only like Truth, but is not Truth, does not stand betwixt Evil and Good, but
(whatever it seems to be) is really and directly Evil, and stands in and with
the Evil.

So their making the Covering of the Soul, where the likeness of Truth is
received for Truth, etc. to be as the Linen and Wollen-Garment, forbid to be
worm under the Law, is an unfit and unsound Comparison: For neither the Linen
nor the Woollen was Evil, though (as a Type of Sincerity and Singleness of
Heart) they were then forbidden to be worn in one Garment together; but either
the Linen might lawfully be worn by it self, or the Woollen by it self. But the
likeness of Truth, that which is only like Truth, but is not Truth, may neither
be received together with any thing that is Truth, nor alone by it self without
Truth.

So when they speak of Outward Rules, they say, Every adding of outward Rules,
shows a want of Christ's Government by his holy Spirit; They mistake. If it
shows a want of any thing, it shows a want of Subjection to his Government by
his holy Spirit, not a want of that Government. Neither is Christ's Government
by his holy Spirit incompatible with outward Rules: but whatever outward Rules
Christ by his Spirit gives, are consistent with, and agreeable to his
Government by his Spirit.

So again, when they say, It is certain that no outward Rule, as it concerns a
holy Conversation or the worship of God, is of any Service, but until he come:
They err. There are many outward Rules in the Scriptures of Truth, that were
given by the Spirit of God, which have been, and are of Service to many, after
Christ has been witnessed come.

Again, when they say, Every latter Appearance of God is as death to the
former; The Expression is unsavory, and not sound. For the Appearance of God
or Christ do not kill one another, but agree one with another, and Cooperate
to the work he intends thereby. But when to this they add, And this is our
Case, as well as any that did go before us, etc. They err egregiously: For the
Appearance of God in us, did not bring Death to the former Appearance of God in
others (though to the false Appearances and Likenesses thereof it did) Neither
will any further Appearance of God hereafter, bring Death, or be Death, or be
as Death to this Appearance of God, whereby God has made known himself in and
to his People in this Age.

Again, they say, When the Appearance or Conversation must be measured by
certain Rules, it follows what is terms of Communion, or is accepted with God,
may not be accepted with men This is a loose Expression, and tends to let up
Looseness. Are not Sobriety, Temperance, Chastity, Modesty, Honesty, etc.
certain Rules whereby Conversation ought to be measured? If there must be no
certain Rules for measuring Conversation, how shall the most unruly
Conversation be blamed, reproved, judged, condemned, and either reformed or
rejected? By these few Instances it may appear, how much they are declined from
Truth.

The God of Truth knows, I have no other End in this Reply than to defend
Truth, and the Children of it, against the slanderous Suggestions, false
Charges, and wicked Insinuations of the Adversaries; to lay Open their
deceitful Dealing; and to remove (as the Lord shall enable me) the
Stumbling Blocks which they have laid in the way of the Week, whereby they have
caused some to fall into Misapprehensions and hard Thoughts of Friends, without
cause. And I beseech the God of Mercy to open the Understandings and clear the
Sight of all those, whose Simplicity has been betrayed by the Others Subtilty,
that they may see and escape the Enemies Snares, and return to the true Fold,
from which they have been led astray.

A Reply to an Answer, lately published to a Book long since written,
entitled, A brief Examination and State of Liberty Spiritual, etc.
THe Author of that Book, called, A brief Examination, etc. has therein truly
and soundly defined Spiritual Liberty; declaring it to be twofold, True and
False, according to the true and false Spirit, which respectively leads into
each. The true Spiritual Liberty he defines to be Deliverance from Sin by the
perfect Law in the Heart, the perfect Law of Liberty, James 2. otherwise
called, The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, that makes free from the
Law of Sin and Death; elsewhere styled The Law of Truth writ in the Heart,
which makes free indeed* as says Christ, If the Truth make you free, than are
you free indeed. So that the Liberty of God's People stands in the Truth, and
their Communion in it, and in the Perfect Spiritual Law of Christ Jesus, which
delivers and preserves them from every Evil Thing that does or would embondage.
In this blessed Liberty it is not the will or wisdom of man, neither the vain
Affections and Lusts that rule, or give Law to the Soul; for the minds of all
such as are made free by the Truth, are by the Truth conducted in doing and
suffering through their earthly Pilgrimage. The false Liberty he defines to be
A departing from this blessed Spirit of Truth, and a Rebelling against this
Perfect Law of Liberty in the Heart, and being at Liberty to do our own Wills;
upon which comes Reproof and Judgment. This, being the Basis of the work, I
thought fit to transcribe at large, that the Reader may plainly see and
understand what that Liberty is, both true and false, which was the subject of
that Book, and is now of this Controversy.

Against this Definition of Spiritual Liberty, I do not find the Answerers of
that Book (for the Answer runs in the plural Number) take any Exception. For,
in the entrance of their Answer, they say, As to the Definition of Liberty
Spiritually explained, page the first, We agree upon the matter. But, passing
by some Questions and Answers in that Book, tending to show, in some general
Instances, wherein and how far the Members of the Church of Christ may be left
to their freedom; They take-hold of a Question and Answer in the second and
third pages, which are thus expressed. Quest. But does not Freedom extend further
than this; for since God has given me a manifestation of his Spirit to profit
withal, and that I have the Gift of God in my self, should I not be left to act
according as I am free and persuaded in my own mind, in the things that relate
to God, lest looking upon my self as obliged by what is revealed unto another,
though it be not revealed unto me, I should be led out of my own measure, and
act upon another's Motion, and so offer a blind Sacrifice to God? Answ. This is
true in a sense, that is, if thou art such a one that can do nothing against
the Truth, but for the Truth, then may thou safely be left to thy freedom in
the things of God, and the Reason is plain; Because thy freedom stands in the
perfect Law of Liberty, in the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, and
in the Truth, which is Christ Jesus, which makes thee free indeed, that is,
perfectly free from all that is Bad, and perfectly free to all that is Holy,
Just, Lovely, Honest, Comely and of good Report; But if thou pleadest thy
Freedom against such things, yea, obstructest and slightest such good, wholesome
and requisite things, Thy Freedom is naught, dark, perverse, out of the Truth,
and against the perfect Law of Love and Liberty.

The Question, as stated above, the Adversaries find no fault with, but approve
and applaud, often calling it a Weighty Question. But for all that, they either
mistake, or wilfully pervert it. For whereas the plain and express Terms of the
Question are these, [Since God has given me a manifestation of his Spirit to
profit withal, and that I have the Gift of God in my self, should I not be
left, etc.] They, in their Sophistical Glosses upon it, vary the Terms, and
instead of [God's having given, etc.] They render it [ where the Gift of God is
received to profit withal:] And instead of [I have the Gift of God in my self]
They put [ such as do adhere to it] As if there were no difference (or They
knew, or regarded none) between God's having given a manifestation of his Spirit
to profit withal, and man's having received this Gift of God to profit withal:
Betwixt man's having the Gift of God in himself, and his Adhering (that is,
joining and cleaving close) unto this heavenly Gift. Whereas the
Spiritually-minded know, not only that the manifestation of the Spirit is given
to every man to profit withal, according to 1 Cor. 12.7. (though too many
receive it not, but reject and rebel against it*) but that, even of those that
have professed to have received it, all have not received it to that good end
and benefit for which it was given, namely, to profit thereby. Neither have all
who have had the Gift of God in themselves, adhered thereto: But many have
wholly kicked against it; and some who have pretended to adhere to it, have,
instead thereof, adhered to its and their own Enemy, not to their profit, but
to their Loss and Ruin, and to the Trouble and disquiet of the Church, of which
they held themselves to be Members.

Now that the Adversaries have thus wrested the Question, shall appear in their
own words; for after they have (without much variation) recited the Question
and Answer, they in their own Answer thereto, page 2. say, That this Question
above is weighty, is clear, for the whole Controversy seems included in it;
For where the Gift of God is Received to profit withal, they have liberty and
freedom to choose or refuse things, according as they are persuaded, or they
have not; and all this (say they) is included in the Question. Here, they have
put in the word [ received] thereby turning the ground of the Question from
God's having given, to man's having received the Gift of God to profit withal.
Again, say they, The Question is, whether freedom and Liberty do not extend
further than outward things, that is, Whether it does not reach to the things
of God, where the Gift of Gods is Received according to the Question; Whenas
the word [ Received] is not in the Question. Again, taking upon them in a
conceited humor, to turn the Question into a Position or Assertion, they say,
It will follow thus, or to this effect, that true Liberty and freedom reaches
to the things of God, to all that have received the Gift of God to profit
withal; for such, as they do adhere to it, have liberty and freedom in the fear
of God to choose, etc.

Now having thus wrested the Question, by varying the Terms in which the Author
had laid it down, Their next work is to Cavil at his Answer; which, though it
answered his Question, does not answer theirs, at least not to their minds. And
first I take notice, as if they had a mind to play the Critics, and show some
little skill in Pedantry, they fall a Word-pecking, and Carp at his manner of
expressing himself. It seems as if they thought him deficient in Grammar, and
that he understood not Congruity of Speech. The beginning of his Answer was,
This is true in a sense. For this they take him up. It seems rather (say they,
page 2.) to take the Question to be an Assertion, than a Question in our
Judgment; for (say they) it follows thus, That this Question is true in a
sense, which to us is neither clear nor very proper, a Question in some sort
being a matter undetermined till affirmed or denied. Surely, one would think,
they might have spared their Censure on another, unless they had learned to
speak with more clearness and better sense themselves. How would they be
understood, that a Question in some sort is a matter undetermined till affirmed
and denied? Is it undetermined in some sort, and determined in some other sort,
before it be either affirmed or denied? Or is a Question, with them, a matter
determined so soon as it is affirmed or denied? They have found out, sure, an
easy way of determining Questions, if either affirming or denying will
determine the matter. But to make this pretended Solaecisme upon the Author of
the Book they pretend to Answer, They abuse his words: for they say, It follows
thus (meaning, in his Book) that this Question is true in a sense. But without
Question, They put in the word Question in that place: for it does not follow
so in his Book. His Book does not say, This Question is true in a sense: But,
This is true in a sense. This; the Matter, Substance, Subject of the Question:
not the Question (which is but a form of Speech) but the thing questioned;
which if They know not how to distinguish, They are the less fit to take upon
them to correct Others, him especially.

Next, I observe they except against the Answer as insufficient. They say, page
2. The Answer, if worthy of that Name, is slight and evasive, no way deserving
to be reputed or accepted as a true Answer to this weighty Question. Again, We
find no direct Answer, neither directly affirming or denying the Question.
Again, We see the Question is rather avoided than answered. All this in one
page. And with such abusive Slights their Book abounds. But in this They do but
beat the Air with empty Noise and Clamor, roving in Uncertainties and
Self-inconsistencies. One while they say, The Answer is no way deserving to be
reputed a true Answer, as in page 2. Another while they confess, It is true in
the sense he grants, page 4. Now it is not a full Answer, page 4. Anon, it is
Nothing to the purpose, p. 6. This befalls them, because They go from the plain
and simple Truth, from the true Light, to grope in the dark, with their own
Guessings, Conjectures, Conceivings and Suppositions, built upon this [ If] and
to'ther [ If;] from which They as confidently force Conclusions, as if their
Suppositions were the plainest Positions; their Conjectures, the clearest
Demonstrations. Of this, Instances may be seen in their 3. and 4. pages, where
attempting to find out by their [ If's] whether the Author's Answer be full or
nay to the Question, They say, Either this Question, if affirmed, is true in a
larger sense, then he has granted, or it is but true in this sense. If true in a
larger sense, it follows (say They, but not without another [ If] though) If
his aim and design, as he says, was to assert the Truth, he has missed his
mark. This were to suppose it impossible to hit the mark, if a Question be true
in a larger sense than it is answered. Which Supposition no man of sense, I
suppose, will allow of. So again, a little lower, If (say they) I must not act
as I am persuaded, then I must act as others are persuaded. What necessity is
there for that? Where lies the [must] in this case? Is there no medium between
my not acting as I am persuaded, and acting as others are persuaded? What if,
in such a Case, I should for a while forbear acting, not act at all, but humbly
wait upon God, to receive from him the like Persuasion that my Brethren have,
that so I also may act with them upon my own persuasion? Were there any hurt in
this? nay, were not this a good sign of a right Christian Mind and Spirit?
Again, they say, page 3. Either he believes his Answer is full to the Question,
or he believes and knows it is not: If he believes and knows it is not full,
then must he not only not have asserted the Truth as above, but also be
conscious wherefore he did it not; and we conceive (there is another of their
Conceptions?) that must either be because he wanted ability, or because he
wanted Truth in his way. Here are a pair of inconclusive Conclusions together,
pieced out with a shallow Conceit of their own; which I should not have thought
worth taking notice of, but to show the well-meaning Reader, what false ways of
Reasoning they work by, to beguile the simple. Amongst whom though such sort of
Reasoning may pass for current, and perhaps be thought of some force by such
as, through yiedling to the Enemies suggestions against the Truth, are become
veiled and clouded in their understandings: yet to the opened Eye, the single
Eye, the enlightened mind, it appears, as indeed it is, empty, shallow, trivial,
weak and false.

Now as to the Answer it self, after all their vilifying of it, it will appear
to the honest-minded to be pertinent, proper and full enough to the Question to
which it was given. The Adversaries, I perceive, expected an Answer to consist
only in a Yea, or Nay: and they account the Answer not direct, because (as they
think) it does not directly affirm or deny. But it is their want of skill (if
without offense they may be told so) that makes them think an Answer not
direct, unless it be expressed by Yea or Nay. As the Answer relates to the
Question, so the Question related to (as being grounded on) the Definition of
spiritual Liberty, which the Author had given before. That therefore the Answer
they except so much against may appear to be both proper, full and direct
enough to the Question, I desire both the Question it self, and the Definition
of that Liberty propounded in it, (and on which it is grounded) may be
seriously and impartially weighed together. The true spiritual Liberty, on
which the Question was grounded, was defined to be Deliverance from Sin by the
Perfect Law in the Heart, the perfect Law of Liberty, etc. (as is before set
down at large.) And this Definition the Adversaries have subscribed to. The
Question that follows, and is grounded upon, this Definition of spiritual
Liberty or freedom, is this; Since God has given me a Manifestation of his
Spirit to profit withal, and that I have the Gift of God in my self, should I
not be left to act according as I am free and persuaded in my own mind, in the
things that relate to God, etc. Now consider; since it is certain, that this
Gift of God is universal, that the Manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every man to profit withal: and yet no less certain, that All who have this
Gift in themselves, are not subject to it; that All to whom the Manifestation
of the Spirit is given to profit withal, have not received the Gift; nay, that
of them who do profess to have received it, All have not so received it, as to
profit therewithal, to be redeemed thereby into the true Spiritual Liberty:
These things, I say, considered, such a positive, absolute, undistinguishing
Answer, as the Adversaries expected and call for, of a simple granting or
denying the Question, by a positive Yea or Nay, without distinction or
explanation, could not in Truth have been given. For that had been to say, that
none ought to be left to their freedom, no, not They, who by receiving the
divine Gift in themselves, subjecting to it, and growing up in it, are truly
thereby brought to the true Freedom indeed, the Freedom that stands in Truth,
the true Spiritual Liberty: Or that All ought to be left to their freedom in
the things relating to Go^^ even they who through their alienation from God,
know nothing of either this true Libety, or the Gift that leads to it; or They
that, professing to know it, and to have received it, live not in subjection to
it, and so are not brought to the true Spiritual Liberty by it; but have a
freedom out of the Truth, a freedom to do such things as the Truth condemns.
The Author therefore, rightly distinguishing these different states, answered
aptly to the Terms of his Question; granting the Question in a right sense, but
not in a wrong sense. For the Question not opening the particular state of the
Party demanding this freedom, but being grounded only upon the Gift or
Manifestation given (which is applicable not only to all in the Profession of
Truth, how disorderly and scandalous so ever, but even to all mankind) and not
mentioning the Parties having received the Gift in the love of it, closed with
it to an improvement of it to a profiting therewith, and dwelt in a subjection
thereunto (which alone brings into the true Spiritual Liberty) therefore the
Author, that he might divide his Answer aright, said, If thou art such an one
that can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth (as much as to say,
If thou art indeed come by thy subjection to the Heavenly Gift given thee, into
the true Spiritual Liberty, and thy freedom stand in that) then may thou
safely be left to thy freedom in the things of God, and the Reason (said He) is
plain: Because thy freedom (the freedom thou would be left to) stands in the
perfect Law of Liberty, etc. As much as to say, thy freedom, if this be thy
state, is the true spiritual Liberty before defined; and therefore thou may
safely be left to that, both with respect to thy self, and to the Church of
Christ, which thou art a Member of, since that freedom will not lead thee to do
any thing against the Truth, but all for the Truth. (And herein, it is evident,
the Author had direct Relation to that Definition of true Spiritual Liberty
which he had given before, and which the Adversary now agree to) But on the
other hand, If thou who demandest to be left to thy freedom in the things of
God, art not come to this true spiritual Liberty; but notwithstanding God has
given thee a manifestation of his Spirit to profit withal, and that thou
professest in words to have received this Gift, yet thou have not so closed
with, and subjected to this divine Gift, as to have profited therewithal, and
so art not come into this true Spiritual Liberty; but by rebelling against the
perfect Law of Liberty in thy Heart, thou art gotten into a false Liberty, a
false freedom, a freedom to do such things as are out of Truth; then it is not
safe, either for thy self, or for the Church of Christ (which thou seem to
join with) for thee to be left to this freedom of thine, since that will lead
thee to act not for the Truth, but against the Truth, to bring dishonor to the
Truth, disturbance to the Church, and destruction to thy self. The Author
therefore, having granted that such as are come to the true Spiritual Liberty
in and by the Truth, should be left to their Freedom in that; added, But if
thou pleadest thy freedom against such things as are Holy, Just, Lovely,
Honest, Comely, and of good Report, yea, obstructest and slightest such good,
wholesome and requisite things, thy freedom is naught, dark, perverse, out of the
Truth, and against the perfect Law of Love and Liberty. And thus, to the
Spiritually-minded, who consider the Definition above given of Spiritual
Liberty, and take the Question, as it was stated by the Author himself, I make
no doubt but it will appear, that the Answer given by him thereto, was plain,
proper, direct and full enough.

But the Adversaries show what they would be at: for they say, p. 4. The
Question affirmed as above, is certainly not only true in a part, or in a
sense, as he is pleased to say, but it is true in every part, true in the whole
and every sense that a Position can be true in; Nay, it is so far true, that if
it can be wrong at all, it is only in a sense, and that is only when misapplied.
Reply. These few Lines yield much matter to be considered; 1 st. When they say
the Question affirmed as above, they must mean the Question, as it lies in the
Author's own Terms and Book, or as they have new modelled it, formed,
transformed and deformed it, perverted and wrested it to their own sense in
their Book. If they mean the latter, they prevaricate foully. If they intend
the former, viz. That the Question, as stated and laid down (or, to answer
their conceit affirmed) in the Author's own Terms, is true (that is, is to be
granted, or held in the affirmative) in every part, in the whole, and in every
sense that a Position can be true in: then, since the Question assigns no other
Qualification to the Party demanding to be left to act according to his
freedom, but that which is common to the most scandalous Professor, to the
vilest Apostate, yea, to all mankind, namely, that God has given him a
manifestation of his Spirit to profit withal, and that he has the Gift of God
in himself (which many that have it, rebel against, and are so far from
profiting with it, that they do despite unto it, it will follow, according to
the Adversaries sense, that All such as God has given a manifestation of his
Spirit to profit withal, All such as have the Gift of God in themselves, how
disobedien^ soever they are to it, how Heady and High-minded soever, how unruly
and turbulent soever, how factious and quarrelsom soever in the Church, must
notwithstanding be left to act as they are free (though they are free to act
what is out of Truth) and the Church be obliged to own and receive them as
Brethren and Fellow Members in their so acting. But though this be the
Consequence of the Adversaries Arguing, yet it is directly contrary to the
Apostle's counsel, Romans 16.17. and 2 Timothy 3.5. Secondly, when They say, The
Question is true in every part, true in the whole, and every sense that a
Position can be true in; And then add, It is so far true, that If it can be
wrong at all, it is only in a sense; They seem to me to run at once into an
Uncertainty and a Contradiction. A contradiction, in admitting it capable of
being wrong in any sense, after they have so positively affirmed it to be true
in every sense. An Uncertainty, in saying, If it can be wrong at all; which
shows They haesitate, They doubt, They are not well assured, They are but in
the Uncertainty: And themselves say in the same page, but a few lines lower, An
Uncertainty admitted for the Truth in this case, stands in the nature of a Lie.
To this they add another Paradox; for having said, If the Question be wrong at
all, it is only in a sense, and that is only when misapplied; They add, But the
misapplication of this weighty Question when affirmed, does neither destroy it
in its self, nor in the least take away the true use. This, in a Parenthesis,
They bid us Observe. And truly they must be observant Readers indeed, that can
observe any Congruity of Sense or Reason in this Passage; or understand how
that can be misapplied to any one, which (according to their sense) is
applicable to every one.

But it is very probable, that what They here say of this weighty Question, as
they so often call it, is intended rather of the Question, or Position they
have made (for they have turned it from one to to'ther) than of the Question
propounded by that Author: for they here immediately subjoyn their Creed, as if
they deduced it from the Question; but in such Terms as are only in their own
Question, not in his. Thus they word it. Therefore we believe, where the Gift
of God is received to profit withal, and truly adhered to, there must be a
Liberty to choose and refuse things, according as such are persuaded, even from
the Babe in Christ, to the Strong Man, and so to all states: (in Christ I
suppose they mean.) This shows how little they understand the Question, and the
ground of it. For the Babe in Christ, he that is truly in Christ, though but in
a Babish state, abiding in him, can do nothing against the Truth, but for the
Truth; though he may not be able to do so much for the Truth, as a Strong Man,
or Father in Christ can do. He that has so received the Gift of God, as to
profit therewithal, and does truly adhere thereunto, be his measure of growth
or stature therein what it will, yet, abiding and growing up therein, That will
lead him to choose, and with freedom to embrace, whatsoever is Holy, Just,
Lovely, Honest, Comely, and of good Report. So that such as one in that
Capacity, wherein (according to the Author's Answer to the Question, concerning
being left to act as he is free, etc.) he may safely be left to his freedom in
the things of God. Thus, after all their Clamor against the Answer to the
Question, as no way deserving to be reputed a true Answer, not worthy of that
name, of no use or service with respect to the Controversy, worth nothing,
nothing to the purpose etc. because not large enough, not comprehensive enough
(as they think) to take in All; They, with all their stretching and wresting,
have brought it but to the same pass, to them only that are in Christ. And they
tell us, page 7. That Man must be made a New Creature, and must travel through
the whole Mystery of Iniquity, before* he can come into Christ; and that,
though the Enemy, that fallen Angel, can go with Man into every Remove, while
man is fitting and preparing, yet into Christ he cannot come. So that, with
them, a man being come to be in Christ, is out of the Enemies reach. Thus,
(though, exercising themselves in things too high for them, They utter what
they understand not,) yet they bring the matter to the same Issue and result,
that the Author's own Answer left it in. For they that are thus come through
the Travel, beyond the fitting and preparing, beyond the whole Mystery of
Iniquity, into Christ, and out of the Enemy's reach, being entered where he
cannot come: These are sure in as high an Estate as those can be, who the
Author said may safely be left to their freedom in the things of God. The
difference then lies not between such as are in different growths in Christ;
but between Those that are really in him, and Those that are not in him, though
they may profess to believe in him. The danger is not of the Babe, muchless of
the strong Man, in Christ: But of the strong Man out of Christ; him that is
strong in his own Will, in his own Conceit, being heady, high-minded,
Contentious, Quarrelsom, Impatient; who, if he cannot in all things be
humoured, and have his own way, flies out into open Opposition, to work
Division and Separation, as these Adversaries have done. For however; They now
palliate, and in words smooth over the Liberty and freedom They pretend to, as
if it were only a Liberty to choose or refuse things according as they are
persuaded: yet their Practice (which in this case is the best Discoverer of
Intentions) has sufficiently manifested what freedom, what Liberty They seek;
A Liberty to Oppose Friends in such Things as Friends are satisfied in; A
Liberty to reproach, revile, despise, scoff and Jeer at those Things that are
conscientiously received and practiced by Friends, and which Themselves neither
have showed, nor can show any Evil to be in, but only pretend They are not
Convinced of the Needfulness or Usefulness of them; A Liberty to revile and
vilify Friends in Print, under the names of Apostates, Innovators, Introducers
of Popery, and but one step from it, Idolaters, Setters up of Images,
Idol-Prophets, a treacherous Company, possessed with the Spirit of Belial,
Mercinary Judges, Self-seeking slavish Drudges, led by Satan, etc. A Liberty to
rend off, divide and separate from Friends, and set up separate-Meetings, in
diverse parts and places, out of the Unity of Friends, and in direct Opposition
to them; And yet after all this, and in the midst of all this, and maintaining
all this, to come when and where They please, to Friends Meetings, as
pretending to join with Friends in Worship, and impose upon Friends their
Preaching and Praying, and expect that They (who have given the highest
Demonstrations of Their being our greatest Enemies, and persist therein) should
notwithstanding be owned and received as Friends, as Brethren, as Preachers, as
Ministers of Christ amongst us. This is the Liberty They have taken, this the
freedom they plead and press for. And this is such a piece of Hypocrisy, and
gross Deceit as, I verily believe, cannot be paralleled among all the
Pretenders to Christian Religion. This to be sure is a Mystery of Iniquity; And
therefore, seeing They pretend not to extend the Liberty, of choosing and
refusing things, according as They are persuaded, to any but such as are in
Christ, p. 4. And that They must travel through the whole Mystery of Iniquity,
before they can come into Christ, p. 7. They must needs travel out of these
things before mentioned, before they can pretend to be within the compass of
their own Plea.

In their 4th page, They say, Forasmuch as he neither has, nor we believe, can
give us any certain undoubted Rule, how to know who these are that are so to be
left, all that he has said by way of affirming this great Question, is worth
nothing; for as it is altogether unintelligible, it is every way impracticable.
Again, If any certain Rule can be given to know who may be left to their
Liberty as above, let us have it (say they) and by the contrary Rule we shall
know who may not be so left.

Reply; By this They show themselves to be out of the Truth, in the
Uncertainty. If they were in the Truth, they would not be to seek of a certain
Rule in this case, the Spirit of Truth giving Certainty and Assurance to them
that are guided by it, though not to them that resist it. Now though they have
not explained what they mean by Who these are, or how they expect a Description
of them, whether by Qualifications, or by Personal Marks; yet each way they are
wrong. For if they would have a Rule to know them by Qualifications, they
themselves (with sufficient Contradiction to themselves, while they make as if
they believed no such Rule can be given) have adventured to give it, assigning
them to be such as are in Christ, even from the Babe in Christ to the strong
Man, and so to all states (but still in Christ.) Now that this cannot take in
(even in their own sense) the whole promiscuous Number of those that go to
Friends Meetings, that hear Truth preached, or that by Tongue, or outward
Profession only, confess to the Truth of the Principle, their own Description
or Explanation of what it is to be in Christ, page 7. will manifest: For there
they tell us, that Man must be made a new Creature before he can come into
Christ, he must travel through the whole Mystery of Iniquity; that the Rest is
only by being in Christ, the Travel is while he appears in us to fit us for
himself, for it is (say they) the New Creature that only finds room in him. (So
then the Travel must be over before they come to be in Christ) For, say they,
the Enemy, that fallen Angel, can go with Man into every Remove, whilst man is
fitting and preparing, but into Christ he cannot come. These are some of the
Qualifications by which they describe who should be left to their freedom, etc.
But if this may pass for a Rule with them, why may not that as well, which the
Author of that Book they pretend to answer, laid down therein, viz. that they
may safely be left to their freedom in the things of God, who are such as can
do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth; such whose freedom stands in
the perfect Law of Liberty? If they ask, But by what certain or undoubted Rule
shall we know who are such? I Reply; When they have told me, by what certain or
undoubted Rule they know who are in Christ, according to the Explanation they
have given of being in Christ, that is, who they are that are certainly and
undoubtedly made New Creatures; who they are that have certainly and
undoubtedly traveled through the whole Mystery of Iniquity; who they are that
have certainly and undoubtedly gone beyond, where the Enemy can go, into Christ
where he cannat come; I will then tell them, who they are whose freedom stands
in the perfect Law of Liberty, etc.

They add, But if no such Rule (that is, no certain or undoubted Rule) can be
given, it must follow, All must be left free, or None must be left.

Reply; They are very quick at their Consequences. But it concerns them to see
that their Consequence contains no more than their Premises. When they say, All
must be left free; what All do they mean? All that are called Quakers? or only
All that are in Christ, from the Babe in Christ upward? If they say only All
that are in Christ, (according to the Description they have given of being in
Christ) what more or other is that, than the Author they carp at had said
before? If they mean All that are called Quakers, that is more (by their leave)
than is in their Premises. For there they say, Therefore we believe, where the
Gift of God is received to profit withal, and truly adhered to, there must be a
Liberty to choose and refuse things according as such are persuaded, even from
the Babe in Christ, to the strong Man, etc. And sure they will hardly say, that
All that are called Quakers have so received the Gift, have so adhered to it,
have so profited with it, as to be really in Christ (and that according to
their forecited Description of being in Christ) though but in a Babish state or
degree. They were therefore too hasty in their Conclusion that All must be left
free, or None. They should have remembered, that the Definition of true
Spiritual Liberty (to which they say they agree) was, Deliverance from Sin by
the perfect Law of Liberty in the Heart, a being made free indeed by Christ the
Truth. All have not this freedom. They cannot be left to it, who neither have
it, nor know it. Must therefore None be left to it, although they know it, and
have it? They should have considered, that Spiritual Liberty was declared to be
twofold; True, and False: So that there is a false Liberty, a false freedom,
as well as a True; a Liberty to do our own Wills, upon which comes Reproof and
Judgment. Examinat. of Lib. Spir. p. 1. Would they have All, nay, would they
have any left to this freedom, to this Liberty, to do their own Wills, in
Opposition to God's Will? That would bring Reproof and Judgment indeed.

Now because it is a pleasing and desirable thing to man's Nature to be left to
its Freedom, to be at Liberty to do, or not do, what it pleases, and how it
pleases, in Religious, as well as in Civil matters; whereupon it may sound
harsh in the Ears of some, that any should not be absolutely and unquestionably
left to their own Freedom, to do what they think fit, without being accountable
to others: Therefore that I may remove all grounds of Offense and Stumbling on
this occasion, out of the way of such as are honest-minded, I am willing here,
as briefly as with plainness I can, to open the matter further. First
therefore, a little to explain the Terms, and show what is meant by those words
[Not to be left to ones Liberty to act as one is free, etc.] I take the meaning
thereof to be, that no Person, who does profess to be a Member of a true
Christian Society, ought, or has right to plead any Exemption, upon the
account of his Liberty or Freedom, from being called to an Account by that
Society which he professes to be a Member of, in case such Person shall do any
thing repugnant to the Principles of that Society, or tending to the Defamation
or hurt thereof. But that every such Society has power to call any such
professed Member to an Account, in order to inform him, and open his
understanding, if he be weak and dark; to Reprove, Rebuke, and Exhort him to
Repentance, if he prove heady, wilful, contentious and Unruly; And if he
obstinatly persist therein, to refuse any further Fellowship with him, until he
manifest true Repentance. This is the Power, the utmost Power, that the Church
of Christ claims, namely to Inform, Instruct, Reprove, Admonish, Exhort to
Repentance such of her professed Members as go astray, and (if nothing less
will serve) to refuse Communion with the Impenitent, and those that reject her,
and declare them not to be of her. Now that it may appear how reasonable as
well as needful it is, that there should be such Power in the Church of Christ,
I desire the Reader, in the next place, to consider, that in the best Religious
Societies of men, there have always been (as to outward Profession) Good and
Bad, True and False, Right and Wrong. With Israel of old there came up, out of
Egypt, a mixed Multitude, or a great mixture, Exodus 12.38. Besides which, many
of the Israelites themselves, when they came to be tried in the Wilderness,
proved to be Murmurers, Complainers, Gain sayers and Rebellious: So that the
Apostle rightly observed, they are not all Israel, which are of Israel, Romans
9.6. In the Christian Church, at the first gathering thereof, many that walked
a while with Christ, so far as to be reputed his Disciples, wont back* and
walked no more with him, John 6.66. How* it was afterward, in the Apostles
times, the Epistles of the Apostles sufficiently show. There were in the Church
at Corinth, some that were carnal, and walked as men, 1 Cor. 3.3. There were
many, the Apostle tells the Philippians, that so walked, that they were the
Enemies of the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18. There were some in the Church at
Thessalonica, that walked disorderly, 2 These. 3.11. There were some in the
Church in Fergamos, that held the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balack to cast
a Stumbling Block before the Children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to
Idols, and to commit Fornication (for by that name does the Holy Ghost call
those unlawful Marriages, of Believers with Unbelievers, which Balaam taught
Balack to draw the Children of Israel into with the Midianitish Women.) Rev.
2.14. There were some also in that Church, as well as in the Church in Ephesus,
that held the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans ver. 6. and 15. Which by
Ecclesiastical Writers is delivered to have been Community of Wives, as well as
of other things. And sure enough it was some great Evil, which Christ expressed
his Hatred of. There was in the Church in Thyatira the Woman Iezabel, seducing
(like Balaam) to Fornication, etc. Not to fetch instances out of every Church,
there were some that walked after the Flesh, in the Lust of Uncleanness, 2.
Pet. 2.10. These were presumptuous, self-willed, despised Government, and spoke
Evil, not only of Dignities, but of things they understood not, ver. 12. Yet
these were great sticklers for Liberty: for They promised Liberty to such as
they allured, being themselves mean while the Servants of Corruption, ver. 19.
Of whom a more full description may be seen in the rest of that Chapter, and in
the Epistle of Jude. Thus it was in those times. How it has been in our time,
since the Lord first gathered us to be a peculiar People to himself, they must
have had but little Experience, or made but little Observation, that need to be
informed. How many that have walked for a while (some for some years) with
Friends in the Profession of Truth, have turned their backs thereon, and gone
off, some into the Sea again, some into Nets! What has been the general
pretense of these, but want of Liberty? the way of Truth was too strait for
them? they wanted a broader way. How many, even of them that retained the
Profession of Truth, have slept aside, some into one odd thing, some into
another, under pretense that they had Freedom so to do? Did not they that ran
out in I. Perot's business, plead being left to their Freedom, to their
Liberty? They did so: and by that Plea were some, to my knowledge, betrayed
into that snare. Now since it is evident, by the Instances given, that in the
true Church in all times, there have been (as to outward Profession) Bad as
well as Good, wrong as well as right, what can be more reasonable, than that
there should be in the true Church such a Power, as may enable those that are
right to acquit themselves, their Principle and Profession from the Disorders,
of whatsoever kind, committed by them that are wrong; which they can never do,
if those that are wrong may exempt themselves from being called to account, and
reproved for their Disorders, by alleging that what they have done, they had
Liberty and Freedom in themselves to do.

Now this has happened, in a great part, through a misunderstanding and
misapplication of true Spiritual Liberty. For though all that have received,
and are indeed guided by the Grace of God and Spirit of Truth, are to be left
to it, to act for God in the Liberty and Freedom that it gives. Yet for any to
infer from thence, that every one that pretends to the Grace of God and Spirit
of Truth, (though it be too apparent that they are not subject thereunto) must
be left to that Freedom, which they call (and in one sense rightly enough)
their own, to that Liberty which they have set up in and for themselves, though
it leads such to thwart, oppose, gainsay and disturb the rest of the same
Society; this is not right, but (whatever else may be pretended) is both wrong
it self, and an Inlet for that which is wrong. For the meaning of that Plea,
that every one ought to be left to his Freedom, etc. Is this, that none should
be accountable, or answerable to the Church, or Congregation they are reputed
to be of, for what they do, (that is not simply Evil, or Evil in it self, as
the Adversaries in their Book distinguish) so that, although what they do be
disorderly, and that which either directly, or by Consequence, tends to bring
scandal, and trouble upon the whole Society; it is enough to stop the Churches
Mouth, for such an one to say, I have Liberty and Freedom in my self to do so
or so. And thereupon the Church may not judge, may not reprove, may not blame
such an One; but must be obliged to own and receive such an one as a Friend, a
Brother in the Truth (though walking out of Truth) as a member of the Body
(though acting against the Body.) This were to set up a false Liberty, to
overthrow the true Liberty; to give Liberty to Particulars, and take it from
the General: which to do, were contrary to Truth, and to true Reason. For
surely, how much Liberty soever a Part may claim, the whole may claim as much.
And therefore, if each Particular has Liberty to choose, or refuse things,
according as they are persuaded the things are right or wrong (which it is fit
they should:) Why should not the whole have like Liberty to receive, or refuse
such Persons, with respect to Membership, according as they are persuaded that
such Persons, so acting, are in, or out of, that Spirit in which the true
Membership stands? But this Liberty the Church should be deprived and debarred
of, if she were bound (as the Adversaries would bind her) to own and receive
for members all such as make any Profession of Truth, though walking and acting
contrary to Her, and (as she believes) to Truth, under pretense that they walk
and act according to their own Liberty and Freedom. He that would shun the
Cross of Christ in any Testimony that Truth leads to, has scope enough under
this Plea to do it. He that, for advantage or fear, will break Christ's
Command, and Swear, can say he has freedom so to do, and is not persuaded in
his own mind of the unlawfulness thereof. He that, to shun Sufferings, will pay
Tithes to the Hireling-Priest; He that will Marry by the Priest, or take in
Marriage one that is not in the Profession of Truth, has the same Plea for his
Shelter; and so in other Cases of Evil.

This the Adversaries saw, but saw not how to Answer: And therefore in their
5th page, having said, There Is but one Objection, and that is, that this
(leaving all to act according as they are free, etc.) is to give Liberty to
Evil; they add, Which we may speak to in another place. And so they shift it
off in this place. And having thus given it the Go-by here, never give any
direct Answer to it (that I observe) throughout their whole Book. In their 19th
page they touch it, but presently start back, and slide off of it again. There
they say, What can hinder the putting this in practice, but the Devil in the
likeness of Truth, persuading this was to give Liberty to Evil? Then add, It Is
a mistake to think, this is to give Liberty to Evil, while our End, we are
sure, bears witness to the contrary.

Rep. They are sure! What Assurance does their saying, they are sure give to
others? Their witness-bearing, as it is of themselves, and for themselves, may
perhaps reach no further than to themselves. But suppose Charity should extend
it further, and on that foot it should be granted, that their End, or
Intention, is not to give Liberty to Evil. Does it therefore follow that that
unlimitted Plea, for leaving every one so to act, according as they are free
and persuaded in their own minds, as not to be accountable for their actings,
may not give Liberty to Evil? May not People have a wrong freedom, a freedom to
do Evil, and a false Persuasion in their own minds, that that wrong freedom is
a right one, notwithstanding that God has given them a manifestation of his
Spirit to profit withal, if they do not (and it is too plain that too many do
not) obey and follow the leadings of that good Spirit, that they may profit
thereby? But what Answer do the Adversaries now give to that One Objection,
which they took notice of in their 5th page, and then made a show as if they
would speak of it in another place? Truly none at all. But instead of answering
it (which was reasonably to be expected from them) they excuse themselves, but
very poorly, from Answering: for after they have told us, They are sure their
End is not to give Liberty to Evil, they add* But to Answer All the Objections
that may be made, as it would take up too much time, so perhaps we may not know
all that may be advanced; so we shall Omit that, till we are better informed of
them, as also, till more fitting Opportunity do occur.

Rep. A dull Come-off! Who, that were shameless, might not, at this rate, avoid
Answering any Objection that lies hard upon them, by pretending it would take
up too much time to answer all Objections, and that perhaps they may not know
all that may be advanced? They told us in their 5th page, There is but one
Objection; and that is, That this is to give Liberty to Evil; and they made a
kind of Promise to speak to that in another place. (Why did they not answer
this One Objection, which themselves had advanced?) Now, because they know not
what to say to it, nor how to Answer that One Objection; they pretend it would
take up too much time to Answer all the Objections that may be made, and that
perhaps they may not know all that may be advanced. Is not this pitiful
Shuffling? Is not this mean Trifling for men! for such men! for men so cried
up, as some of them are? Perhaps, say they, we may not know all that may be
advanced. What then? should that hinder them from taking notice of what they
did, or might know, of what was advanced? Did not the Book they pretend to
Answer enumerate several Particular Evils, which the Enemy by that Plea (of
leaving every one to act as he is free, etc.) is introducing a Liberty to, as
Paying Tithes to Hireling-Priests; Marrying by the Priest, Declining a public
Testimony in suffering times, or hiding in times of Persecution, Worshipping
and respecting the Persons of men; and Observing the World's Holy Days and
Mass-days (as they call them?) Why did they not Answer these that were
advanced, as there phrase is? Did they want to be better informed, whether
These are Evils or no? They could not but know, that most of these Evils have
been closely charged, as the Fruits of that Spirit they are now joined to. And
their so slightly slipping over them now, is no good sign that they are wholly
clear and free from them. They boast indeed of Life and Conversation; but
distinguish not (that I observe) betwixt Conversation Civil and Religious,
betwixt that which relates to the World, and that which more especially
respects the Church of God. It Is true, they say in general words, p. 43. with
respect to Lives and Conversations, Place your Judgment upon what is Evil, and
spare not, for there it will stand; for we plead not for Evil in any. And
again, We grant that any may reporve Evil, and what is Immoral, etc. p. 46. But
their explaining Evil by the terms Immoral, and simply Evil (as in page 39.
where they say, If Nothing that is simply Evil or Immoral, can be charged upon
your Brethren, etc. And in p. 44. Though nothing that is Immoral, or Evil in it
self can be proved against them) shows they mean by Immoral, such open
Profaneness and Debaucheries as Human Laws correct. And so, notwithstanding
their pretending Not to plead for Evil in any, their Plea may indulge and
countenance those Evils before mentioned, of paying Tithes to the hireling
Priest, of being married by the Priest, etc. and of marrying such as are out of
Truth, yea, out of the Profession of it; yea, and of all the Disorders that
heady and unruly Persons are capable of committing against Church-Society, by
raising and fomenting Strife and Contention amongst Brethren, by drawing and
gathering into Parties, Sides and Factions, by making Schisms, Rents and
Breaches, by running into downright Division, and open Separation. All which
are Evils, and such Evils as the Judgment of Truth always was, is and ought to
be placed upon. But seeing the Adversaries hide themselves under the Terms
[Simply Evil, or Immoral] let me ask them more particularly, Whether it be not
an Immoral Act for any one to deprive Another, by force or fraud, of his just
Right and Property? They know what of this kind has been done by some of their
own Party at Reading, and other Places, where they have forcibly kept Friends
out of their public Meeting Houses, and deprived Friends of their just and
lawful Right and Property in those Meeting Houses, contrary to all Right and
Justice. Now though Truth's Judgment has been placed, and does stand and
abide, upon this Evil, and upon the Authors and Abettors thereof; And though,
being so undeniable in fact, and so gross in nature, some of the Adversaries
are ashamed, or afraid to plead for it: Yet which of them all has joined with
Friends in placing the Judgment of Truth upon it, and upon them that are more
immediately guilty of it? Nay, do they not rather own and join with such as have
been and are most guilty in this case, and receive such of them as are
Preachers, to preach and pray amongst them?

In their 5th page, they take a slight notice of the latter part of the
Author's Answer, where he said, But if thou pleadest thy Freedom against such
things, yea, Obstructest and Slightest such Good, Wholesome and Requisite Things
(namely such things as are Holy, Just, Lovely, Honest, Comely and of good
Report, as he had mentioned just before) thy freedom is naught, dark, perverse,
out of the Truth, and against the perfect Law of Love and Liberty. In the
reciting of which, I observe, they slip over these words [obstructest and
slightest] as being Conscious perhaps that they have done so, and have no
colorable defense to make for their so doing. Their Answer to the rest is
this, This is still to the same Tune; here is a Judge implied, but not set
forth; it is not (say they) the Spirit of Truth, but some outward thing,
whatever it is; and they add, We know not where he will fix, etc.

Rep. To the same Tune! They were in a jolly Humor sure, when they borrowed
this Phrase from the Ballad-mongers. So page 17. they say, Shall we Pipe to the
same Tune for Company. Truth would have taught them more Gravity: and it is to
be hoped their beguiled Proselites will observe and take notice what a frothy
Spirit they are guided by. But though they say, The Judge is not set forth, but
only implied; and by the^^ saying [Whatever it is] they imply they know not
what it is; nay, they confess in plain Terms; they know not where he will fix:
yet, in this tuning strain they as boldly as blindly (that is confessedly not
seeing, or knowing what it is) adventure to affirm, It Is not the Spirit of
Truth. By which the Children of Truth know, that the Adversaries, in this
Judgment, are out of Truth.

In the same airy Vein they go on thus, But since we know not where he will
fix, to say no more, it is dark to be sure; Then (as if, on a sudden, they would
grow very kind) to help it all we can, say they, we shall thus far grant, there
are some Outward things so far Essential to true Religion, as those that do
contrary to them may be detected of Error.

Rep. If it was dark before, how much clearer is it now? For they mention not a
Syllable what these outward Essentials are. They complain of want of Certainty
in the Book they pretend to answer: yet themselves leave it wholly uncertain
what they mean by these outward Essentials. They suggest here, that in that
Book things are laid down in a general way, in which (they say) Deceit or
Cunning often lurks. Yet sure, nothing could be laid down in more general
terms, than they have here mentioned their outward Essentials; for what to lurk
under, let themselves Consider, others judge.

But they say, The things suggested as the Ground of Difference, are neither
such Principles nor Practices as have been from our beginning, nor yet such
things as can be truly said to be Essential to true Religion.

Rep. I will not here Descant on their beginning, though the conceitedness of
the Expression would even invite to it. But I would know what things those are,
that they say are suggested, as the Ground of Difference, and by whom they are
so suggested. Are not these Generals designed for a shelter for something to
lurk under? But suppose for the present, that the things they suggest, are
suggested as the Ground of Difference, are neither such Principles nor
Practices as have been from their beginning; what then? Is their Beginning the
Boundary? the Nil ultra? Was there a Bar then set, a limitation to the
illimitable Holy One, that Nothing, not then in Practice, should thereafter be
ever brought into Practice, for the Service of the Church of Christ? But say
the Adversaries (and they bid us Observe it) If the things suggested as the
Ground of Difference, are not Essential things* nor yet such things as have
been from our beginning, then they can at best be but Circumstantial, or if you
will, Ceremonial or Shadowy Things, and such things at best are but accidentaly
good, that is (say they) as Persons are persuaded of them, and what is but
accidentally good, may on the contrary be accidentally not good, and that is
(say they) as Persons are dissatisfied with them.

Rep. It Is fit we should (as they desire) observe this: For I think there are
many things observable in it. First, when they say, If the things suggested,
etc. are not Essential things, not yet such things as have been from our
beginning, they can at best be but Circumstantial; They plainly imply, that if
those things had been from their beginning, they might have been more than
Circumstantial, although they had not been Essential things. An Absurdity that,
at best, must needs spring from conceited Ignorance. Secondly, By making the
terms Circumstantial, or Ceremonial and Shadowy, Synonomous, or of the same
signification, They render all outward Performances of Gospel Worship, contrary
to the nature of it, Shadowy; since no outward Act of Worship ever was, or ever
can be performed without Circumstance. If the other Passage showed their
Ignorance, this, I think, will not commend their knowledge, at least, in divine
matters. Thirdly, their saying such things are at best but accidentally good,
savours of no good understanding or sense. But Fourthly, In making such things
accidentally Good, or not Good, according as Persons are persuaded of them, or
dissatisfied with them, they have exceeded common Weakness; and to speak
favorably, draw too near to the borders of Ranterism. For it was the grand
Notion of the Ranters, and the source of their immodest and unclean Practices,
that things were no otherwise Good or Evil, than as Persons apprehended or
thought them to be so: Only they extended it more generally: These seem to
restrain it to such things as they call Circumstantial or Ceremonial, which yet
they confound with Shadowy. But let me ask these Adversaries, Do ye think or
hold, that this was always so; or only so now of late, since your Beginning (as
ye speak) that is, were all Circumstantial things, or (according to your
notion) Shadowy things, always, in all times, and places, good, or not good,
according as Persons were persuaded of them, or dissatisfied with them? Or are
they so now of late only: There were many Circumstantial Things attendant on
the Service of God under the Legal Dispensation and Shadowy Things, not a few.
Were those things then good, or not good, according as Persons were persuaded
of them, or dissatisfied with them? Or would a Persons being dissatisfied with
any of those things then, have freed him from the Obligation of them? That had
been a ready way indeed to have made void the Commandments of God. But even the
Rebellious Jews, as bad as they were, never (that I remember) made such a Plea.
Will ye rather choose to say that, though it was not so then under the Law; yet
it is so now, under the Gospel? But since ye have resolved Circumstantials into
Shadowy things; what will ye do with them under the Gospel? Will ye assert
shadowy things to be Good now, under the Gospel, if Persons are persuaded they
are so? Be persuaded to consider better of it first. At this rate, the same Act
of Religious Worship may, at the same time, and in the same Assembly, be good
to one, not good to another of the same Society, according as they differently
esteem it. It will, on this ground, be as good for men to offer up public
Prayers to God with their Hats on, if they are so persuaded and satisfied, as
to Pray with their Heads uncovered. For ye shall find, if ye look rightly into
it, that this Notion of yours is but a fresh Sprout from the old Root of the
Hat-Controversie in John Perot's time. I have some cause, more perhaps than
every one of you, to understand this Wile of the Enemy, having been in some
degree beguiled by it then. In humble reverence of Soul, and with thankfulness
of Mind, I pay this Acknowledgement to the God of my Deliverance, who was
graciously pleased to show me this Snare, and deliver me out of it. And in
tender pity, I warn you of it.

Another strange Notion the Adversaries have immediately after these, in their
5th and 6th pages, where speaking of things which they say, They believe
concern only the outward Court; They add, Which God has left unmeasured, on
purpose that Christians might never differ about them. This they repeat in
their 9th page, saying, We are sure that he has left such things on purpose
unmeasured, that men might agree. As if what God had measured, he had therefore
measured that Christians might differ, that men might not agree. For their
affirming that God has left some things unmeasured, on purpose that Christians
might never differ about them, implies (by that way of contrary arguing which
they so much use) that God has measured some things on purpose that Christian
might differ about them. But as that were wicked to imagine: So I wish the
discovery of so many absurd and false Notions as have here (in a few Lines)
dropped from them, may awaken them and others, to consider what Spirit it is they
are guided by.

When they say, they believe, nay, are sure, God has left such things (as they
except against) unmeasured, on purpose that Men might agree, that Christians
might never differ about them; I take their meaning to be, that God has
therefore left such things free, that some may practice them, others not
practice them, according as either sort like or dislike them, without taking
offense at each other therefore. Now if this be their meaning, this is of force
against themselves, to clear the things they except against from having Evil or
harm in them: for if there were any Evil or harm in them, God would not leave
any of his People at liberty to use them. And then all the Clamor and Outcry,
Division and Mischief the Adversaries have made, is against things which they
cannot in Truth say have any Evil or harm in them.

In their 10th page, the Adversaries take up another Question out of the
forementioned Book, which in that was thus laid down. But must I conform to
things whether I can receive them or no? Ought I not to be left to the Grace
and Spirit of God in my own Heart? The Answer was, to the first part of the
Question, Nay: to the last, Yea. This Answer they seem to like: for they say of
it, This is fairly said we must confess. But as fairly as it was said, they
unfairly alter it, in taking upon them to explain it; for reciting the Author's
Answer, viz. to the first part of the Question, Nay; that is, say they, Thou
ought not to receive things against Truth. Whereas the first part, nor any part
of the Question was not, Ought I to receive things against Truth? But it was,
Must I conform to things whether I can receive them or no? Betwixt which
Answer, and their explanatory Gloss, there is no small difference, both in
words and matter. For it is one thing, Not to conform to things, because I
cannot receive them (which may be, and yet the things be agreeable to Truth,
and the fault in me only, that I am not in that which would lead me to receive
them.) And it is another thing, Not to receive things against Truth, which none
ought to receive, and which it would be Evil in me to receive and conform to,
if I could. But though in this they deal not fairly by the Author; yet by his
Answer it is evident, that none is put upon Conforming to any thing that they
cannot receive: But all are left to the Grace and Spirit of God in their own
hearts (which is that that leads into the true Spiritual Liberty before
defined) though not to the freedom of their own unruly Wills, to oppose,
obstruct, revile and vilify those things, which they say They cannot receive,
and them that have received and do practice them: muchless to rend, divide,
separate from them, and yet break in upon them, and force upon them their
Preaching and Praying, as if they were still of them, though apparent Enemies
to them.

But though they seem to approve his Answer at the first, yet they soon find
fault with it again; because they think there is not sufficient Provision made
by him for withstanding the things, if the fault be in them. Repl. How may we
suppose he could admit the fault to be in the things, which he prae-suppos'd to
be good, wholesome, and requisite? Or how can the fault be in the things, if God
has left them, as the Adversaries say, unmeasured; that is (if I reach their
meaning) free for his People to practice, or not practice. He would not leave
any thing for some of his People to practice, which others of his People could
not practice from a fault in the thing it self. And although from the Author's
asking, Is the fault in the thing themselves? They would gladly catch an
advantage to infer, that It is fairly implied, if not granted, that the fault
may lie on the side of the things brought in; yet they fall short in that also:
for Interrogatvies have sometimes the force of Negatives. The Apostle, when he
said, Is there Unrighteousness with God? Romans 9.14. did not imply, muchless
grant, that there might be Unrighteousness with God. But they add, that The
fault does lie in the things, for any thing he has said to prove the contrary.
Repl. It seems they expected a proof of Negatives. That were needless. It Is
enough that they have not proved a Fault in the things they reject and despise.
When they attempt that a disproof thereof, I believe, will not be wanting. They
say, We may conclude such as bring them in (viz. the things they say are
suggested as the ground of Difference) are reputed Leaders. Repl. I say such as
raised the Opposition at first, and made the Division thereby, and led into the
Separation thereupon, were reputed, and were, Leaders among them. They add, p.
11. The Leaders may do more harm in bringing in things that are wrong, than
others can do in Opposing some things that may in some sort be right. Repl. If
this be true to any purpose, yet it is nothing to this purpose. The things they
complain of for being brought in, they have never proved to be wrong, nor ever
can; therefore there has been no harm done, by bringing those things in, as
their Phrase is. But the harm has been done by the heady and unruly Opposition
they have made against those things that are right. They say, The Leaders have
caused the People to err, and the effect was, that the People led by them was
devoured. Repl. This is rightly applicable to themselves: The Children of
Light* in the Light, see it, and lament over them. Their Leaders have caused
them to err, and by following them, they have been led into that Separation,
which, unless by Repentance they quickly return from, will certainly destroy
them. Again, they say, The way to prevent the danger is, by allowing freely
Conviction and Persuasion to precede Conformity. Repl. This is an evil
Suggestion, by which they would insinuate, that Friends did press Conformity
before Conviction and Persuasion: which is utterly false, contrary to our
Principle, and contrary to our Practice. That it is contrary to our Principle,
the Book and place they here pretend to Answer, evinces: For there the Author,
having put the Question, Must I conform to things whether I can receive them or
no? Answers directly and positively, Nay; And even so they cite his words. In
the same place also he says, Thou art not to conform to a thing ignorantly; yet
thou art to consider, why thou art ignorant, and what the cause of such
Ignorance may be. What can be plainer! That it is contrary to our Practice
also, is matter of Fact. Let the Adversaries therefore prove if they can, that
Friends press Conformity before or without Conviction.

They go on in their 11th page to quarrel with another expression of his, which
is this, It is a dangerous Principle, and pernicious to true Religion, and
which is worse, it is the Root of Ranterism to assert, that nothing is a Duty
incumbent upon thee, but what thou art persuaded is thy Duty. Against this they
make a great noise. This, they cry out, is as removing a Bounder or Landmark.
It Is, they say; of the same nature with Conviction or Persuasion; for if (say
they) Conviction and Persuasion is to go before Conformity in our duty to God
and true Religion, then nothing can be a duty incumbent upon us, but what we
are persuaded on: But if duty to God and true Religion must be performed before
convinced or persuaded to it, then something may be a duty incumbent upon us,
that we know not, or are not persuaded on.

Rep. Here they confound Duty with performance of Duty or Conformity to Duty;
which are different things, and ought to be distinguished: and their not
distinguishing them has puzzled their heads. Performance follows Duty; not
Duty, Performance. Duty, in order of time, as well as in the nature of things,
is before Performance, as the Cause is before the Effect. Now the Assertion
here taxed for a dangerous Principle is not, that nothing can be performed as
thy Duty, but what thou art persuaded is thy Duty: But, that nothing is a Duty
incumbent on thee, but what thou art persuaded is thy Duty. Though it be true,
that a man cannot rightly perform a thing as his Duty, which he is not
persuaded is his Duty: yet it does not thence follow, that it is not his Duty,
because he is not persuaded it is his Duty. It is not simply want of persuasion
or conviction, but want of sufficient means for persuasion or conviction, that
can exempt any man from the obligation of Duty. The Jews, though they had
sufficient means for conviction, or persuasion that it was their Duty to own
and receive Christ for the promised Messiah, yet were not persuaded that that
was their Duty; was that therefore not a Duty incumbent upon them? If I had not
come, and spoken unto them, says Christ, they had not had sin: But now they
have no Cloak for their sin, Joh. 15.22. Why so? They were never the more
persuaded of their Duty for his speaking to them. Well, but they had sufficient
means to have been persuaded, had they not resisted it. We read of some of old,
that of some things were willingly ignorant, 2 Pet. 3.5. Of others, before
them, that said unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of
thy Ways, Job 21.14. Unlikely were these to be persuaded of Duty. Was therefore
no Duty incumbent on them? This were a ready way indeed for men to discharge
themselves of all Duty, if through negligent Carelessness, or wilful resisting,
they harden themselves against Conviction. But as that is a dangerous state; so
this is a dangerous Doctrine: And the endeavors the Adversaries use to
justify and establish it, render their Bottom the more justly to be suspected.

Now let us see what Mediums they use to maintain this Doctrine or Principle,
that nothing is a Duty incumbent upon one, but what he is persuaded is his
Duty; If, say they, to assert or believe that nothing is a Duty incumbent upon
us, but what we are persuaded on, be in its self a dangerous Principle,
pernicious to true Religion, and what is still worse the Root of Ranterism,
then the Saying that stands against this must be as Good as that is Evil; that
is, it must be a Safe Principle, propitious to true Religion; and which is
still better, it should be as the Root of all Good to men: for we conceive, the
Root of Ranterism is as the root of all Evil.

Repl. Here they run a Ground again, by tampering unskilfully with Logical
Conclusions. To show them their mistake, I refer them to 1 Timothy 6.10. The
Apostle there says expressly, The Love of Money is the Root of all Evil. Does it
therefore follow, or will they thence infer, that the Hatred of Money is the
Root of all Good? They say, The saying that stands against this, must be as
Good as that is Evil. Now the Apostle having said, The Love of Money is the
Root of all Evil; the saying that (according to their sense) stands against
this saying of the Apostle, is, that the Hatred of Money is the Root of all
Good. But I think they are not so much out of love with Money, as to assert
that.

They run on, page 12. in the same false way of Reasoning, thus, If to assert
that Nothing is a Duty incumbent on us, but what we are persuaded on, be the
Root of Ranterism, etc. Then, to avoid this Shoal, we must believe that
something is a Duty incumbent upon us, that we are not persuaded on; and if we
can thus believe, we must of necessity depend on him or others, to let us know
what our Duty is.

Rep. This is the thing the Adversaries drive at, to make their Proselites
believe, that Friends endeavor to draw People from a dependence on the Gift
and Manifestation of God in themselves, to depend on them for direction to, or
information in their respective Duties. But this is utterly false, a wicked
Slander and an evil Design to beget in such a Prejudice against Friends, that
they may the more easily gain, the more strongly bind such to their Party. Nor
is their way of Reasoning here fair or forcible. For supposing something is, or
may be a Duty incumbent upon a Man, which he is not persuaded to be his Duty;
it does not thence follow, that he must of necessity depend on some other Man,
to let him know his Duty. This is no true Consequence. Though the Adversaries
say, If we can thus believe, we must of necessity depend on him or some other,
to let us know what our Duty is; yet there is no such necessity* The necessity
such an one is under, is, to depend more truly on the Gift of God in himself,
to attend more diligently and duly thereon, that so by and from that
Manifestation of the Spirit, which God has given unto him to profit withal, he
may come to receive a right Sense, a true Understanding, a clear Discovery of
the Mind and Will of God to him, with respect to that Duty or Thing, which
hitherto, for want of such a due and diligent Attendance upon the heavenly Gift
in himself, he has not had a clean sight of, a full satisfaction in, but has
been in the dark and doubting concerning it. So that the supposing a
Possibility for something to be a Duty incumbent upon a man, which he is not
persuaded is his Duty, has no tendency to draw him from a dependence upon the
Gift of God in himself* for a discovery thereof* but rather to drive him some
to it, to excite him to a more close and diligent attendance thereunto, that he
may thereby come to see and know what yet he does not. For, if the Adversaries
do, yet none else, I think, will think that every man does, at all times, so
watchfully attend upon the Gift of God in himself, that he does not at any time
miss, or fall short of knowing the mind of God thereby. He, to be sure, thought
otherwise, who said, God speaks once, yea, twice, yet man perceives it not,
Job 33.14.

Now this Slanderous Suggestion of the Adversaries, is the more vile and wicked
in them, in as much as they know it to be a Slander; and that very Book, which
they pretend to Answer, does plainly prove it so* For in the 10th page of that
Book (called, A brief Examination and State of Liberty Spiritual) to the
Question, But if I do not presently see that Service in a thing, that the rest
of my Brethren agree in, in this case what is my Duty? The Answer is, It is thy
Duty to wait upon God in silence and patience, out of all fleshly
Consultations; and as thou abidest in the Simplicity of the Truth, thou will
receive an Understanding with the rest of thy Brethren, about the thing
doubted. Is this to draw from the Gift of God in ones self, to depend upon
others for Guidance? Yet the Adversaries say, page 12. This (to wit, that
something may be a Duty incumbent upon one, though he be not persuaded it is
his Duty) is to impeach the Grace of God, and Spirit of Truth, to whose
sufficiency so many Testimonies have been born, as not now sufficient to lead
all into all Truth.

Rep. No such matter. They had no cause to suggest this; no ground for it. The
Book they pretend to Answer denis it positively; for asking where the fault is,
it says, page 3. Is it thy weakness, or thy Carelessness or If thy weakness, it
is to be born with, and to be informed* If thy carelessness, thou ought to be
admonished. And a little lower in the same page it follows thus, So that though
thou art not to conform to a thing ignorantly, yet thou art seriously to
consider, why thou art ignorant, and what the Cause of such Ignorance may be;
Certainly it cannot be in God, nor in his Gift to thee [mark that] it must then
needs be in thy self* etc. This is plain enough; and this they could not choose
but see, picking up matter just before and after it; which shows they had a
design to abuse Friends, and that makes their guilt the greater. Yet thus they
go on, adding Falsehood to Falsehood. For in their same page they say, The
Consequence of his arguing is to make us believe, that something is a Duty
incumbent upon us that we do not know, and yet at the same time does not let us
know on whom we may depend. Whereas (as I have cited before) he said expressly,
page 10. It is, thy Duty to wait upon God, in silence and patience, etc. So
that he did let them know on whom they were to depend, namely upon God. Again,
they insinuate as if their not understanding their Duty, were placed upon their
Inability. Whenas they know, it is laid upon Carelessness, Disobedience,
Prejudice, etc. But this they do, on purpose to render Friends odious to their
separate Party, as if we held that something may be a Duty incumbent upon one,
which he cannot know, which he is in no capacity of being persuaded of; whereas
indeed we hold no such thing. For what is impossible for a man to know, to
understand, or be persuaded of, cannot be said to be a Duty incumbent on him.
But what he may know, what he has sufficient means to understand, what he is
put into a Capacity to be convinced and persuaded of, by the Gift and
Manifestation of the Spirit, which God has given him for that end, may be a
Duty incumbent on him, although he, through his Carelessness, Negligence,
Non-attendance on the Gift, or prejudice against the thing, has not received a
certain Knowledge, Understanding, Conviction or Persuasion that it is his Duty.
Had the Adversaries taken the matter plainly and fairly, as it was laid down in
the Book they pretend to Answer. They had not thus run beside the line. But
their manner is (as is obvious to an observing Reader) when they have picked out
a Sentence which they intend to oppose, to turn it this way and that way, to
shift it to and fro, to alter the form of it, till they have varied it from the
Author's Terms and Sense, and fitted it to their own turn and service, and then
triumph over it. Thus (besides other Instances) they have done in this
particular case. The sentence, as they first quarrelled with it, was this; It
is a dangerous Principle, and pernicious to true Religion, and which is worse,
it is the Root of Ranterism to assert, That nothing is a Duty incumbent upon
thee, but what thou art persuaded is thy Duty. No sooner had they drawn this
forth, but in their first modelling of it, they slip in the words Conformity
and Performance; whereas Duty is one thing, Performance of it another, as I
have noted before. Then in the next place, they frame up another Sentence, in
terms (as they apprehend) directly opposite to this, and argue from one to
the other, till at length they have slipped it quite beside its first and right
bottom, and set it upon a bottom of their own, an Inability to understand;
Whereas the sentence is not, that it is a dangerous Principle to assert that
nothing is a Duty incumbent on thee, but what thou art in a Capacity, or have
means to understand or be persuaded of (for there were no danger in asserting
that) But, its a dangerous Principle, etc. to assert, that nothing is a Duty
incumbent on thee, but what thou art persuaded is thy Duty. There is some odds,
sure, betwixt thou art persuaded, and thou may be persuaded, or thou art in a
Capacity, or thou have means of being persuaded. Yet the Adversaries,
confounding these Terms, run on to the same effect. For, taking offense at the
mentioning of seared, dark, dead Consciences, in the Book they pretend to
answer (which the Author there mentioned, to set forth the dangerousness of
asserting as a Principle, that nothing is a Duty incumbent on thee, but what
thou art persuaded is thy Duty: for, said he, The seared Conscience pleads his
Liberty against all Duty, the dark Conscience is here unconcerned, the dead
Conscience is here uncondemned, etc.) They say, p. 13. There is a vast
difference betwixt denying all Duty to God, and believing nothing a Duty but
what we are persuaded on. The first, say they, deny all duty; the latter owns
all Duty that can be known.

Repl. This is a high and bold, but not a safe expression. To own all Duty that
can be known, is not an ordinary state. But let us see who this first is, that
denis all Duty, and who the latter. The first, that which pleads Liberty
against all Duty, is expressly termed the seared Conscience, in the Book and
place the Adversaries pretend to Answer. The dark Conscience, and the dead
Conscience, are not there charged with that, with pleading Liberty against all
Duty, or denying all Duty. How then know the Adversaries but the dark
Conscience may find a place among the Latter, among those that believe nothing
a Duty, but what they are persuaded of? And how then will it hold that the
Latter, they that believe nothing a Duty but what they are persuaded of, do
indeed own all Duty, that can be known? Will the Adversaries, upon second
thoughts, advisedly and consideratly assert, that All they who believe nothing
a Duty but what they are persuaded of, do really own all Duty that can be
known? I don't think they will. Nay I find they begin already to flag from it,
within two lines: for they immediately subjoyn thus, The first denying all Duty
is Evil; but the Latter, as they own all Duty that they know, so, etc. Here it
is not (as above) all Duty that can be known; but all Duty that they know. If
they own all Duty that they know; it is well: But there is some odds sure,
betwixt owning all Duty that they know, and owning all Duty that can be known.
But so little constant to themselves, so little consistent with thenselves, are
the Adversaries, so loose and regardless of the terms they write in, that Do
know, and Can know; Are known, and Can be known, seems to be alike with them.
They add, As the Latter own all Duty that they know, so may they wait truly to
know what God is pleased further to show. Rep. I grant they may so; I wish they
would so; and it is that which All are exhorted to. But if they do not so, what
then? What may be, may not be. And I suppose the Adversaries will grant, that
as they may, so it is not impossible but that they may not wait so truly, as to
know what God is pleased further to show. And then, if by reason of their not
waiting, or not waiting so truly and rightly as to know what God is pleased
further to show, they fall short of, miss and deprive themselves of the
knowledge of what God is pleased further to show, or what God requires as a
Duty of them; will their falling short through their own default, and missing
the knowledge thereof, make it not to be a Duty to them? There were indeed
times of Ignorance, the Apostle says, at which God winked; But now he has
commanded All men every where to Repent, Acts 17.30. Why now? Because now the
Gospel Light, the discovering Light, the universal Light which lights every
man that comes into the world, is arisen and broken forth; by the inshinings
whereof every one is put into a Capacity to know and understand what God
requires of him.

After all this, in page 14. They tell us, They believe where the Gift of God
is received to profit withal, and truly adhered to, nothing is a Duty incumbent
upon such, but what they are persuaded on.

Rep. Here now they have given it another stretch. What was spoken with direct
relation to a state of Carelessness, Disobedience, Prejudice, etc. or a seared,
dark, or dead Conscience, they apply to such as have received the Gift of God
to profit withal, and truly adhered thereto; and make their Inference from that
misapplication.

What they speak, page 13. concerning Circumstantial things being called
requisite things, on the score that we could not (as they say) know dead, dark
and seared Consciences without them; has nothing in it but an unsavory Scoff,
fit to discover what frothy Spirit it came from. But when they ask, in the same
flouting manner, if those Requisite things that keep out or make known those
dead, dark and seared Consciences, etc. can keep out Hypocrites: I must tell
them, that is in one sense a difficult matter. For truly, I think, there can
hardly be a grosser sort of Hypocrites found, than those that having publicly
printed Friends to the world to be Apostates, Innovators, Introducers of
Popery, Idolaters, setters up of Idols, with much more of that kind, and having
upon that score (as they pretend) separated from us, and set up separate
Meetings of their own, will and no yet come, whether we will or no, into our
Meetings, in show and pretense of joining with us in Worship, and impose upon
us to hear them Preach and Pray among us, and require to be received and owned
by us therein, after they have so publicly disowned us, and departed from us.
But though such Hypocrites will not keep out, but will thrust in, yet they
cannot keep themselves from being discovered, but are known to be what they are.

In their 15th page, they carp at an Expression, taken out of the 9th page of
that Book which they pretend to Answer. It is this, A Saying may be true or
false, according to the Subject Matters it is spoken upon, or applied to. They
say, We believe he has missed the Truth there. And repeating it, page 44. they
say, That we believe is a mistake; for we think Truth's Testimonies are not
false, because some may misapply them.

Rep. The Author's words are not, that Truth's Testimonies may be true or
false, etc. But, that a Saying may be true or false, etc. Now we know every
Saying is not Truth's Testimony. And yet, even that which is a true Testimony
when spoken of or applied to a right Subject, may not be a true Testimony, when
spoken of or applied to a wrong Subject. When the Apostle said, I have fought a
good Fight, I have kept the Faith, etc. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown,
etc. 2. Tim. 4.7, 8. This was a true Testimony, as spoken of or applied to him.
But this same saying, if applied to or spoken of Judas, Demas, or any other
Apostate or wicked Person, would not have been true, but false. But though they
Cavil at this saying from him, yet they could be content the same fort of
Expression should pass for Truth from them, when they thought to serve their
own turn by it. For in their 4th page blaming his Answer to that Question,
which he said was true in a sense, they say it is so far true, that if it can
be wrong at all, it is only in a sense, and that is only when misapplied.
Misapplying then it seems, can make a Right saying Wrong, when they hope to get
some advantage by it, else not. Does not this show both great Partiality, and a
captious mind? So also, they wrangle much about that Expression, The Root of
Ranterism; Whereas they might easily have seen it to be a Metaphorical or
Figurative Speech, to show that that Assertion was a Radical or Fundamental
Principle or Doctrine of the Ranters, from which (as Fibers from a Root) other
erroneous Tenets did sprout forth and grow up. But this shows their propensity
to Contention and Quarrelling.

Now that it may most evidently appear, that all this Outcry against the
Author, and Clamor against this Passage in his Book, as tending to bring in
blind Obedience, and draw from a Dependence upon God, to a Dependence upon Man,
for discovery of Duty, etc. is without ground, and that his Book has not given
them any colorable Occasion for it; but that they have wickedly perverted, and
wrested both his words and meaning in that Passage: I desire the Reader more
particularly to observe that Passage, and consider the Occasion, scope and
drift of it. For the Occasion, it is manifest it was written with direct
relation to the Careless state, to those who, through Heedlesness and
Inadvertency, neglect and disregard the divine Gift in themselves; and so, for
want of attending thereunto, are ignorant of its motions, and what the Lord by
it requires of them. For having put this Question, But must I conform to things
whether I can receive them or no? and answered directly and flatly, Nay (which
positively excludes blind Obediences:) the Author thereupon puts the
Questionist to consider what the Reason is that he cannot receive them, that so
he may find where the Fault lies, whether in himself, or elsewhere. Therefore
he subjoyns, Is the fault in the things themselves? Are they inconsistent with
Truth, or will not the Truth own or assent unto them? As much as to say, If
thou can make appear that thou can not receive them, because the things
themselves are faulty, as being inconsistent with Truth, then thou will appear
clear in not receiving them. But if thou can not rightly lay the fault upon
the things themselves, then consider whether the fault is not in thee, that is
to say, Is it thy Weakness, or thy Carelessness? If thy weakness, it is to be
born with, and to be informed; if thy Carelessness, thou ought to be
admonished: for though thou might have acquitted thy self, if thou could
justly have laid the fault upon the things themselves, as inconsistent with
Truth; yet thou can not clear or acquit thy self by laying the fault upon thy
Ignorance, if thy Ignorance proceed from, or be occasioned by thy own
Carelessness. And because some have entrench't themselves in their own
Ignorance, and thought themselves secure from Obligation to Duty, under a Plea
of want of sight; therefore to excite such to a closer Inquiry, to a stricter
Search, to a more diligent waiting upon the Lord, for a clear discovery and
sight of his will, the Author there adds, that It is a dangerous Principle, and
pernicious to true Religion, and which is worse, it is the Root of Ranterism to
assert, that nothing is a Duty incumbent upon thee, but what thou art persuaded
is thy Duty. And to evince the dangerousness of this Assertion, and show in
particulars the Perniciousness of this Principle, He adds, For the seared
Conscience pleads his Liberty against all Duty, the dark Conscience is here
unconcerned, (reckons its Darkness, its Ignorance, it was want of sight and
Conviction, a sufficient defense and excuse, and so concerns it self no further)
the dead Conscience is here uncondemned, unless this Distinction be allowed of,
that there may be an Ignorance or an Insensibility from Inability or
Incapacity, or a dark Education (which he comprehended before under the word
Weakness) and an Ignorance and Insensibility from Carelessness, Disobedience,
Prejudice, etc. Hence it is most apparent that this Passage related to the
careless, disobedient, dark Ones, who make darkness their refuge, want of sight
there shelter. To such it is said, by way of Reproof and Admonition, It is a
dangerous Principle, etc. to assert, that nothing is a Duty incumbent upon thee
(thou careless, disobedient, prejudiced, dark One) but what thou (who, by thy
own Carelessness, Disobedience or Prejudice, have brought Darkness upon thy
self) art persuaded is thy Duty. Now this being the plain and clear import of
the place, it is not without violence and great Injustice that the Adversaries
have strained, and applied this so such as have received the Gift of God to
profit withal, and have truly adhered thereunto. Then, as to their Suggestion
that the Author's drift, and the tendency of his Discourse, was to lead into
blind Obedience, and from a dependence on God, it is utterly groundless. His
own words prove the contrary, not only (as I noted before) in saying positively
Nay to the Question, Must I conform to things whether I can receive them or no?
But also, when in the same page, and on the same subject, he says expressly
afterward, Thou art not to conform to a thing ignorantly. This fully shuts out
blind Obedience. And so far was he from drawing to a Dependence on Man, for
sight or understanding in point of Duty, that he expressly says, page 9. The
People of God ought to be left to the Guidings of the Spirit of God in
themselves. And page 10. It is thy Duty to wait upon God in silence and
patience, out of all fleshly Consultations, and as thou abidest in the
simplicity of the Truth, thou will receive an understanding with the rest of
thy Brethren about the things doubted. These are Evidences plain enough: Yet
because the Testimony of an Enemy is accounted of great force, and
unexceptionable, take here, for an overplus, the Adversaries own Confession in
the case, p. 16. where, of the Author of that Book they are so offended at;
they say, That he desires all should be guided by God's Spirit, we believe.
Now, if they believe this of him, what, Reader, may we believe of them, who
have raised all this Noise and Clamor against him, charging him that he would
bring in blind Obedience, frighten into blind Obedience, and lead to a
dependence on himself or some others; and yet now, after all this, confess they
believe, He desires all should be guided by God's Spirit!

But notwithstanding they say they believe thus of him, they presently blames
him again, p. ^6. for limiting it (as they say) to that one way, with respect
(as they apprehend) to Shadowy or Circumstantial things, etc.

Reply. Here again, and frequently in their following Discourse, they run into
their former Error, confounding Shadowy with Ceremonial and Circumstantial
things, as if they were all alike, and had all but one and the same
signification; thereby rendering (in their sense) all Circumstantial things
Shadowy things: which to be a great mistake, and such an one as would make all
outward Acts of Gospel Worship, contrary to the Nature of the Gospel, shadowy,
I have showed before. Yet upon this Shadowy Notion of theirs, they take upon
them with Confidence to pass Judgment upon him, that Though he may have
received a measure of God's Spirit, yet in plain he is not truly born of it.
And this, methinks, is pretty briskly done for such, whose common Theme and Cry
was wont to be, Judge not.

Next whereas the Author of that Book they Cavil at in Answer to that part of
the Question which was, Ought I not to be left to the Grace and Spirit of God
in my own Heart? had answered Yea; That is of all things most desirable, since
they are well left that are there left; for there is no fear of want of Unity,
where all are left with the one Spirit of Truth; They must be of one mind, they
cannot be otherwise: To this the Adversaries say, That those that are truly
left with the one Spirit of Truth, must and will agree, we grant; and
therefore, where difference is carried on to the breach of Charity, one side at
least, must be wrong, but which, ought in God's fear to be inquired, the
greater Number cannot determine it.

Rep. Here they grant that those that are truly left with the one Spirit, must
and will agree, and yet at the same time suppose they will differ; and which is
more, that they may differ, and yet neither side be wrong, if the difference be
not carried on to the breach of Charity. How they will reconcile these their
different Notions, I know not* But since they yield that one side at least must
be wrong, where difference is carried on to the breath of Charity* Let the
Difference between them and Friends be looked into, and inquiry made, in God's
fear, on which side the Breach of Charity began, that it may thence appear
(according to their own Proposition) which side is wrong. And in this
Disquisition, we will not expect any advantage from being the greater Number;
though they may give us* leave to put them in mind, that when and where an
Argument from the greatest Number, with respect to particular Places, seemed to
lie on their side, they have not failed to urge it. Now in order to a right
understanding, how Charity came to be broken in the carrying on of this
Difference, it should be remembered, that when some things were recommended to
the Churches, relating to Christian Discipline, in order to prevent such
disorderly and scandalous Practices, as under an abuse of our Principle of true
Christian Liberty, a Spirit of Looseness and Libertinism was introducing, some
showed themselves dissatisfied therewith, and unwilling to admit the use
thereof, pretending that they did not see the service of the things
recommended. Though this Plea was seen to proceed from weakness in some, and
want of a true watchfulness unto, and waiting upon the heavenly Gift in
themselves, which would have given them a true sight and sense, as it did their
Brethren, both of the want, and of the usefulness of the things recommended:
yet while they kept quiet, out of Contention and open Opposition, Friends
tenderly bore with them, and carried themselves Brotherly toward them,
endeavoring in the love of God, as occasion offered, to open and inform their
Minds in the things, concerning which they professed to doubt. But long it was
not ere they, abusing the tenderness of Friends toward them, grew high and
heady, contentions and quarrelsome* endeavoring publicly, and laboring much
in private to gather into a Faction, and make a Party. Which when they had in
some measure effected (having, by evil Surmises and false Reports, betrayed and
misled many young Convinced Ones, and some that were but weak in Judgment, as
well as picked up others that went discontented, whose (...) Spirits and
disorderly Conversations had ^^^^^red them of the esteem they coveted amongst
Friends) they then appeared more openly to oppose, revile and vilify those
things, which before they pretended to the doubtful of, and not to see a need
of or service for, calling them in Contempt and Derision, Men's Orders, human
Edict, Canons, Constitutions, Prescriptions, Papists Impositions, Innovations,
Bulls, etc. not sparing any reproachful Term, which they thought might beget,
or increase, in their Proselited Party, a dislike of the things recommended,
and a dis-esteem of Friends. This their unruly and turbulent behavior, gave
occasion to Friends to reprove them, and exhort them to study to be quiet, and
have regard to the Churches peace. And surely had they indeed had any regard to
the love of their Brethren, to the peace of the Churches of Christ, to the
Reputation of Truth in the world, or to the honor of that holy Name of the
Lord, by which we are called, they would never have begun, much less have
carried on a Difference, (...) so high a Breach of Charity, as they have done
and that about such things as some of themselves have declared to be (in their
esteem) but trifles, small things, of little or no (...). But notwithstanding
the Endeavors, the Labors and Travels that were used by Friends to have
reduced them to a (...); they grew still higher and higher in their Opposition
and (...) Carriage, till at length they made not only a Breach of Charity, but
of Meetings also, ^ending off from Friends, and setting up separate Meetings of
their own, for themselves and their Party to meet apart in, in separation from,
and opposition to the constant settled Meetings of Friends, not only with
respect to the outward Affairs and Business of the Church, but even with
respect to public Worship too: And in several printed Books and Papers
(written by some, and industriously spread by others of them) published the
difference to the world, exposing Friends (as much as in them lay) to the
Contempt and scorn of the Profane, as Apostates, Innovators, Idolaters;
setters up of Images, Idol-Prophets, possessed with the Spirit of Belial, and
the like; and not only to the Government, but even to the Rabble also, as a
treacherous Company, Introducers of Popery, and but one step from it, etc. and
that in a juncture of time, when the then present discovery of the Popish Plot
had exasperated the Nation against all that were but suspected to favor that
Communion. That this is the true state of the Case (though but briefly set
forth) I appeal to all Friends that understand it, and hereupon leave it to all
such to judge, in the fear of God, whether the Adversaries be not they that
have made this Difference, and carried it on to the Breach of Charity; and are
therefore, according to their own Conclusion, WRONG.

The Adversaries having granted in their 16th page, that those that are truly
left with the one Spirit of Truth, must and will agree; they in the same page
add, But that there must be an Identity of Opinion, as (say they) we think the
Schoolmen call it, that is a Sameness of Mind, and Oneness of Judgment to
Circumstantial, Ceremonial, or Shadowy things, is sooner said than proved, and
savours more of Curiosity, than any real Necessity.

Rep. It may perhaps be thought to savor more of Curiosity, or something else,
as Vainglory, Self-conceit, or a fond Affectation of being thought to have
converst with Schoolmen, than of any real necessity, or common Discretion, for
them to tell us what the Schoolmen call Sameness of mind, especially unless
they could have done it upon better assurance than an [ as we think.] They had
better have kept in the School of Christ, where they might have learnt Sameness
of mind, and Oneness of Judgment with God's People in the things of God, than
have puzzled their brains about Identity of Opinion, and made themselves
ridiculous by Cracking of their Converse with Schoolmen. But leaving them to
their thoughts, and the Schoolmen to themselves, they might have learnt from
the Author of the Book they are so angry with, if it had pleased them to have
taken notice of it, that there is a difference between Sameness of mind, and
Contrariness of mind; between Oneness of Judgment, and Opposition of Judgments.
But if I may tell them so, without offending them too much, the word Opinion
(with respect to Religious matters) is fitter for the Schoolmen, th^n for any
that would be taken for a Quaker. Nor is it aptly or properly expounded by the
word Judgment: For Judgment implies Certainty, and should be Positive; whereas
Opinion is but Suppositive, importing uncertain or doubtful Thought.

They complain, page 16. that the Author of the Book they would Answer, has
not made a difference between Circumstantial things, and such as are truly
Essential. Yet they themselves have not yet told us what things they account
truly Essential. They said indeed once, page 5 There are some Outward things so
far Essential to true Religion, as those that do contrary to them may be
detected of Error. But they have not particularlized what those outward things
are, nor whether they intend them for absolute Essentials. But they are in the
dark, and in Confusion, and no wonder, having kicked against the Light, and that
wholesome Order which the Children of the Light have in the Light received. They
say, Though all that fear God must and will agree in things truly Essential,
yet there is no necessity that they must agree in Circumstantial things.

Rep. This seems to me as if they should say, All must agree in things
Essential; but they may differ, disagree, wrangle, jangle, contend and fall to
pieces as much as they will about Circumstantial things; There is no necessity
that they must agree in them. Strange! But whence should this Liberty of
disagreeing proceed? Are not all to be led by the One Spirit of Truth into all
Truth, into Circumstantials, as well as into Essentials? Or will the
Adversaries say, that in Essentials indeed the Spirits Guidance is to be
expected; but for Circumstantials, every one may choose for himself, and please
his own humor? If they will grant (which methinks they should scarce care to
deny) that into Circumstantial things all ought to expect, and may receive the
Spirits guidance and leading, as well as into those things which they call
Essential, will they then find any room for the Disagreement they contend for?
Can any one of a sound mind think, that the one holy Spirit of Truth will lead
his Followers to contradict one another in Practice, any more than to
contradict one another in Words? If all are led by the Holy Spirit, he will
undoubtedly lead them to agree, not to disagree, in whatsoever he leads into.
Of the Primitive Christians it is written, The Multitude of them that believed
were of one Heart, and of one Soul, Acts 4.32. Was it only in such things as
are accounted Essential? Or was it in all things then relating to Religion
amongst them, even in those things that were rather Circumstantial than
Essential? It may seem to be spoken more immediately of those things: for it
follows in the Text, Neither said any of them, that ought of the things which
he possessed was his own; but they had all things Common. Yet none, I suppose,
will affirm that the Community they had of Goods and outward Substance was
Essential to Religion: for then they that hold not that Community of Goods,
would want an Essential part of Religion.

In their 17th page, having surmised before, that some Circumstantial things
have been over-valued they say, On the other hand, some, seeing this as a
certain wrong, the Enemy has aggravated the matter to make both wrong, etc.
Here they seem willing to own themselves faulty, provided they may fix some
fault too upon those they design to asperss; But they may be supposed to
understand their own Guilt, better than another. If they are truly sensible
that the Enemy has made them wrong, let them return to that which can make
them Right. They add, It is our danger, and will continue until the Spirit of
the Son of God be more plentifully poured forth upon us that can say, Father
forgive them, they know not what they do: This (say they) is that which we
want, and should truly wait for, that the great Deceiver, the Occasion of all
Strife and Trouble among such as fear God, might be cast out, etc.

Rep. That saying, Father forgive them, they know not what they do, if it be
spoken according to Truth, and in the Spirit of the Son, can be spoken only of
such as know not what they do. The Jews, of whom the Son of God so spoke, Luke
23.34. knew not what they did in Crucifying him that came to save them. Paul
bears them that witness, 1 Cor. 2.8. Now it is one thing, not to be able to say
of Opposers, Father forgive them, they know not what they do, from a belief or
persuasion that they do know what they do: And another thing, not to be able to
say of Opposers, Father forgive them, they know not what they do, from a want
of the Spirit of the Son, which alone can enable in Truth to say so, though
there be a persuasion that the Opposers do not know what they do. Now this, it
seems, is the state of the Adversaries; the want of the Spirit of the Son of
God, plentifully poured forth upon them, that can say (of such as oppose them)
Father forgive them, they know not what they do. This (say they) is that which
we want, and should truly wait for, that the great Deceiver might be cast out,
etc. That this relates to themselves, appears by the Advertisement which they
give at the end of their Preface, where they say, the word [ We] may be
understood in respect to those of the same mind with the Author of their Book.
Their want of this, shows their Condition to be bad; their not truly waiting
for it, shows it to be worse. And since they acknowledge, the great Deceiver,
the Occasion of all Strife and Trouble among such as fear God, is not yet cast
out, it is no wonder that he has thus long deceived them, and yet does deceive
them, out of whom he is not yet cast, and through them occasions so much strife
and trouble to those that truly fear God, But, as if they had already forgot
what they have here acknowledged, they in the next page say, As we can truly
say, Father forgive them, they know not what they do, we are not without hope.
But they deceive themselves, if they think they can truly say that, while they
want the pouring forth of the Spirit of the Son of God upon them, in and by
which alone that can be truly said. But, blessed be God, Friends (whom these
Adversaries oppose) have received the pourings forth of the Spirit of the Son
of God so plentifully, as that they can therein say of many, whom the great
Deceiver has, through the Adversaries, deceived, and by Deceit drawn into the
Separation with them, Father forgive them, they know not what they do.

But though they here acknowledge the great Deceiver is not cast out, yet they
say they hope his casting out is near: for (say they) there seems but one grand
Remove to know the Mystery of Iniquity finished; and that is (say they) to know
our habitation in God, who we have professed has appeared in us by his Light
and Spirit.

Rep. It seems then they do not know their Habitation to be in God now. But if
they know not their Habitation in God, in what do they know their Habitation to
be? Or do they not know where, or in what their Habitation is? Oh uncertain and
sad estate! Our Savior Christ said, Ioh. 65.6. He that eats my Flesh and
drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him. If the Adversaries object that
this is an high state, let them know, that all short of this is too low, the
same Mouth having expressly said, verse. 53. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood; ye have no Life
in you. The beloved Disciple said, God is Love, and he that dwells in Love,
dwells in God, 1 John 4.16. Again, He that keeps his Commandments, dwells
in him, chap. 3.24. And hereby, says the same Apostle, know we that we dwell in
him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit, chap. 4.13. The
Apostle Paul dedicated two Epistles to the Church of the Thessalonians, which
is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ. By all which it appears,
that it is the proper state of God's People to have their Habitation in God,
and that God's People then had, and did know their Habitation in him. And
surely, I cannot but in Charity believe, that some of those that are in the
Separation, have formerly known in some measure, an Habitation in God also. But
not keeping in the true Love, but going out of that into the Enmity; not
keeping his Commandments, but rejecting, opposing, scorning, slighting,
despising, reviling and vilifying them, and instead of Teaching others to keep
them, discouraging and diswading others from keeping them, have (like the
Angels which kept not their first Estate, or Principality, Jude 6.) left their
Habitation in God; and now, by their own Acknowledgement, do not know their
Habitation in him, who they have professed has appeared in them by his Light
and Spirit; but must have one grand Remove more, before they can come to know
their Habitation in God again. O that all the Beguiled ones among them would
weigh this well, and see and consider what their Separation has brought them
to, even to be destitute of an Habitation in God! Nay, if according to what
they deliver in their 7th page, As man must be made a new Creature, before he
can come into Christ, so must he travel through the whole Mystery of iniquity;
In the last step of which travel, they say, the Mystery is finished: then,
since with them the Mystery of Iniquity is not yet finished, but there is one
grand Remove yet behind to know the Mystery of Iniquity finished) they are not,
it seems, yet come in to Christ.

In their 17th page they say, To make lesser things than Essential things Terms
of Communion, we have observed to be a great Evil in others, and shall we cry
it up as good in our selves? And in page 18. They speak of making Nothing Terms
of Communion but Essential things. And something to like purpose they touched
before, p. 6.

Rep. This is, first, an evil Insinuation, to prejudice Peoples minds against
Friends, as if Friends did set up this, that, or the other thing, as Terms of
Communion with us. Secondly, it is a plain Indication, that the Adversaries do
not truly and rightly understand the Saints Communion, and the terms thereof.
Amongst other Religious Societies, as the Communions are outward and visible,
so the Terms of such Communions consist only in outward and visible things; as
an outward verbal acknowledgement of Creeds, Doctrines, etc. and an outward or
actual Observance or Performance of such things as are reputed Ordinances,
Duties, Rights, etc. the confessing the former, and doing the latter of which,
intitles any one to those Communions. But the Communion or Fellowship of the
Saints in Light is another thing. For as the Dispensation of the Gospel is
Spiritual, so the Communion or Fellowship which stands in the Gospel, Phil.
1.5. is Spiritual also. The Apostles declares the Terms thereof to be walking
in the Light, when he says, if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we
have Fellowship one with another, etc. 1 John 1.7. As therefore the Communion
of God's People is Spiritual, so the Terms of that Communion are, to receive
the Holy Spirit, to be led by the Spirit, to walk in or after the Spirit, to
obey the motions and requirings of the Spirit. So that it is not an
acknowledgement of Doctrines, or an Observation of outward Practices, that can
bring any one into the Fellowship or Communion of the People of God (for the
one may be in Words acknowledged, and the other in Act performed, by such as
neither believe the one, nor regard the other.) But it is a being truly
subjected to, and led by the Spirit of God, both to believe and confess to the
Doctrines of Truth, and to take up and appear in those Practices which the
Spirit of Truth leads into, that are indeed the true Terms of the true
Spiritual Communion. And as a coming under the Government and Guidance of the
Spirit of Christ, brings into Communion or Fellowship with the Church of
Christ: So the departing from the Government and Guidance of that Holy Spirit,
the grieving, the quenching, or resisting of the holy Spirit in its requirings,
shuts out of the Communion or Fellowship of Christ's Church. And as such a
departure from the Guidance of the holy Spirit may be felt, and known by those
that keep under the Spirit's Guidance, by the holy Unction, and that Spiritual
Sense (so much at this day by the Adversaries set at naught) which the People
of God do from thence receive, as the Lord is pleased to dispense it: so may it
also be certainly and safely concluded, from either an Abrenunciation and
Denial of any of the Doctrinal Principles of Truth, or from an opposing,
rejecting, slighting, or reviling of any Practice which the Church of Christ is
by the Spirit of Christ led into. So that, though no outward things (whether
Doctrines or Practices) are, or can be the Terms of true Spiritual Communion:
yet the rejecting, opposing, despising and slighting such outward things, as
the Church of Christ is by the Spirit of Christ, led into the practice of, and
finds acceptance with God in, is a certain discovering sign and token, that
such Opposers are departed from under the leadings and Government of that holy
Spirit, in which the Communion and true Christian Fellowship stands.

In their 18th page, to suggest that Friends would use Violence as others have
done, if they had more power, they say, Do not object, that was only as carried
on to Violence; for they that omit nothing of that Power they have, who can
believe, if such had more, they would employ it better.

Rep. This shows their Envy, but does no more affect us, than it would the
Church of Christ in all times. The Apostles, we read, and Primitive Christians
did not omit to exercise that Power they had in reproving, rebuking, denying
and testifying against such, in their times, as by loose and disorderly
walking, or unruly, contentious, turbulent Behavior, disturbed the Peace of
the Churches, and brought scandal upon the Profession. Such (persisting in
their disorders) they declared not to be of them: Such (so persisting) we
declare not to be of us. They desired no greater Power: Neither do we. They, if
they had had more Power, could not have used it to outward Violence: neither
could we, if it were in our power. But what might be expected from the
Adversaries, if they had Power equal to their Wills, who have already given so
plain a poof of their propensity to Acts of Violence, that, having no lawful
Power, they have usurped a Power to keep Friends by Violence, out of their
public Meeting Houses, wherein the Friends, so kept out, have a plain,
undoubted, rightful, legal Property! Was it not a great piece of Folly, as well
as Injustice, in them, to suggest such a thing against Friends, which they knew
they had no ground for; when they could not but know with what an unavoidable
force and stroke it would recoil upon themselves.

In their 19th page they say, Do we think we have been the most true that have
been since the Apostasy, which (say they) perhaps we have, as to Notion and
Profession of the things of God?

Rep. They did well to say [ We] that it may be known they speak this only of
and for themselves, having, at the end of their Preface, directed us to
understand the term [ We] in respect to themselves. Friends have no need of
such Advocates. The People of God, in scorn called Quakers, they who have
received the Truth in the love of it, they who have obeyed the Truth in the
manifestation of it, they who have kept their habitation in the Truth through
the Power of it, can say beyond thinking, much more beyond thinking with a [
perhaps,] that they have been (and, through the preserving Power of God, are)
the most true that have been since the Apostasy, and that not only as to
Profession of the things of God. but as to the true, living, experimental
knowledge, enjoyment and possession of the things of God. And before these
Adversaries had turned their backs on Truth, and wandered from their Habitation
in God, they too perhaps would, without a perhaps, have adventured to have
asserted this beyond thinking, and further than Notion and Profession only. But
now we see how low they are sunk, that they can content themselves to say,
perhaps we have been the most true that have been since the Apostasy, as to
Notion and Profession of the things of God. Notion is a term they often use in
their Book, but not very properly, with respect to the things of God: for
Notion imports rather an uncertain Speculation, than a solid, certain,
scientifical Knowledge, such as is fit to be had of Religious matters. And
therefore Persons of speculative Fancies are often called Notionists, or men of
high Notions. But these men, it seems, dare pretend at highest but to Notion
and Profession of the things of God, to think they have perhaps been the most
true that have been since the Apostasy. It seems then they do not think they
have been the most true that have been since the Apostasy, as to Life, Power,
Virtue, Sincerity, divine Enjoyments, experimental Knowledge in the things of
God, Possession of the living Substance, etc. Nay, with them it is but a
perhaps, that as to Notion and Profession they have been the most true that
have been since the Apostasy. But undoubtedly, were they not now Apostatized
from what some of them once have known and been, they would not have written in
such a loose and unsensible manner.

In the same 19th page, they confound themselves again with another of their
own Notions; they say, We know it is writ, they shall come from the West, North,
East and South, to sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom. (I
know there is something written to this purpose; but where this is thus written,
I know not.) Upon this they thus descant, Those certainly was not of one
external Form or Order, as to Ceremonial and Shadowy things, yet we find they
agree. (That, say I, is more than we can find from these: for rather than these
will agree, they will Oppose, Rail, Revile, Print against, Rend, Divide, Separate
and Tear, if they could, all in pieces:) But, say they, perhaps some will say
this (agreement of all these from the four Quarters) is in Heaven. Well, add
they, what then? Must they not agree on Earth, that must agree in Heaven?

Rep. It Is fit no doubt they should; and 'twere well they would, that expect to
come there. But if they must agree on Earth that must agree in Heaven, then
pray consider, whether such an Agreement as the Adversaries propose, p. 16 viz.
that they must agree in some things, (such as they account Essential) but there
is no necessity that they must agree in all things, will serve the purpose.
Must the Agreement in Heaven be in some things only, and not in all? What
shattered work would these Men make with their idle Notions Besides, is it not
too ridiculous in these men, speaking of them that shall come from the West
(for they may be allowed to begin where the Sun goes down, upon whom the Sun is
already gone down) North, East and South, to sit down with Abraham, etc. to
say, those was not of one external form and order, as to Ceremonial and Shadowy
things, and yet we find they agree, and apply this agreement to Heaven? Do they
think then that there are Ceremonial and Shadowy things in Heaven too, where
many perhaps, if not most, of the things which they account Essential, will
find no place? However, if (as they here, by a kind of affirmative
Interrogatives, deliver) they must agree on Earth, that must agree in Heaven:
If God's will must be done on Earth, as it is done in Heaven; then surely they
must retract their Notion of a necessity of agreeing in some things
(Essentials;) but no necessity of agreeing in other things (Circumstantials.)
Is the will of God, think they, done in Heaven by some, one way, by others, a
clean contrary way in opposition to that? Their Comparisons help them not, but
helps Truth against them.

They go on for a while in a strain of Interrogatives, page 20. Is not Christ,
ask they, the Head of all that is good, from the least breathing to the fullest
perfection?

Rep. All that is good proceeds from God and Christ. But since Head and Members
are Correlatives, and all in whom some little (not to say the least) breathings
may be, are not yet come to be joined to the Body of which Christ is the Head,
and brought into a Membership thereof, it seems not a clear and proper
Expression to say Christ is the Head of all that is good, etc. There may be
good desires, and true (though weak) Breathings after that that is good, in
many in whom Christ is not Head, but the evil one is head, and Christ as in the
Sepulcher; the Seed, from which those Breathings spring, kept under, crushed
down, pressed as a Cart is pressed with Sheaves, Amos 2.13. But among all those
of whom Christ is Head ought there not to be an Agreement? Does Christ, the
Head, dispose or allow any of his Members to quarrel amongst themselves? to
oppose one another? For some to slight, reject, deny and obstruct the work and
service of the rest? according to the Doctrine laid down by the Adversaries,
page 16. That in Circumstantial things (as they call them) there is no
necessity that they must agree. These consider not that Christ's Coat was
without seam, Joh. 19.23. a Tipe of Unity and Agreement even in Profession.

They go on; Does not he own all that is of his own beegtting, every where,
according to the degree of knowledge received? -- And as Christ owns all that is
good, shall not we own it?

Rep. Yes; He does own all that is of his own begetting, and so do his People.
But he does not own all those for his, and as Members of his Body, in whom he
has begot some Breathings, neither do his People. For too many, in whom such
Breathings are begotten, answer not the love of him that begot them, but by
joining with the evil one, and doing that which is evil, stifle and quench
those Breathings, and greive him that begot them. Therefore as Christ owns all
that is good, so do his People: But neither he, nor they, own all those to be
of him, and fellow Members with them, in whom there is some good thing. He has
given of his good Spirit unto all, even to them that rebel against it. The Gift
is good, and owned: the Rebellious bad, and disowned.

They go on; Does not he gather all the Good together in one, even himself?

Rep. The Scripture no where says so, that I remember. But it says, Ephesians.
1.9.10. He has made known unto us the Mystery of his will, according to his
good pleasure, which he has purposed in himself: That in the Dispensation of
the fullness of times, he might gather together in one all things in Christ,
both which are in Heaven and which are on Earth, even in him. This Universal
gathering is not spoken in the present Tense, nor of the present Time; but of
the fullness of Times. Neither is it spoken simply of all the good, as they
express it; but of all in Christ: All these, both in Heaven and one Earth, has
he purposed, in the fullness of time, to gather together in one.

They go on; Does he gather all Universally in every Nation that fears him, and
work Righteousness, without respect to shadowy things, etc. wherein they may
differ, for those he has left unmeasured on purpose that they might not
hinder, etc. And shall he not do it in one Nation?

Rep. The Scripture does not say, He gathers all universally that fear him, and
work Righteousness, without respect to shadowy things. But the Apostle Petet
says Acts 10.34.35. Of a Truth, I perceive that God is no respecter of
Persons: But in every Nation, he that fears him, and works Righteousness,
is accepted with him. This is without respect to Persons; not without respect
to shadowy things: For they whose Righteousness stands in shadowy things, are
not therein accepted with him. But alsuch as he gathers, in this his day of
Gospel substance, if they were working Righteousness in shadowy things before
he gathered them, he gathers them out of the shadowy things to the substance.
Here the Adversaries show Error upon Error. First, They hereby suggest, that
such as fear Christ, and are gathered by him, may continue in shadowy things;
which is contrary to the nature of the Gospel. This Error springs from another
(which it self springs from extreme Ignorance) that all Circumstantial things
are shadowy. Secondly, they say, that they that fear Christ, and are gathered
by him, may differ (that is, as in page 16. they explain it, there is no
necessity that they must agree) in shadowy things, as if Christ gave Liberty to
his to differ, disagree, contradict, oppose one another in any thing. Thirdly,
that he has left those things unmeasured on purpose that they might not hinder
(that is, not hinder their agreement.) As if those things would have hindered
their Agreement, if God had measured them; and as if he did measure other
things on purpose that they might hinder the Agreement of those about them, who
were to practice them. Oh the darkness and blindness that is come over these
men!

They add, The true Church is here indeed, but not yet referrable to any
society, with respect to outward Rules, etc.

Rep. This is the voice of the Enemy, that would detract from, and deny the
work which God has wrought, and brought forth by his Power, in this day of his
Glorious Appearance; wherein he has reached unto many, and by the Cords of his
Love has drawn many unto himself, and has gathered them into an heavenly
Communion with himself, and into an holy Society and pure Fellowship one with
another in him. Now as the true Church is here indeed, so it is indeed
referrable to this Society, and that too with respect to such outward Rules, as
Christ, who is the Head of this Society, has given for the well-ordering of
such outward things, as relate to the well-being and preservation of the
Society. But if (according to the Adversaries) the true Church is not yet
referrable to any Society, with respect to outward Rules; what then will become
of themselves! Have they not hereby unchurched themselves? Or disclaimed
Membership with the true Church? For do not they pretend to be a Society, and
that too with respect to outward Rules? How then can they pretend to be of the
true Church, which they will not allow to be yet referrable to any Society,
with respect to outward Rules?

Another Passage which they Carp at in the Book they pretend to Answer, is by
them thus worded; To plead being left to the Grace of God against Unity, is to
abuse the very Plea, etc. To this they say, The Drift of this Argument is like
the rest, to gain a presumptive dependence upon men, etc. without true regard
to Conviction or Persuasion.

Rep. If the drift of this Argument (as they call it) be like the rest, then it
cannot be to gain any dependence upon men, on any consideration whatsoever,
without true regard to Conviction or Persuasion: For that has not been the
drift of any of the rest of the Arguments or matter in that Book. But the drift
of that Passage, and of the rest also, was to draw from a feigned pretense of
being left to the Grace of God, (as a Cloak of Evil, of any kind) to a real
acquaintance with, subjection to, and dependence on the Grace of God indeed.
This appears (not only from several other Passages in that Book, as, Thou art
not to conform to a thing ignorantly, page 3. And, It is thy Duty to wait upon
God, in silence and patience, out of all fleshly Consultations, page 10. The
People of God ought to be left to the Guidings of the Spirit of God in
themselves, page 9. It is a great Truth, that all are to be left thereunto,
Ibid, but) very plainly from the words immediately foregoing those which the
Adversaries Cavil at. For the Question being there put, Ought I not to be left
to the Grace of God in my own Heart? The Answer there is, That is of all things
most desirable, since they are well left, that are there left; for there is no
fear of want of Unity, where all are left with the one Spirit of Truth, page 4.
This was far sure from a drift to gain a presumptive Dependence upon Men,
without true regard to Conviction or Persuasion. And therefore it is evident,
that the drift of the Adversaries, in suggesting this slander, is to prejudice
unwary Readers against Friends, by misleading them into a wrong apprehension,
that Friends endeavor to draw them from the Divine Grace, and holy Spirit in
themselves, to a dependence on men, to act according as men shall direct them,
without true regard to Conviction or Persuasion in themselves. But this is a
foul slander upon Friends, and a gross abuse to the Readers: for indeed, the
contrary hereof is most true. Friends as they have always done, so now, as much
as ever, do direct all to the heavenly Gift, the saving-Grace that has
appeared, the manifestation of the Spirit in themselves, of it to learn, and on
it to depend, for both Conviction and Conduct in their Religious Performances.
But, as on the one hand, they labor to bring every one to an acquaintance with
this heavenly Gift in themselves, and a true dependence on it for Guidence by
it: So, on the other hand, they caution all to beware, that they be not
beguiled by the Enemy in themselves, (who forms Likenesses of heavenly things,
on purpose to deceive and mislead thereby, and for the same end transforms
himself into an Angel of Light,) and take him for their Guide and Leader, as
too many have done, instead of the Spirit of Truth; and then demand to be left
to the Grace of God in themselves, when indeed they are gone from the Grace of
God in themselves, and oppose the manifestations, operations, and productions
thereof in others. So that the Controversy (rightly stated, and truly
considered) is not about being left, or not left, to the Grace of God (for that
all should be left to that, was never doubted, much less denied, by Friends)
but about being left, or not left, to that which is pretended to be the Grace
of God, but indeed and in truth is not it; and by the fruits it brings forth
sufficiently manifests, that it is not it.

They say, it is true, to plead this against our understanding is an abuse of
the Plea, and is little better than Heresy, but none can be an Heretic that
truly fears God; therefore, to plead this against this or that thing, brought
in by this or that Man, or by this or that Assembly, that we believe is wrong,
is so far from abusing the Plea, that it may be a true using of it.

Rep. This is a very loose and trifling way of arguing, having nothing cogent
or conclusive in it. The Passage they oppose is this, To plead being left to
the Grace of God against Unity, is to abuse the very Plea. This was grounded
upon, and drawn from an undenyed Proposition, that where all are left with the
one Spirit of Truth, they must be of one mind, they cannot be otherwise. Now
from this Proposition, that All who are left with (that is, led by) the one
Spirit of Truth, must be of one mind, it fairly and naturally follows, that for
any to plead a being left to the Grace of God, and led by the Spirit of God in
themselves, in order to countenance or defend a being of a contrary, opposite
mind from the rest that are led by the Spirit of God, is to abuse the Plea; and
to commit (as the Author of the Examination there says) the greatest
Contradiction to that very Doctrine of Scripture, viz. that all should be
guided by the Grace and Spirit of God in themselves: for the End of that
Doctrine is Certainty; which the Author there confirms by several
Scripture-Evidences, as Ier. 32.39. Ezekiel. 11.19. Acts 4.32. etc. This the
Adversaries do not attempt to answer: but turn the matter from pleading this
against Unity, to pleading it against Understanding, which, they say, is little
be^ter than Heresy, and grant that to do thus is an abuse of the Plea. But can
nothing be an abuse of the Plea, but using it against Understanding? What if
any have so little understanding in the things of God, as to believe that God's
People may be led by the one Spirit of Truth to disagree, act contrary to, and
oppose one another in the things of God (as the Adversaries say, in their 16th
page, There is no necessity that they must agree in things Circumstantial:) is
not this to abuse the Plea, though it should not be done against Understanding,
but for want of Understanding? For the Plea of being left to the Grace of God
in ones self, is therefore said to be abused, because used to an End and
purpose directly contrary to that, for which it was given. For the end for
which it was given is to bring men into Unity, both with God (from whom the
Devil, by Transgression, divided them) and with one another in the things of
God, in whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. And therefore to plead
being led by it, out of Unity, and against Unity, is to abuse the very Plea.
And surely, if they go not against their Understandings, they go much without
Understanding, in concluding, that because it is an abuse of the Plea to plead
this against Understanding, therefore (for so they infer) to plead this against
this or that thing, brought in by this or that man, or by this or that
Assembly, that we believe is wrong, is so far from abusing the Plea, that it
may be a true using of it. For here is not only no Coherence between their
Premises and Conclusion: but a plain departing from the terms of the
Proposition; which was a Pleading this (of being left to the Grace of God in
themselves) against Unity. Which word they wholly leave out, and instead
thereof put in [ to plead this against this or that thing, b^ought in by this
or that man, etc.] This shows their shuffling, and idle way of arguing.
However, we deny that any thing, believed or practiced as a Religious Duty
among us, was brought in by any man o^ men, as men, but by the Spirit of the
Lord, opening Counsel in the hearts of his Servants, and throu^h them
recommending the use of such things to the Church of Christ; and opening the
hearts of such as waited singly in the same Spirit of Truth, to receive, close
and join with the same, from an inward sense, Conviction and Persuasion that
the things so recommended were of God: In which we have been, and are,
abundantly confirmed, by the sweet and powerful presence of the Lord with and
amongst us in the use thereof, evidencing to our Spirits his accepting us
therein. And if the Adversaries believe those things to be wrong, that does not
prove they are wrong; though it may prove their belief and themselves wrong.

In their 21th page, They quote another passage out of the said Book, in these
words; "I must say unto thee, Friend, what if thou will not be left unto the
Grace and Spirit of God in thy self? (Here they break off with an, etc.
omitting the rest of the Sentence, which in the said Book follows thus,) nor
wait for its mind, nor be watchful to its Revelations, nor humble and quiet
till thou have received such necessary manifestations, but pleadest against the
Counsel of the Spirit of the Lord in other faithful Persons, under the pretense
of being left to his Spirit in thy self; by which means thou opposest the
Spirit to the Spirit, and pleadest for disunity under the name of Liberty.
Their Answer is, Then such do the thing that is extremely Evil.

Rep. No doubt of that. But when they do so, what is to be done in the case?
Are they to be left to their Liberty and Freedom in doing the thing that is
extremely Evil? Is the Church bound to own them, receive them, acknowledge and
admit them, not only for Members, but Ministers and Preachers, while they are
doing the thing that is so extremely Evil? Or in case they disturb her godly
Care and Practice, and grow Contentious, and exalt their Judgment against her,
(as the Adversaries have done,) has she power from God to exhort, admonish and
reprove them, and (if they persevere therein) in his Name to refuse any further
fellowship with them, till they repent of their Evil, as, in the 10. page of
the Book they pretend to Answer, is laid down, but not taken up, answered, or
taken notice of by them, that I find.

Having nimbly answered to the former Quotation, Then such do the thing that is
extremely evil; they immediately add, but on the other hand, what if they are
left with the Grace and Spirit of God, which they may, or at least some; for
any thing that he has said.

Rep. May they so? That Is strange! They that will not wait for the mind of
God's Spirit, not be watchful to its Revelations, nor humble and quiet till
they have received such necessary Manifestations, but plead against the Counsel
of the Spirit of the Lord in other faithful Persons, under the pretense of
being left to his Spirit in themselves, and so oppose the Spirit to the Spirit,
and plead for Disunity under the name of Liberty; may they for any thing that
he has said (who has said all this here, and more elsewhere) be left with
(that is led by) the Grace and Spirit of God in this?

But say they, What care has he taken? What remedy has he provided, that true
Liberty and Freedom of Speech may be maintained?

Rep. Let them show, if they can, when or where true Liberty and Freedom of
Speech has been denied by Friends. That it has been indeed by the
Adversaries, may be proved, if need require. But it may well be supposed what
sort of Liberty and Freedom of Speech they would maintain, by the Licencious
Liberty they have taken, and used in speaking of, and against such Persons and
things, as they dislike: a Liberty to rail at and revile those whom they call
their Brethren, under the Names of Apostates, Innovators, Introducers of
Popery, Setters up of Im^ges, Idolaters, Idol Prophets, a treacherous Company,
etc. a Liberty to mock at scoff, jear and deride the order and discipline of
the Church of Christ, under the contemptuous names of Canons, Constitutions,
human-Prescriptions, Mens-Inventions, Edicts, Bulls, etc. This is the Liberty
and Freedom they have hitherto used, both in speaking and writing; how true,
and fit to be maintained, let all, that live in Truth, judge.

To the Author's Question, whether he may not exhort to the practice of what he
is moved to press to the practice of; they Answer, We grant he may, etc.
Adding, It Is not our Duty to obey him, because he says it, but because we know,
or at least are persuaded, that what he says is true, page 22.

Rep. Neither that Author, nor any Friend besides, ever exhorted or desired
(much less pressed as a Duty on any) to obey him, or to do any thing of a
Religious concern, because he said it; but have always directed to that which
would give every one a certain knowledge, and Persuasion of the thing so
exhorted to. There was therefore no need for the Adversaries to fence
themselves against that which was never offered them. But they delight, by such
suggestions, to insinuate evil surmises into the minds of their beguiled
Proselites.

In their 22. page They quibble upon the words [Common, and Universal:] for
citing these words out of the Book they pretend to Answer, viz. But therefore
are not the Members of one mind and Judgment, in common and universal matters,
relating to the Church of God? They answer, There is not much doubt in this
when truly understood; but we are to mind, say they, that we be not deceived
and imposed upon, as to what is, or ought to be accounted common and universal
matters. Hereupon they give us their notion thereof, both affirmatively and
negatively, thus; By common and universal matters we understand ( and we hope,
say they, according to Truth) what has been commonly and universally received,
and not new and novel things that have not been so received.

Rep. This is not according to Truth, which is free and illimitable; whereas
this would lay a Limit and Restraint upon God, from opening the way of Truth
and Righteousness further and further, and from adding such helps and means for
the Propagation thereof, and preservation of his People therein, as he in his
unsearchable Wisdom shall see need of: For every fresh Discovery may on this
pretense be slighted, rejected as a Novelty, in the same Spirit wherein the
World rejects the whole way of Truth as a Novelty. Common and Universal matters
therefore, relating to the Church of God, are not to be restrained to such
things as have been commonly and universally received. For the envious
Seeds-Man was not backward to sow his evil Seed betimes; and Captious Spirits
have risen up early (as well as now of late) excepting against, some one, some
an other thing, in Doctrine or Practice, yet pretending to own the Fundamental
principle of Truth. So that the most approved practice amongst Friends may,
perhaps, fall short of having been, in a strict Sense, Universally received:
For Universal admits no Exception. But by Common and Universal matters,
relating to the Church of God, are to be understood matters of Common and
Universal Use and Service in the Church of God; things not peculiar to this,
that, or to'ther Member only, but of common use or benefit to all the Members
of the Body. And that the Author so meant it, his own words plainly show, page
5. Where he says, Degree or Measure in the same Life can never contradict or
obstruct that which is from the same Life, for the common benefit of the Family
of God. Did Jude call the Salvation he writ of verse 3. Common, because it was
commonly received; or because it was offered, intended and tendered as a Common
Benifit to all that would receive it? And whereas the Adversaries say, This of
Conviction and Persuasion preceding Conformity, has been a Common and
Universal matter or thing, because commonly and universally received among us
as a great Truth.

I Reply, It is indeed a great Truth, and has been, and is, a common and
universal Matter; but not for the cause or reason they assign: For if it had
not been commonly and universally received among us, as a great Truth; yet it
would have been a common and universal Matter, relating to the Church of God,
because it is a Matter of common and universal Service and Benefit to all and
every Member in the Church of God. But since they here acknowledge that this
Doctrine, of Conviction and Persuasion preceding Conformity, has been commonly
and universally received among us as a great Truth; they do ill to insinuate
(which too frequently they do,) that Friends would draw any to a Conformity to
any thing before, or without, Conviction or Persuasion.

In their 23d page, They pick another piece of a Sentence out of the Book they
pretend to Answer, which they set down thus, What comes from the Light, Life
and Spirit in one, is the same in Truth and Unity to the rest, as if it rise in
themselves. This is seen in our Assemblies every day, etc. Now because they
dare not directly gainsay this, and yet are disposed to wrangle, they pretend
to know the Design of the Argument, and quarrel with that. The Design, they
say, of this Argument is to gain a dependence upon the Teachings of God, by
Instruments, equal at least to the Teaching of God, immediately by his Spirit,
in our own hearts; and this (they say) how plausible soever, is not according
to the Truth, as it is in Jesus.

Rep. Their surmise in this Case is wrong and Evil, and therefore not according
to Truth. That which they suggest to be the Design, was not the Design of that
Argument (as they call it.) But the plain and true Design of it was to obviat
an Objection, and cut off a false Plea for Disunion and Discord, grounded upon
variety of Measures, and diversity of Gifts and Offices in the Body. For the
Author. having put the Question, page 4. Are there not various Measures,
diversities of Gifts, and several Offices in the Body? And having granted that
there are, proves that that variety and diversity of Measures, Gifts and
Offices in the Body, administers no ground for Disunion, Discord or Contrariety
amongst the members of the Body; since it is a false way of Reasoning to
conclude Discord from Diversity, Contrariety from Variety: which having
illustrated by an Instance of the various Senses in a natural Body, without any
Contrariety flowing from that variety, he shows, page 5. That Diversity of
Gifts does not infer Disagreement in Sense, nor variety of Offices contrariety
in Judgment concerning those Offices. Then having, from the concurrent
Testimonies of the holy Scriptures, set forth the Unity of God, he infers that
the Light, Life and Spirit of God is at unity with it self in all; and what
comes from the Light, Life or Spirit in one, it is the same in Truth and Unity
to the rest, as if it rise in themselves. For this he appealed to the daily
experience of Friends in our Meetings, where the Living and sensible ones know,
that what comes from the Light, Life or Spirit of God in any Friend that
Ministers, is felt, received, closed with and united to as Truth, by those that
in the same Light, Life and Spirit wait, as well as if it had arose in
themselves. this was the Design of the Author's words in that place, as is
apparent to any that fairly reads them; and the Design was good. But the Design
of the Adversaries was Evil, in surmising another Design without ground, that
they might make an occasion for Cavilling. For they are fain to confess, that
there is no contrariety in the Spirit of God, no Contradiction in the Spirit's
Teaching, being all for one and the same end, the good of Man, by the Salvation
of his Soul. Nay, they acknowledge, There is so much Truth in what the Author
has said, that when fairly stated, they are content it should be as a Rule to
measure the whole difference by. And yet they spend about a couple of Pages in
Carping at it. They say, betwixt God's Teaching by Instruments, and Teaching
immediately by his Spirit in our own hearts, there is this Distinction or
Difference, that the first is but to prepare, the latter to perfect. Whereas
the Scripture says expressly, When Christ ascended up on high, he gave gifts
unto Men, some, Apostles; and some, Prophets; and some, Evangelists, and some,
Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, etc. Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12.
So that hence it appears that the Teaching of God, through such Instruments as
he gives his heavenly Gifts unto, for the work of the Ministry, has a further
tendency and Service, than but (or only) to prepare: for those Gifts were given
for the Edifying (that is, building up, or Establishing) of the Body of Christ,
and for the Perfecting of the Saints. This shows, the Adversaries, for all
their high Notions and fluttering Pretenses, are short of a right
understanding, and to seek in the work of the Ministry, being ignorant of the
true and full end of Divine Ministerial Gifts. So again they say, page 23. When
the things of God do come from God's holy Spirit immediately, they are then as
the Oracles of God. this shows they do not reckon them as the Oracles of God,
if they come from the Light, Life* or Spirit of God through Instruments. But
the Apostle Peter (who knew as much as they, and is fitter to be believed than
they) says, If any Man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God, etc. 1 Pet.
4.11. So that the Apostle, it seems, understood no other, but that the things
of God, when Ministered as of the ability which God gives, were as the Oracles
of God, though spoken by or through Man.

To make way yet for more wrangling, they reason after this manner; either say
they, all that do speak in our Assemblies or Meetings, speak from the Light,
Life and Spirit, or all do not, if all do so speak, prove it; if all do not so
speak, then you must give us a certain Rule to know who do so speak and who do
not.

Rep. At the end of their Preface, they give an Advertisement, that where the
Term You is found in the following Discourse, (namely in their Book) they
intend the Author ( viz. of the Book they pretend to Answer) and those of his
mind. And where the term We is also used (in their Book) it may be understood
in respect to those of the same mind with the Author of that Book of theirs. So
that You and We are there set for Characteristical Notes, or distinguishing
Terms, between Friends and them; Friends being intended and denoted by the word
You, and themselves by the word We. Now since Your and Our are but Derivatives
from You and We, each ought to follow its own Primitive. And since by the term
We, they would have themselves to be understood, it is but reason that by the
term Our Assemblies or Meetings, their own Assemblies or Meetings should be
understood, not the Assemblies or Meetings of Friends: especially, seeing they
have Meetings of their own, properly their own, set up themselves, in their own
wills and choice, in a Spirit of separation from the Meetings of Friends, and
in opposition to them. Now, if we take them in this Sense, when they say as
before, Either all that do speak in Our Assemblies or Meetings, speak from the
Light, Life and Spirit, or all do not; I shall easily grant, what they say they
take for granted, that all that speak in their Assemblies or Meetings, do not
speak from the Light, Life and Spirit of God, if any do. But if they mistook
themselves here, and by Our Assemblies or Meetings, intended the Assemblies or
Meetings of Friends, and so put the Question, whether all that speak in the
Meetings of Friends, do speak from the Light, Life and Spirit of God, or not.

I Reply, No* For many of the Adversaries themselves (who are gone into a
wicked separation from Friends, and instead of abideing in the Light, Life and
Spirit of God, are got into an ungodly Spirit of Wrangling and Quarrelling,
Railing and Reviling, Envy, Bitterness and Restless Contention) do
notwithstanding thrust into Friends Meetings, and there take upon them to
speak, though they (or their Party) have openly denied Friends in Print. This
is such a work of darkness and horrible Hypocrysie, as manifests that such
speak not from the Light, Life or Spirit of God. But whereas they say, You must
give us a certain Rule to know who do so speak, and who do not, or otherwise
you must leave us to receive or refuse, according to the best of our
understanding; (which they repeat over and over, biding us) Observe, either you
must give us a Rule as above, or you must leave us free, etc. I Reply, Friends
have always directed and left them, and all others, to that which makes free
indeed, the Truth, John 8.32. And their insinuating the contrary, is a foul
Slander, and a wicked Design. I would to God they, who are run into Enmity to
and separation from Friends, would leave us free, and not impose upon us their
Preaching and Praying, which they have been often told Friends cannot receive
or own. And whereas they say, both here in page 24. and elsewhere, We take it
for granted, that you can give no such Rule.

I Reply, They mistake, taking that for granted which they ought not. That
Light, Life, Spirit, Grace or Truth, which Friends have always directed them
and all unto, is a Rule. a certain Rule, to know who speak from it, and who do
not. And they that abide in it, and are attentive to it, do know who speak from
it, and who do not; who are acted by it, and who are not: and know accordingly
what, and whom, to receive, and what, and whom, to refuse. For the true Sheep
know the true Shepherd's Voice, John 10.4. and 27. which is more than words.
But there is a difference between being left to this Light, Grace or Spirit of
God in our selves, to receive or refuse according to that; and being left to
our own understanding, to receive or refuse according to the best of that, as
the Adversaries would be left. For Man's understanding, as it is a natural
Faculty, must be illuminated by this heavenly Light and Spirit of God, before
it can receive, or know, the things of God, because they are Spiritually
discerned. 1 Cor. 2.14. Well therefore did the Wiseman advise, Trust in the
Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own understanding, Prove. 3.5.

In the close of their 24 page, They say, We may safely conclude, where
Conviction and Persuasion are disallowed, that Government cease to be true.

Rep. But where is that? not amongst Friends, I am sure. This they have
suggested over and over; but without proof, without color. The contrary has
been asserted and proved over and over, again and again, and that by undeniable
Evidences, from that very Book they pretend to Answer, As thou art not to
conform to a thing ignorantly, page 3. The People of God ought to be left to
the Guidings of the Spirit of God in themselves, page 9. It is a great Truth
that all are to be left thereunto, ibid. And again, If thou do not presently
see that Service in a thing, that the rest of thy Brethren agree in, it is thy
Duty (what to do? not to Conform without or against Conviction or Persuasion,
but) to wait upon God in silence and patience, out of all fleshly
Consultations, etc. page 10. These plain Testimonies, one would think, were
enough to stop the clamorous mouth of slanderous Envy.

They begin their 25th page with a Passage, which they single out of the 6th
page of the Book they pretend to Answer; And they word it thus, They that walk
in the Light, have Fellowship one with another, 1 John 1. Whence he says, it is
easy to conclude. that those that go out of Fellowship, go out of the Light,
etc. Upon this they spend about four pages in mere Cavilling. And to make the
more way for their Cavilling, they miscite the Passage, leaving out a word of
small sound, but of great force in the present Case, because a strong Emphasis
lies upon it. For whereas the Author's words were, they that go out of [ the]
Fellowship, go out of the Light; the Adversaries, omitting the word [ the]
report him to have said, They that go out of Fellowship, go out of the Light;
By that means, making themselves a liberty to extend this to any sort of
Fellowship, that they have a mind to stretch it to, which was spoken
Emphatically, and by way of Excellency, of that Divine and Spiritual
Fellowship, which is attained only by walking in the Light. Nor was this a
single slip, or oversight; but seven or eight times over have they here
repeated this Passage in the same Terms, and with the same Omission: and have
made advantage of it accordingly, to prevent the Sense, abuse the Author, and
beguil the Reader. For in their 26th page. They put themselves upon the
Inquiry, What must be understood by the word Fellowship; for, they say, it
cannot stand of it self (it seems they take it for a Noun Adjective) and they
have taken from it that, by which it might have both stood, and been
understood. They pursue their Inquiry thus; Therefore, say they, to make it
intelligible in the best Sense, we must join to it what he calls the Church,
and then (add they) that Church must relate to People, and at last (say they)
we judge, it must relate to those Orders, Rules and Forms, that are set up by
this Church, etc. Thus have they taken away what they pleased from the Author's
words, and added to them of their own, that they might the more foully pervert
the Sense and meaning of them.

Whereas the Author's words, [They that go out of the Fellowship, go out of the
Light,] had a direct and limited relation to that Fellowship which stands in
the Light, which they that walk in the Light have one with another, in and by
walking in the Light. So that the true Fellowship here treated of, is a pure,
holy, Spiritual Fellowship, which God's People have and enjoy one with another;
and their Fellowship one with another stands in that wherein their Fellowship
stands with God; not in any Ceremonial or shadowy thing, as the Adversaries,
with an evil mind, suggest.

They say, page 25, We may see the cunning that is in Daubing, as well as
something of that ground of the false Reasoning, that is among the Children of
men. Their Daubing, and their Cunning is laid open in the foregoing. Their
false Reasoning, and their Folly will appear in what follows. They tell us,
page 25, Every saying or Position has only one other Saying or Position that
stands against it; if therefore (say they) what is brought as the Antithesis,
differ from the direct opposite Sense, the work that follows, or what is
builded upon it, cannot be true.

Rep. This is so opposite to Sense, that it is hard to pick any Sense out of
it. Antithesis is a Position directly contrary to another Position, which is
the Thesis to it; and it must differ from the Thesis, or direct opposite Sense,
which it is brought against, else it is not truly Antithesis: Yet they would
have it, that if it do differ from the direct opposite Sense, it cannot be
true. They have got hold of a Cramp-word (as the saying is) and seem very fond
of it; but handle it with so little skill, a shows they do not rightly
understand it: For they confound Thesis with Antithesis, making the same words
some times one, some times to'ther; not considering that themselves at the same
time say, Opposites remain as fixed in their Sense, as the East does from the
West. Then sure they are not Convertible. Yet they make those words, [ They
that go out of Fellowship, go out of the Light,] one while a Thesis or
Position; another while an Antithesis, which is quite contrary. Again, they
say, This Position, that they that go out of Fellowship, go out of the Light,
he brings as the true Antithesis to this Position of Scripture, quoted 1 John
1. or he does not so bring it; if he does not bring it as true, he deceives or
abuses his Reader, but if he does bring it as the true Antithesis, he is
mistaken.

Rep. What ground had they to dream that he brought it as an Antithesis at all?
He no where calls it so: Nay, he directly calls it a Conclusion, (his words
are, Whence it is easy to conclude, They that go out of the Fellowship, go out
of the Light:) And cannot they discern between a Conclusion and an Antithesis?
They had better then not have meddled with either. Is every Conclusion an
Antithesis, do they think? They say, He brings it as the true Antithesis, or he
does not so bring it; if he does not bring it as true, he deceives or abuses
his Reader. Here, to show their Cunning in Daubing, they leave out the word
Antithesis in the latter Clause of the Sentence, and only say; if he does not
bring it as true, he deceives or abuses his Reader. But he does bring it as
true (though not Antithesis, but) Conclusion from the Premises; so that they
deceive themselves and their Readers, and abuse him. They grant, from the Text
in John, that The ground and cause of true Fellowship, is a walking in the
Lig^t. And it is very evident, that it was this true Fellowship, which walking
in the Light is the Ground and Cause of, that the Author spoke of, whom he
said, They that go out of the Fellowship, go out of the Light, because he
inferred it from having Fellowship by walking in the Light, asserted by the
Apostle, 1 John 1. Now therefore, after all their wrangling, and idle Cavilling
about it, I desire they will seriously consider, whether they that go out of
this true Fellowship, which stands in the Light, which is attained only by
walking in the Light, or which (as their own phrase is) walking in the Light is
the ground and cause of, do not go out of the Light in which the Fellowship
stands, when they go out of the Fellowship which stands in the Light.

They say, The proof that the work is true, is the witness in a Man's own mind
by the cleansing from all Sin; and they add, without this, Fellowship is
ineffectual.

Rep. I grant that Cleansing, being an effet of walking in the Light, is a good
proof of such walking. But since Cleansing is a gradual work: (for as, Nemo
repent fit Turpissimus; So Nemo repent fir Purgatissimus: As no Man becomes
most filthy all on a sudden; so neither is it usual for any one to be made
thoroughly Clean in a moment:) Cleansing from all sin is the highest degree of
Cleansing. Now though the further this work of Cleansing is carried on, the
more sweet and precious the Fellowship is; yet to assert (as the Adversaries
here do) that without cleansing from all Sin, this Fellowship is ineffectual,
is an Error. For while the work of Cleansing is but in part wrought, and is
carrying on from one degree to an other, this holy Fellowship is of good effect
to them, who by walking in the Light, are brought into, and preserved in it. I
find the Author of the Book I am Replying to, does not weigh his matter in the
true Balance before he brings it forth; but runs on in a dark way of natural
Reasoning (wherein his greatest strength seems to ly) which leads him to lay
hold too suddenly of Crude and indigested Notions, which will not stand, when
brought to the true Trial. But to manifest more directly to him and his Party,
their mistake in the present Instance, I recommend to their Consideration,
whether they, among themselves, have, or pretend to have any Fellowship one
with another, or no. If they have; whether All in that Fellowship can in truth
say, they are cleansed from All Sin. If they cannot; then whether (according to
their own Position before laid down) that Fellowship of theirs is not
ineffectual. This concerns all them that value that Fellowship, or themselves
for being in it, to consider.

In their 27th and 28th pages, having spoken of the Church 's going into the
Wilderness, and of her being led out of it again by Christ, they say, As we
believe there is to be no end of the Increase of his Government now begun, we
are to consider there is some alteration in the work; it then decreased, it
must now increase, and if it must increase, we may will consider, as God is
infinite and eternal, he has still more Wisdom, Power and Glory to reveal.

Rep. There is no doubt but he has: And in his Wisdom he has revealed such
things, as his Wisdom saw needful and useful to his Church and People, which by
his glorious Power he has confirmed them in; And which the Adversaries, in
their carnal Wisdom, judging too mean and low for them to receive, have
despised, reproached, rejected and opposed. But while they here admit, that God
has still more Wisdom, Power and Glory to reveal, they seem to have forgotten
how often throughout their Book, they have scornfully rejected things as New and
Novel, and bounded all to their beginning.

Again they say, there must be a looking forward, and not backward for the mind
of Christ.

Rep. Why then would they limit us to their beginning, as in their 5th and 9th
pages, as if nothing were to be received, but what is (in their esteem)
Essential to true Religion, or which has been from their beginning? Is not
that looking backward, instead of forward? Besides, if there must be a looking
forward, and not backward (as they say) for the mind of Christ; why then do
they twit us with unscriptural Orders, and peremptorily call for a plain
Scripture Proof for this or that Practice? Is not this looking backward,
instead of forward? For the Scriptures, they know, were written many hundred
years ago. Thus their weakness and self Contradiction appears. But this is not
all. Their Position is unsound in it self. They say, there must be a looking
forward, and not backward for the mind of Christ. This Negative part of their
Position is false and Erroneous, excluding the Scriptures of Truth to be looked
in for the mind of Christ. Herein they Err to one Extreme, as the World 's
People do to the other. They are for looking backward, not forward, for the
mind of Christ; backward to the Scriptures, which they call such a complete
Canon, as admits no Addition, or further discovery of the mind of God; not
forward, as believing God has so bound himself up to what is revealed in the
holy Scripture, that he will not reveal his mind any further. These, on the
other hand, are for looking forward, not backward, for the mind of Christ. The
Truth lies between these two Extremes. There ought to be a looking both
forward, and backward, for the mind of Christ. not only forward, to every
fresh and further manifestation, discovery or Revelation of his mind: but also
backward, to those Revelations, discoveries or manifestations of the mind of
Christ, which we have already received from him in our selves, and which the
Church of Christ in Ages past received from him, through the holy Spirit, and
are recorded in the holy Scriptures, which were written for our Instruction.
Thus running on headily and in haste, the Adversaries have shut out the use and
Service of the Scriptures of Truth, from being looked into for the mind of
Christ.

They say, We should not think by what we know, to measure what is to come; and
they add, we hereby limit the holy One as much as is in our power, etc.

Rep. They directed us before, at the end of their Preface, to understand the
term [ We] of those that are of the same mind with the Author of their Book.
Now this which they here say* of limitting the holy One, etc. They speak in the
term [ We.] So that this is applicable to themselves, by their own direction. I
am sensible indeed, that what they here speak concerning themselves, is true;
and I am sorry for it: for hence has proceeded their hurt, and the loss that is
come upon them. They have measured the Lord 's Appearances by the false Metwand
of their own conceited Knowledge, and the things they so measured not answering
their expectation by that measure, they have rejected, despised and vilified
the things themselves, blasphemed the Power which led Friends into the practice
of them, turned head against their Brethren, disquieted and disturbed the
Church of Christ, proclaimed in Print open War, and set up their separate
Meetings, as Ensigns and Standards thereof.

Their 29th page contains a Quotation out of the Book they pretend to Answer.
It is too long to transcribe (being almost a page) consisting of many
particulars, picked out of the 6th and 8th pages of that Book, but not fairly:
for, besides other Variations, there is this material one, that whereas the
Author 's own words are, If I will not comply with him that God has made an
Eye, etc. They have cited it, If I will not comply with him that is made an
Eye, etc. leaving out God, that they might make room for an evil mind to
furmise, that the Eye there spoken of might be of Man's making, not of God 's;
though the Author had expressly said, Him that GOD has made an Eye This shows
(as they elsewhere reflect, page 25th) more Cunning in Daubing, than honesty in
Dealing. In their Answer they say, it is plain the Author intended to gain a
dependence upon what he calls the Church.

Rep. It Is plain they herein abuse the Author, and endeavor to mislead their
Reader. It Is plain the Author had no intention, nor does his Discourse tend, to
gain a dependence upon the Church, or upon any thing else than what the Church
it self is built and depends upon, Christ Jesus, the Head thereof. That which
they Carp at is a Scripture-Metaphor, borrowed from the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor.
12. And the Author 's intention in using it was no other, than to reprove, and
refute the folly of those, who from the variety of Measures, diversity of Gifts
and Offices in the Spiritual Body, would infer, and bring in a Liberty and
allowance for the members of that Body to disagree among themselves, to
contradict and oppose each other, in and about the self same matter and thing,
relating to the Family or Church of God. That this was his Intention, appears
most plainly in his 4th page. Now in order to convince such of the weakness,
unreasonableness, and falseness of that Plea, he used the Comparison which the
Apostle had made, drawn from a natural Body, wherein, notwithstanding there are
diverse Members, and various Offices to which they are adapted, yet is there no
disagreement among them, no Contrariety, Contradiction, or Opposition. So that
the Adversaries, in this Cavil, do but in effect carp at the Apostle, at the
Holy Scripture, and at the Spirit of Truth by which it was written. But I come
to particulars of their Answer.

Having said, it is plain his intention is to gain a Dependence upon what he
calls the Church, they add, And that he makes infallible as she relates to Men.

Rep. This is a notorious Falsehood, not to be fastened on any thing in his
Book; and that I suppose, they were sensible of: for they do not attempt to
quote any passage of his in proof of it, but endeavor to prop up this, by
setting another Falsehood to it, which is this; That she must relate to Men is
clear, the Difference (say they) being betwixt Men and Men. This is false as
well as the former. The Difference is not betwixt Men and Men; if it were, it
would relate to the things of Men, such things as are common to Men as Men. But
the Difference is between Spirit and Spirit, and relates to the things of the
Church, not of the World; of Christians, not of Men as Men. But the
Adversaries, in their carnal minds, distinguish not between Men and Christians.
Next they say, He makes no provision in all his Book to the contrary, by
allowing Conviction to precede Conformity.

Rep. Doubtless the Adversaries are come to an high degree of obstinate
hardness, that without remorse they can so often repeat so foul a Falsehood as
this. How many places have I already cited out of that Book (in which, they
say, he makes no provision at all for this) which plainly convict them of
Falsehood and Slander therein! when he said, page 3. Thou art not to conform to
a thing ignorantly; was here no Provision at all made for Conviction to precede
Conformity! If they were not to conform ignorantly, then surely they were to
know, be persuaded, convinced, before they conformed. So that here was a good
provision made, that Conviction should precede Conformity. When, to the
Question, [Ought I not to be left to the Grace and Spirit of God in my own
heart,] He Answered, Yea, that is of all things most desirable, etc. page 3.
and 4. when he said, page 9. The People of God ought to be left to the Guidings
of the Spirit of God in themselves; and again, It is a great Truth that all are
to be thereunto left; was here no Provision at all for Conviction to precede
Conformity! what better Provision could have been made for allowing Conviction
to precede Conformity, than to declare that God 's People ought to be left to
the Guidings of God 's Spirit in themselves? Is it not from the Spirit of God
in ones self, that Conviction or Persuasion of Duty is to be accepted and
received? will the Spirit of God lead them that ^e left to the Guidings of it,
to Conformity before Conviction? no sure. The leaving therefore of God 's
People to the Guidings of God 's Spirit in themselves, was the best Provision
could have been made for Conviction to precede Conformity. When, to the
Question, [If I do not presently see that Service in a thing, that the rest of
my Brethren agree in, in this case what is my Duty?] He Answered, It is thy
Duty to wait upon God in silence and Patience, out of all fleshly Consultation,
and as thou abidest in the simplicity of Truth, thou will receive an
understanding with the rest of thy Brethren about the thing doubted; was there
no Provision at all here, for allowing Conviction to precede Conformity! Did he
say, thou must Conform before or without Coviction? whether thou see the
Service, or no? Whether thou have received an Understanding about it, or no?
Nay, did he not positively exclude that, and obviate this Cavil, by saying
directly, It is thy Duty to wait upon God, etc. And what was such an one to
wait upon God for? to be lead into Conformity before Conviction? no sure; but
to receive Conviction from God: therefore he there added, And as thou abidest
in the simplicity of Truth, thou will receive an Understanding, etc. Nay, so
far was he from favoring (much more from pressing) Conformity before
Conviction, that, having declared, as before, the Duty of such an unconvinced,
doubting one; he adds also, what is the Duty of the Brethren toward such an
one, thus, And it is their Duty, whilst thou behavest thy self in meekness and
humility, to bear with thee, and carry themselves tenderly and lovingly toward
thee. Can any be so impudent as yet to say, that he makes no Provision in all
his Book to the contrary, by allowing Conviction to precede Conformity! Nay,
the Adversaries themselves say of him, page 16. That they believe he desires
all should be Guided by God's Spirit. Does this look like leading into blind
Obedience, like drawing to Conformity before Conviction, like drawing to a
Dependence upon Men, as they often suggest against him! how abominably wicked
are they herein!

In their 30 page, they quarrel at some particular passages in the large
Quotation they gave before, relating to the Metaphor of a natural Body. As
first, they say, The Author seems to make the Church immediately joined to
Christ for her Head, as the natural Body (...) joined to the natural Head.

Rep. Does this offend them? It is then because they do not know the true
Church, nor her strict Conjunction with or to her Head. Do they indeed think
the true Church is not immediately joined to Christ for her Head! were they of
that Church, they would think otherwise. It concerns them to consider, whether
they are not such as the Apostle complained of, Col. 2.19. for not holding the
Head, from which all the body, by joints and bands having nourishment
ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God. The same
Apostle exhorting the Ephesians not to be tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of Doctrine, by the slight of Men, and cunning Craftiness,
whereby they ly in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. adds, But speaking the Truth
in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the Head, even Christ:
from whom the whole Body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which
every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the Body unto the edifying of it self in love.
And Baeza, on these words, thus notes; Thereof it follows, says he, that
neither this Body can live without Christ, neither can any Man grow up
Spiritually, that separateth himself from the other Members. A fit Note, and
worthy to be noted by all those, who have separated themselves from that
Church, which yet they acknowledge to be true.

They Cavil yet further at the parts of the Metaphor taken from a natural Body,
which shows they do not well understand the nature of a Metaphor, Comparison,
or Sinicle, which (as the saying is) runs not on all four, nor agrees in every
particular; but it is enough if it square in these parts, wherein the
Comparison lies. When Christ compared his Coming) called by the Apostles, the
coming of the day of the Lord, 1 These. 5.2. and 2 Pet. 3.10.) to the coming of
a Theif, Matthew. 24.43, 44. it was not with respect to the end or intention of
the coming of each: (for the Thief comes not but to steal, kill and destroy,
John 10.10. Whereas Christ came to give Life, and to Save.) But it was with
respect to the unexpected suddenness of the coming of each. The comparing the
Members of Christ 's Body to the Members of a natural Body, was not to tie the
Spiritual Members to a strict and exact proportion and agreement, in every
respect, to the Members of a natural Body, in all and singular the Offices,
Properties, Qualifications and Faculties of the Members of a natural Bedy: But
to show, that as all the Members of a natural Body, being influenced, animated
and acted by one and the same vital Spirit, do harmoniously agree, and not
thwart one another, in their various Offices and Actions: So the Members of the
true Spiritual Body, being all influenced, animated, acted, moved, led and
guided by the one Spirit of Life and Truth, do harmoniously agree, and sweetly
consent together, in the performing of their several Offices, according to the
diverse Gifts, and various Measures that they have received thereof. Which cuts
off, and wholly excludes that pernicious Plea, which the dividing Enemy has
furnished some with, for maintaining Disagreement, Discord, and opposite
Senses, Judgments and Practices, amongst the Members of the same Body, in and
about the same Religious Performances. Had the Adversaries rightly considered
this, they would not perhaps have thought there had been any inconsistency
between the Church of Christ seeing, hearing, speaking with the same Eye, Ear,
Mouth; and particular Members being made by God an Eye, Ear, or Mouth, at such
seasons, or such occasions, and for such Services, as he sees meet to use them
in: For there is no inconsistency in this at all; though they labor to make
one, by a carnal way of Reasoning, not suitable to the nature of Spiritual
Senses. For though they say, In the first of these Cases, they all seem to hear
for themselves; in the latter, some hear immediately, and some secondarily; and
that the first hear not only for themselves, but for others also, the second
only for themselves by others: They err, not knowing the Mystery of true
Spiritual Hearing. For in the true Church All (whose Ear the Lord has truly
opened, and who attentively listen to his Voice, hear for themselves, and that
immediately, by the Spiritual Ear which God has opened in them, at the same
time that, with the outward Ear, they hear the Testimony of Truth sounded
forth, by the Spirit of Truth, through any Instrument unto them. But, Oh! the
darkness that comes over those, who give scope and liberty to their minds to
rove, and range in the way of carnal Reasoning, about the things of God, which
are, and only can be, Spiritually discerned, by them that wait in the Light.
Let us know, say the Adversaries here, what Member is this Eye that we must see
by, and what Member is this Ear that we must hear by, and what Member is this
Mouth that we must speak by, in those things that relate to Christ and his
Church, that so we may not be imposed upon by such as may pretend to be that
Eye, that Ear and Mouth, and are not.

Rep. This looks too like that impertinent Curiosity, which drew from the
Apostle the Rebuke of [ thou Fool] to him that asked, How are the Dead raised
up? and with what Bodies do they come? 1 Cor. 15.35, 36. The Adversaries here
bewray an Imagination, that some particular Members are determinately appointed
to the constant, and continual performance, and execution of those Offices of
Eye, Ear, Mouth, etc. to and for the Body. And they seem to expect we should
describe those Persons to them by name, or other outward Character. But how
carnally minded must they be, that could conceive so strange an Imagination!
They bid us let them know that, which none but God knows. For as no Member can
be rightly a Mouth to the rest, but that which God makes so, by speaking
through it to the rest, and that only at such times as it is so made use of by
God: So none but God knows what Member he will make use of, as a Mouth to speak
his mind by. But as all the Members wait upon God, in their own respective
measures of the heavenly Gift in themselves, all are in their proper places,
ready to be ordered and disposed of by the Lord to whatsoever Office in, or
Service for the Body, he shall see meet to use them in. And every one thus
truly waiting, in that which gives a true discerning, none such can be imposed
upon by any false Pretender. Hence it is, that when any of these Adversaries
(that are gone out of the Unity, into a separation inwardly in Spirit, and
outwardly in Meetings also, from Friends) thrust into our Meetings, and take
upon them to be a Mouth, either from God to the Assembly, by Preaching, or from
the Assembly to God, by Prayer; they are savoured, felt, feen and known to be
but false Pretenders; and as such rejected and denied by Friends. But is it not
strange blindness in them, to Cavil at the Expression of a Member being made a
Mouth by God to the rest of the Members; when it is plain matter of Fact, that
diverse of themselves pretend to that Office, of being a Mouth to or from the
Assembly, and on that pretense obtrude and impose their Preaching and Praying
on Friends! Does not this show they are devoted to Cavilling?

They say, in their 31 page, Will he leave us to depend, and not certainly tell
us what on?

Rep. By this they would insinuate, that the Author of the Book they pretend to
Answer, would have some of the Members depend upon others. Yet they immediately
add, He does not intend that sure. But if they really believe he does not
intend that, why would they suggest that he does so intend, by saying, will he
have us to depend, and not certainly tell us what on? when it is certain he had
certainly and expressly told, what all God's People ought to depend on, namely,
the Guidings of the Spirit of God in themselves, page 9. And indeed, so far are
Friends from having, or referring any to, a dependence on any Instrument,
through which God at any time spoke; that they have always recommended all to
the Grace, and Spirit of God in themselves, (which says Amen to the Testimony
that proceeds from the same Grace and Spirit in another) that their dependence
might be upon God in that! And had the Adversaries looked with an indifferent
Eye, they might have observed what the Author, of the Book they are so angry
at, has written in the 8th and 9th pages thereof, viz. That the same lowly
frame of mind that receives and answers the mind of the Spirit of the Lord in a
Man's self, will receive and have Unity with the mind of the same Spirit
through another, and the reason is plain; because the same self evidencing
Power and virtue that arises from the measure of the Spirit of Truth in one
self, and that convinces a Man in his own heart, does also attend the
discovery of the mind of the same Spirit, when delivered by another.

They speak of the Church that is perfectly redeemed, etc. But this, say they,
is that Church that is hid from the World.

Rep. By this they would make as if Christ had two Churches, one hid from the
World, and another known to the World. But is the Church (or was it ever) known
to the World? Was not his Church always hid from the World? Can the Church of
Christ be seen but by a Spiritual Eye? And has the World that Eye to see her
with?

In their 32 page, they say, Why do you impose upon your Brethren?

Rep. The Insinuation is false and malicious. Friends impose not upon any. But
what God has manifested as his mind unto us, for the Service and good of his
Church, that in his Fear we practice our selves, and that we have recommended
to others. When some have said, they saw not the Service of it, such have been
exhorted, and desired, to wait upon God in the measure of his Light, Grace and
Spirit manifested in themselves, that thereby they might come to a Sight and
^ense thereof, and have Unity with their Brethren therein; and in the mean time
to be quiet, and not oppose those things, which their Brethren were
conscientiously concerned in, and which they themselves confessed that they had
not a sight, whether the things so recommended, were of God or not. But instead
of taking this good Counsel, some Factious Spirits amongst them, set themselves
to obstruct and hinder Friends from proceeding, in the way which the Lord had
led them into; working against Friends, at first, in a more hidden manner, by
sly Insinuations and evil Surmises secretly conveyed from House to House, among
such as were weak of Understanding, or but young in the Convincement and
knowledge of Truth, or under some discontent of mind, or such as wanted a
broader way than Truth allows. These they smoothly and craftily insinuated
themselves into, entertained them with Stories and false Reports against this,
that and the other Friend, laboring to persuade them that such sought to set
up a Lordly Dominion over them to make themselves Rulers of the Church, and
bring others in subjection under them: Than which, nothing could be more false.
But after that those wicked Agents had, by these and such like ungodly Courses,
beguiled many, and formed to themselves (as they thought) a sufficient party in
diverse parts of the Nation; they then brake forth into open Opposition,
gainsaying, withstanding and disturbing Friends in the practice of those
things, which friends were convinced of, and satisfied the Lord had led them
into, and owned them in; calling them (in scorn and derision) by the
reproachful and despightful Terms of Canons, Constitutions, Decrees,
Mens-Inventions, Human Traditions, Popish-Prescriptions, Edicts, Orders, Bulls,
etc. And when Friends, seeing them thus run out from Truth, and bandying
together against Truth, could no longer receive their Testimonies in our
public Meetings, as Preachers amongst us, but were necessitated to show some
open dislike thereof; then did the Adversaries impose their Preaching and
Praying upon Friends, requiring Friends to bow in Conformity to their Prayers,
and that not only before and without, but even against and contrary to
Conviction and Persuasion, (for Friends gave them to understand that they were
convinced and satisfied in their Judgments and Consciences, that they, being
gone from the Spirit of Truth and Gospel of Peace, ought not to be owned as
Ministers thereof.) Nay, to that height did the Adversaries proceed, in
obtruding their Ministry upon Friends, that (in some places, where they had
gotten strength, by Numbers, sufficient to carry on their evil Designs,) they
imposed Conformity to their own Ministry, under an outward Penalty, and that no
less than a being excluded from, debarred and deprived of the use of their
public Meeting-places, in which the Friends, so deprived, had, and have, a
true Right and legal Property. Nor did they only threaten this, but were as bad
as their words, and did actually shut and keep the Friends out, and refuse them
entrance into their own Meeting-places, unless they would first promise to
conform. This was Imposition with a witness: And Reding is a witness of this.

The Cavils they make in their 34. and 35. pages, on occasion of the
Differences mentioned, Romans 14. about Observation of Meats and Days, are very
trivial. They do not prove that the Instances of abstaining from Meats, and
observing Days, are Parallels to those parts of Church Discipline, which they
fight so much against. They confess indeed, that the instance of Meats, Romans
14. is an Instance of Weakness; but they urge, that the Apostle's Advice was,
that those weak ones, notwithstanding their weakness, should be received.

Rep. We agree with the Apostle's Advice, and have testified our Consent
thereto by our Practice: For so long as the Adversaries kept within the bounds
of weakness only, alleging want of sight, their weakness was born with, and
they were received by Friends, in hopes that, if they waited humbly and
honestly upon the Lord, he would open their understandings, and give them a
sight, and satisfaction concerning the things they then doubted about. But
when, not content with this bearing and forbearing, they grew heady and
quarrelsome, and sought, by running into jangling disputations, to stagger
others, and spread the Leaven of their own doubts, that by making others as
doubtful as themselves, they might raise a party, to carry on strife and
contention by; they then put themselves out of the Protection of the Apostle's
Advise. For as he advised, to receive him that is weak in the Faith; so he also
cautioned not to receive him to doubtful Disputations. He was to be received,
if he would be quiet, and his weakness to be born with; but not if he would be
always wrangling, and raising Dissentions in the Church. So far as the cases
will admit Comparison, the Adversaries Representative was that weak one, who
could not eat what his Brethren could. He, through weakness, could not eat:
They, through weakness (of sight) could not see what their Brethren saw, could
not Act as their Brethren did; at least pretended so. Now, as the Apostle gave
a cautionary Let not, to him that was strong; Let not him that eats despise
him that eats not, Romans 14.3. (which Friends observed toward the
Adversaries, not despising nor rejecting them for their apparent weakness, but
bearing with them, and carrying themselves tenderly toward them: So he gave
another cautionary Let not, to him that was weak (by whom, as I noted, the
Adversaries are here represented) Let not him that eats not, judge him that
eats. Had the Adversaries observed this Caution (...) the Apostle, and not
judged their Brethren in and for those things, which their Brethren saw to be
their Duty, and were satisfied and conscientiously concerned in (and which
themselves acknowledged they had not a clear sight of) the Difference in
probability had not come to what it now is. But the Adversaries forgeting the
Apostles Counsel, fell to judge their Brethren, and that in the most provoking
and reflecting manner, under the names of Apostates, Innovators, Idolaters,
Setters up of lordly Dominion, Usurpers of Authority over Conscience,
Introducers of Popery, etc. and that in Print; And never gave over, till they
run themselves by open war, into that open Separation, in which they now stand.

In their 35th page, they fall again upon their old odd Notion of making
Circumstantial and Shadowy to signify the same thing.

Rep. Herein they err, for want of considering the proper nature of each. Every
Shadow is a Representation of some particular Substance, which it is a shadow
of. But every Circumstance is not Representative. There are Circumstances of
Time, Place, Gesture, etc. belonging to every Action: yet is not every such
Circumstance a Representation of some particular Substance. Therefore every
Circumstance is not a Shadow. In meeting together to worship God, there must be
a time to meet at, a Place to meet in. These are Circumstantial to the worship
for which the Meeting is, but they are not Shadows. If the Adversaries think
they are, pray let them assign the particular Substances of which they are
Shadows, and which, as Shadows, they represent. But for ought I see, they make
all things to be Shadows, but the Spirit of God. For they say, they must be
Substance or Shadow; and they admit nothing to be Substance, but that which
leads into all Truth; and they add* The Substance is God's holy Spirit, that
only and alone guides into all Truth. So that, after their Shadowy way of
Reasoning, the Gospel Dispensation should be as Shadowy as the Legal was, or
else there must be no external Appearance of Worship under the Gospel. And yet
they acknowledge, There should be no Shadows in Christ's Government. But, if
there should be no Shadows in Christ's Government, and all External Acts of
Worship (according to their notion) are but Shadowy; then there must be no
external Appearance, or Acts of Worship under Christ's Government. And what
then would this shadowy, shady, dark Reasoning of theirs bring things to! I
wish the more single-hearted of their beguiled Proselites would well observe
this, and consider what Shadows of Christians they have made, or would make
them.

In like manner, they blunder about the Circumstantial and Essential, puzzling
themselves, and their Reader, to no purpose, for want of applying the words
Circumstantial and Essential to their respective and proper Relatives for they
must relate to something that which is but Circumstantial to one thing, may be
Essential to another. Outward Motion, or motion of the outward Members, is
Circumstantial to man; not Essential to his being: for a man may be a man
without outward motion. But this outward motion, though it be not Essential to
man's Being, yet it is Essential to his Walking, Talking, Eating, etc. For
walking, talking, eating, cannot be without some outward motion of the outward
Members. As it is thus in Natural, so in Religious Matters. Outward
Performances are but Circumstantial, not Essential to Religion, simply
considered as in it self, and strictly taken in the abstract. But those very
Performances, which are not Essential to Religion it self in that strict fense,
may be Essential to the Outward Profession and external Exercise of Religion.
And indeed, no outward Profession of Religion can be made, no external Exercise
of Religion performed, without the Circumstance of some outward Act or Medium.
Which shows that outward Performances, outward Acts or Mediums are Essential to
the Being of outward Profession, or Exercise of Relion, though not to Religion
it self, in that strict and abstractive sense before mentioned. I write this
(not with respect to any particular Medium, Act, or Performance, but) in a
general way, with respect to every Outward Performance, that relates to the
right Exercise of true Religion; And to check the too confident Conclusion,
which the Adversaries over hastily draw th^^ whatsoever is not Essential to
Religion (according to their undistinguished sense of Essentials) is, without
more ado, a meer-Shadow.

The Author of the Book they pretend to Answer, in his 9th page thereof, having
showed that the Plea which the Adversaries make, viz. [ I must mind the Spirit
of God in my self] though true in it self, yet ought not to be so applied, as
to disregard the Preaching or Writings of Christ's enlightened Servants, because
by them applied properly to the Preaching or Writing of false Prophets and
Seducers, concluded thus, I say the Doctrine is true, but not exclusively of
all external Counsel or direction; therefore false in application, where men
are allowed to have had the fear of God, and the mind of his Spirit, and are
not proved to have acted in their own Wills and Wisdom, or without the Guidance
of the Spirit of God, about the things of his Church and Kingdom. Here the
Adversaries open wide, and a grevious Out cry they make, p. ^7. etc. Two main
Exceptions they take against this. One at the words [ have had the fear of God]
and the other at the words [ are not proved to have acted, etc.] Against the
first, they allege that such as may have had the fear of God, may now be
without it. And, to give a flurt at the Author, they add, As well as himself,
who used to have good Arguments, but now wants them. Against the second, they
urge, that since every fact must be committed before proved, they may have
acted in their own will, and not yet fully proved. Now, that this is a mere
empty Cavil, and carping at words only, will appear by the Author's own words,
in the place forecited, where he expressly calls the Persons he spoke of,
Faithful Brethren, and Christ's enlightened Servants. So that it is evident, he
used that other way of Speech afterward upon the Adversaries, Concession, and
to bind them the faster, who, how meanly soever they thought of Friends then,
allowed them to have had the fear of God, and the mind of his Spirit, etc. and
had not proved them to have acted in their own wills, how much soever they
slighted them.

And it appears the Adversaries understood this to be so worded upon their
Concession: for they say, p. 38. If we have allowed any to have had the fear of
God, and mind of his Spirit in things offered to us, if that allowance was true
(observe) it was because we had a divine sense, relish and taste of it in our
own Hearts.

Rep. If that allowance was true! it seems then they cannot tell, they have no
assurance, whether that allowance was true, or no. How know they then whether
the sense, relish, and taste of it, which they say they had in their hearts,
was Divine, or no? For since they say that allowance was because they had a
divine sense of it, etc. if the allowance was not true, the sense, which was
the Cause of that allowance, will not appear to have been Divine.

They add, And are we to go any further for a Proof, that such are wrong, than
when the same Evidence comes not along with them?

Rep. Yes sure, they especially, who have so little certainty whether the
allowance they gave before was true; whether the sense in their own hearts, on
which that allowance was grounded, was Divine, had need go further for a proof
that others are wrong, than their own apprehension that the same Evidence comes
not along with them. For how know they, but the same Evidence may come along
with them, whom they judge wrong, though it cannot get entrance into their
hearts, which are prepossessed with ill will, prejudice and Envy? Was it not so
with some of old, who received, owned, embraced and allowed the Apostle Paul as
right, and yet afterward turned against him as wrong? Where was the fault? Did
not the same Evidence come along with the Apostle, and attend his Ministry, as
before? Or was there no room in their prejudiced mind for the Evidence to
enter? Should not they have gone further then, for a proof that he was wrong,
than their sense that the same Evidence came not along with him?

But they say, Can any indifferent man think that all this Smoke can be without
Fire? What, one part all right, and the other all wrong; let them think so that
can, we cannot.

Rep. No, no: All this Smoke is not without Fire; and that they know full well:
for they kindled the Fire. But much of this Smoke is the Smoke of their
Torment, who have no rest day nor night; but are fretting and fuming, making a
Pother and Smother, and sending forth one Pamphlet after another, stuffed with
Falsehoods and Reproaches, to keep the Fire burning, and the Smoke ascending,
that if possibly they may darken the sight of some or other, and by that means
draw them to their party. Their uneasiness is apparent. Their Separation has
not answered their Expectation. They thought to have drove all before them, and
with one sweep of their Leader's Tail, to have drawn, at least, the third part
of the Stars from Heaven. But the Lord has disappointed them, blessed be his
holy Name. So that though here and there a wandering Star has fallen in with
them; yet the Stars of the Morning sing together, and the Sons of God shout for
joy, feeling their Establishment in the heavenly Power, and their Root in him
that lives for ever. From this disappointment of the Adversaries Expectations,
and the unsuccesfulness of their Separation to the end they proposed, I take it
to be, that they still hover at the Meetings of Friends, to tinck off (if they
can) unsensible and unwary Ones, and gain some addition to their separate Party.

When they say, We cannot think one part all right, and the other all wrong, they
seem to acknowledge that themselves are not right. But if they are really
sensible that they are not right, why do they not own wherein they are wrong,
and condemn themselves therein, that (Repenting) they may come to be right? If
they cannot think the other Part all wrong; why did they so revile and reproach
them, and that publicly in Print, as Apostates, Innovators, Idolaters, setters
up of Idols and Images, Introducers of Popery, and the like? And why did they
divide and separate from them.

Their 38th page gives a Quotation, picked out of the 11th and 12th pages of the
Book they pretend to Answer, and serves them to Cavil at to the end of their
Pamphlet, which is half a dozen Leaves, or more. But because their Answer
thereto is not so much Argumentative as a Declamatory Harangue, and the matter
thereof, for the most part, a Repetition of what they have said, and I replied
to, before; interlarded thick with the old Terms [ Imposition, Circumstantial,
Ceremonial, Shadowy, bringing in New things, forcing new things, etc.] I shall
not think my self obliged to imitate their Prolixity, by following them step by
step, over each particular again; but touching on some Passages in the way,
draw this Discourse toward a Conclusion.

First, As to the Quotaion they give, they give it not fairly: for connecting
many Particulars together, they take liberty to leave out what they please.
They begin it thus; He says, The Enemy is at work to scatter the minds of
Friends, by those loose Pleas, as leave me to my Freedom, and to the Grace of
God in my self, etc.

Rep. Here they leave out the first part of that Plea, which the Author there
impleads, and which proves the loose mind of them that so make it. For the
Author's words lie, thus, The Enemy is at work to scatter the minds of Friends,
by that loose Plea, What have thou to do with me? Leave me, etc. This shows
that that End of making this Plea, which the Author there taxes as loose, was
to unbody, to disjoynt, dismember, dissociate, disunite Friends, so as that one
should have nothing to do with another, even in those things wherein the
Testimony of Truth, common to all that profess Truth lies, as will appear by
the following Lines. They go on with their Quotation thus, The plain
Consequence is to go from autient Principles and Practices, as there set down.
This they say, He says, and they set this down in manner and Character with
the rest of the Quotation, just as if he had said it indeed; whereas his own
words are thus, -- This Proposition and Expression (namely, What have thou to
do with me, etc.) as now understood and alleged, is a Deviation from, and a
Perversion of the ancient Principle of Truth; for this is the plain consequence
of this Plea, if any one (especially if they are but lately convinced) shall
say, I see no Evil in paying Tithes to the Hireling-Priest, etc. I see no Evil
in Marrying by the Priest, etc. I see no Evil in declining a public Testimony
in suffering Times, or hiding in times of Persecution, etc. I see no Evil in
worshipping and respecting the persons of Men, etc. I see no Evil in keeping my
Shop shut upon the World's Holy Days and Mass-days, as they call them, etc. All
this (and more) they omitted. When as these are instances of the looseness of
the Plea; and which the Adver, saries knew to be too true to be denied, and
therefore chose rather to conceal, than revive by bringing them forth. Nay, the
Author there showed the Consequence of this Plea extended further, that he who
should plead it in the Cases before instanced, might go on to say to Friends,
Since your Testimony is against Imposition, and for leaving every one to the
measure of the Grace which God has given him, not only, no Man has power to
reprove or judge me, but I may be as good a Friend as any of you, according to
my measure. This also they left out. And then, having pieced up the rest of the
Quotation as they pleased, they give no direct Answer to it. They neither grant
that the things there instanced are Evil, as paying Ththes, Marrying by the
Priest, hiding in times of Persecution, etc. (Lest perhaps they should stumble
those of their Party who expect that Liberty.) Nor do they deny that those, and
such like, things have been, or may be, defended, by some under that Plea, What
have thou to do with me? Leave me to my Freedom, etc. But instead of this, they
begin their long Answer thus, The ground of this great Noise and Clamor, was
not agoing from ancient Principles or Practices, but your bringing in new
things, etc.

Rep. They say not right. The ground of this great Noise and Clamor was, their
going from the ancient Fundamental Principle of all true Principles and
Practices, the Light. They went from the Light of Christ in themselves, and so
became Darkened: Then complained they wanted sight, they could not see the
Service proposed in the things recommended. But as little sight as they had,
they could see to oppose and obstruct their Brethren, and not suffer them
quietly to proceed in that, which they saw and were satisfied was their Duty.
They could see to wrangle, jangle, cavil, contend and disturb their Brethren
with ungodly Speeches, and very unruly and turbulent Behavior, whereby they
raised a great Noise and Clamor.

They say, they ought to be left to the Grace of God in this matter.

Rep. To the Grace of God they were left in this, and every matter. But their
ungodly Speeches, and unchristian Carriage, showed, though they were left to
the Grace of God, they were not led by it.

They say in page 39. If nothing that is simply Evil or immoral can be charged
upon your Brethren, will you to make way for Lordship and Dominion over your
Brethren, join with the Profane and Professors against them and Truth.

Rep. No: But the Adversaries, by their own practice, confirming the charge of
Professors and Profane against the Light, have thereby joined with both against
Friends and Truth. And their saying here, If nothing that is simply Evil or
Immorral can be charged upon your Brethren, etc. Shows how easy and willing
they are to admit this Plea [of being left to their Freedom, etc.] For a
defense or Cover for those, or the like Evils before instanced, as paying the
Priest Tithes, Marrying by a Priest, etc. Which though not such things as in
the Eye of the World are accounted simply Evil or Immoral, are in the Eye of
Truth certainly Evil, and inconsistent with our principle.

Again, they say, If you deny that you impose, why are not you quiet?

Rep. Friends are quiet. But the Adversaries are not, will not be quiet; but in
a restless, tossed, turbulent mind and Spirit, are continually devising
deceitful matters against them that are quiet in the Land. They could not be
quiet till they were separated; they will not be quiet now they are separated:
but ever and anon some or other of them come to Friends Meetings, to disquiet
Friends there. And not satisfied with that neither, they scatter abroad their
dirty Books, stuffed with evil Surmises, sly Insinuations, envious Reflections,
and foul Falsehoods; like those of Old, whom the Prophet compared to the
troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose Waters cast up Mire and Dirt, Isa.
27.20. to whom there is no peace, ver. 21. Therefore it is no wonder they are
not quiet, but as raging Waves of the Sea, are ever and anon foaming out their
own shame, like those whom Jude complained of, verse. 13. Nay, so averse are
they to Quietness, that rather than want pretense for Strife, they have picked
up a Book that was written some Nine or Ten years ago, to make an occasion for
a new Qarrel, or to revive the Old.

They say, page 4, You must bring those things in, about which the Difference
is, either as Terms of Communion, or not. (It seems, as often as they have
charged us with bringing those things in as Terms of Communion, they do not yet
know whether we have done so, or not.) If, say they, you did not bring them in
as Terms of Communion, then why do you criminate your Brethren as evil Doers,
whilst you have nothing against them, but refusing Compliance with your
Opinions.

Rep. Not to enumerate all we have against them, (who, in a subdolous way,
still call themselves our Brethren, though they are gone from the true
Brotherhood, that under that Name they might do us the greater mischief,) we
have more against them, than their refusing Compliance with what they
scornfully call our Opinions; namely, the Troubles and Disturbances they have
raised in the Church, by their unruly, violent and turbulent Oppositions; the
Dissension and Divisions they have caused thereby; the Rent and Breach they
have made; the open War they have begun, and carried on; the Separation they
have run into; the wicked, envious Books they have Printed, to expose them they
hipocritically call their Brethren, and, together with them; the Truth they
profess, to the Scorn Contempt and Rage of the wicked; in all which they are
Evildoers. And so they also are in suggesting, that Friends brought in those
things, about which (they say) the Difference is, as Terms of Communion. For
that is false. We brought not in any things as Terms of Communion. The holy
God, who is the Author of our Communion with himself, and with one another,
has appointed and fixed the Terms of this Communion, viz. Walking in the
Light, as he is in the Light, 1 John 1.7. But I would gladly see what the
Adversaries will assign for the Terms of their Communion: for where I have had
any opportunity of observing them, or understanding their ways, I could never
yet find or learn, that they excluded any from Communion with them, who would
go to their separate Meetings, and rail against Friends. Sure I am, whoever
shall observe, with an indifferent Eye, what they lick up, and whom they give
the hand of Fellowship to, will find no cause to suppose the Terms of their
Communion to be, walking in the Light.

They say, We are sure it is more according to Truth, for you to omit the doing
of what you may believe is good in this Sense, than for others to receive what
they believe is wrong. And this they speak, in order (as they pretend) to
discontinue the Difference.

Rep. They state not the Case fairly on either hand: for what they would have
us omit, they call only what we may believe is good; whereas they are not
ignorant, that we have declared we believe those things to be, not only good,
but required by God of us as our Duty. On the other hand, when they speak of
others not receiving them, they call it what they believe is wrong; whereas
they have not adventured to charge those things with being positively wrong,
but have alleged, they did not see the Service of them; or, as some of their
Party have elsewhere stated it, they had great cause to be jealous, several
things proposed were not from Heaven, but of Man: for in their Birth into the
Church, they seemed not to bear the heavenly Image. There is some ods, surely,
between Belief and Iealousy, between Believing a thing to be wrong, and having
a jealousy that it was not from Heaven; but of Man; especially when that
Jealousy has no greater ground than a seeming not to bear the havenly Image.
Thus they craftily extenuate on the one hand, and aggravate on the other. But
when each comes to be rightly stated, and set on its true bottom, it will
appear to be no more according to Truth, for Friends to omit, the doing of that
which they believe to be (not only good, but) their required Duty, than for the
Adversaries to receive what they did not see the Service of, but were jealous
was of Man, because it seemed not to bear the heavenly Image. However, sure I
am, it had been more according to Truth, for the Adversaries to have been
Quiet, and not run headily against what; through want of sight and true Sense,
they were jealous of; than either for them to have made the Opposition,
Disturbance, Division and Separation they have made. Or for Friends to have
omitted the doing that good, which they believed the Lord required of them, and
felt him by his Spirit leading them into, and by his good presence owning them
in. And indeed, a readier way could hardly be proposed, for obstructing all
Duty in any Society, than to enjoin those, who believe it to be their Duty, to
omit the doing of it, because others are jealous of it. However, their here
proposing that Friends should omit the doing of what they believe is good, etc.
as a way or means to discontinue the Difference, shows that (notwithstanding
their loud Clamours, and reiterated Outcries against Friends for Imposition,
Imposition, Imposition:) it was not Friends imposing upon them, that gave the
occasion of the Difference: but it was Friends refusing to be imposed upon by
them, to omit the doing of their believed Duty, and to be driven, by their
impetuous Opposition, out of the practice of those things, which they believed
were required of them. It was not enough to the Adversaries, not to be imposed
on themselves: but they must have us omit the doing of what we believed to be
good, and our Duty to do. Was not this Imposition on their parts, who so often
cry out of being imposed upon!

What they say in their 41 page, with Allusion to the building of Babel of Old,
and Confusion of Tongues that ensued thereupon, needs no more, in this place,
than their own Application there of to themselves: for they deliver it in the
first Person Plural [WE.] Was not We of one Language (say they) whilst We truly
traveled, etc. But when We found Shinar a Plain, and took up Our dwelling
there in the likeness of Truth, then did not We, as others before Us, begin to
build, etc. Now this they appropriate to themselves by the Advertisement they
have given at the end of their Preface to the Reader, where, after they have
said, Where the Term You is found in the following Discourse, we intend the
Author and those of his mind; they add, And as the Term We is also used, it may
be understood in respect to those of the same mind with the Author of this
(that is their) Book. Let them take it therefore to themselves, to whom (if to
any) it of right belongs. For they have been long hunting for a Plain (a place
of more Room, Scope, and Liberty; finding Truth's way too strait and narrow for
them) and at length have found one, where they have taken up their Dwelling, in
but the likeness of Truth, if in that. They have built up a Separation, which
they designed for a lofty Tower, to preserve them from what they were in no
danger of, In position from those they call their Brethren. How they have sped
in their undertaking, may in some measure be gathered by this, that some of
their Fellow-Builders in that work, have since submitted to the Ministry of the
Parish Priests (to go no further.) So that, as those Babel Builders of old met
with that they shunned, viz. to be scattered abroad, etc. Genesis 11.4, 8. So
these, to avoid an imagined Danger, of Imposition from their Brethren, have
betook themselves to the Parish Priests, where Imposition is avowed. How far
they are divided in Language, while some are mumbling their Mattins in the old
Mass-Houses, I leave themselves to consider. But that they do agree, and are
one in Spirit (as well such of them as are already gone off to the Priest, as
such as are not yet,) to write against the Innocent, to Reproach, Revile, Rail
at, Slander, and wickedly belly Friends, a late scurrilous Book of Francis
Bugg's, and another of John Pennyman's, compared with others written by other
of the Adversaries, plainly show. Which Books came out so near in time with
that I am now Replying to, as if there had been an Intelligence held, and
Correspondence carried on, between the respective Authors.

They say, page 41, For you to call such Pleas as those, Leave me to the Grace
of God, and to the Spirit of Truth, loose Pleas, etc. We look upon it as of
dangerous Consequence; what though some may abuse them, will you take them
away, and with them freedom of Speech?

Rep. We do not call those Pleas loo^e, with respect to the Pleas themselves
(which we acknowledge are sound and good:) but with respect to the Spirit by
which, and the end to which, those Pleas have been pleaded by the Adversaries;
which was by a loose Spirit, in order to let up Looseness without control.
Therefore we take not away the Pleas; but the abuse of them. Nor do we take
away freedom of Speech, but in Truth's Authority reprove that exorbitant
Liberty of Railing at, Reviling and Reproaching Friends, and exposing Truth to
the Worlds contempt and scorn, under pretense of freedom of Speech.

In page 42, they ask, Why may not you be cautioned to beware of Formality?

Rep. We are often cautioned so; as they that frequent our Meetings know. And
when that Caution is given in the love of God, it is in the same love received.
But when, under pretense of Cautioning against Formality, some (not
distinguishing between Formality and Form) endeavor to overturn, subvert and
take away all Form and Order from the Church of Christ, we cannot receive, but
reject, such Cautions and Cautioners, as knowing that they come not from, nor
serve. the God of Order; but that Spirit which would bring all into disorder
and Confusion.

In page 43, they say, Pray let us know why Truth's Testimonies may not be
allowed and pass current, where the Life and Conversation is suitable.

Rep. Truths Testimonies are allowed, and do pass current among Truth's
Followers. But the Adversaries should have explained what they mean by Truth's
Testimonies. For those Doctrinal Principles, delivered of old by Truth himself,
and afterward by his inspired Followers, and Recorded in the Scriptures of
Truth, are Truth's Testimonies, especially as they are taken up and used by the
same Spirit that gave them forth. And the Testimonies that proceed from the
Spirit of Truth, speaking through any of his Servants in our Meetings, or
elsewhere, at this day, are the Testimonies of Truth also. And all these are
allowed, and pass current amongst Friends. But if the Adversaries mean, by
Truth's Testimonies, their own Testimonies, those Testimonies that they bring,
and thrust upon Friends in our Meetings, and ask why those Testimonies may not
be allowed and pass current; the Answer is, because those Testimonies are not
Truth's Testimonies, (how like soever they may seem to be,) neither come they
in Truth's way. They proceed not from the Spirit of Truth, but from that Spirit
that Fights against Truth; a Spirit of Dissension, Division, Disunion and
Separation from Friends in Truth.

In page 45. they say, Might not a little Charity help all this, could you look
upon such as trouble you to be Conscientious. Again, Certainly you cannot think
that all is wrong that are dissatisfied, etc. We would persuade you better, by
assuring, that some are right by being sincere.

Rep. They who have known these Troubles thoroughly, and have seen and observed
their manner of Troubling, and in what Spirit they have done it, had need have
more than a little Charity, to make them look on such to be Conscientious. Was
their publishing Friends in Print to be Apostates, Innovators, Setters up of
Images, Introducers of Popery, Idolaters, etc. An Argument that they were
Conscientious? Was their exposing Truth and Friends, by their printed
Pamphlets, to the Scorn, Contempt and Derision of the Wicked, and rendering them
(as much as in them lay) obnoxious to the Government, a token of their being
Conscientious? Was their shutting Friends out of their Meting-Houses, wherein
they had a rightful Interest and Propriety, exposing ancient and tender Bodies,
and some their nearest Relations, to all Extremities of Weather, and that for
diverse years together (as at Reding, and elsewhere) an Effect of their being
Conscientious? O barbaroas Consciences! O conscientious Barbarism! where shall
a Parallel to this be found, unless in that which Christ foretold his
Disciples, John 16.2. They shall put you out of the Synagogues: yea, the time
comes, that whosoever kills you will think that he does God Service. How far
these conscientious Troublers have answered this Prophecy, let themselves and
others consider. Nay, have they not been worse than those forespoken of by
Christ? For they were open Enemies; these feigned Friends and false Brethren.
Now whereas they say, Certainly you can not think that all is wrong that are
dissatisfied with those new things brought in, at least, as made Terms of
Communion.

I Reply, We do not think all that are so dissatisfied equally wrong: for we
are sensible those Troublers have, by slanderous Suggestions and false
Insinuations, beguiled and betrayed some; whose Recovery out of the Snare, in
which those Troublers have taken them, we earnestly desire and travel for. But
though we do not think all alike wrong; yet we do think and know that all who
think new things are brought in and made Terms of Cummunion with Friends, are
wrong in thinking so, whatever they are otherwise.

And whereas they say, They would persuade us better, by assuring that some are
right by being sincere.

I Reply; If they are, they must not be any of those Troublers, who
notwithstanding they have separate Meetings of their own, to which they have
withdrawn, and chosen to meet apart (as some of themselves have elsewhere
expressed it) do yet frequently thrust in at some of our Meetings, and impose
themselves upon Friends for Preachers, as if they did it on purpose to disturb,
and to make trouble in our Meetings. Can any thing be more contrary to
Sincerity than this! Is not this an extreme degree of Hypocrisy! Let the
Troublers therefore give over their Hypocrisy, and make it appear that they
themselves are sincere to what they themselves have chosen, and set up, before
they take upon them to give assurance of the sincerity of others.

They bid us Remember, They obtrude nothing upon you.

Rep. That Is false. Those Troublers obtrude themselves, their Preaching, and
their Praying, upon Friends (which they know, (having been often told) Friends
cannot receive:) than which, what worse they could obtrude, I know not. And
where they have had strength by numbers, they have obtruded these upon Friends,
under the Penalty of being deprived of their Meeting House, if they would not
conform to this Imposition. And because Friends could not conform thereunto,
those Troublers have actually shut Friends out of their Meeting Houses, and do
yet continue to keep them out; thereby depriving Friends of their just Right.
Therefore when any of those Troublers shall again come to obtrude themselves
upon Friends in our Meetings, Let them Remember this.

Again, they say, The Lord often spared those that are wrong, for the sakes of
those that are right.

Rep. We know he has done so, and we desire he may do so still: but we leave
that to him; who best knows to whom, and how long, to extend that forbearance.
But let not the Adversaries abuse God's merciful forbearance, by continuing in
the wrong, after that the Lord has made them sensible that they are wrong.

They add, And it is our Doctrine, Tares should be suffered to grow, rather than
destroy Wheat.

Rep. And it is Christ's Doctrine, and his own Exposition of his Parable of the
Tares, that the Field, in which they should be suffered to grow, is the World,
Mat. 13.38. This is a good Argument against Persecution, or outward Violence,
for Religion's sake. Men ought not to be killed, destroyed, plucked up, and
rooted out of the World, only because they are Tares, or a wrong Seed of the
Enemies sowing. But I wish the Adversaries would speak plainly, whether it be
their Doctrine that such Tares, called by Christ, The Children of the wicked
One, should be suffered to grow in the Church, the Garden of God, after they
are discovered, discerned, plainly perceived, and certainly known (as the Tares
in the Parable at the first sight were) to be Tares. Ah, how would this loose
Spirit, that is got up in some, turn Spiritual Zion, the enclosed Garden of
God, into a Plowed-Field! However, it is to be hoped, Their applying the
Parable of Tares to themselves, may help to make some others understand them
better, than hither to they have done. And their pleading for a Toleration for
Tares to grow in the Church (for of the Church, and its Members, they here
treat; not of the World:) may give some a further sight of their Design for
sheltring Evil, and what they aim at in this Plea, than ever they had before.

After they have showed the utmost of Immoderation in managing the Difference
on their own part, they now at length begin to preach Moderation to Others.

If, say they, this Difference cannot be ended, -- manage it with more
Moderation (they might have added, than themselves have done) and in that love
of God, that it may be showed the Lord is at hand, to gather different
apprehensions into a better Temper. (They might have added, than Themselves
have hitherto been in.)

Rep. But why did they not think of this Moderation, before they published
their many scandalous and malicious Books, to the defaming of Truth and Friends
to the world, as much as in them lay? Why did they not preach this Moderation
to their own Party at Reding, and other Places, to have gathered them into a
better temper (for a worse they could hardly have been in) than to keep Friends
out of their Meeting Houses, wherein they had a just and legal Property, and
expose them, for diverse Years together, to those hardships that Heat and Cold,
Rain and Storms of Weather bring? They, who have done the greatest mischief by
their Immoderation that they can, begin now to recommend Moderation to others.
And they, who have done their utmost to dishonor the God of Truth and Peace,
before the People, by publishing their wicked Books, and setting up their
separate Meetings, do now take upon them to exhort Others to Moderation;
Otherwise, say they, you will dishonor the God of Truth and Peace, before the
People. Is not this Hyprocrisie in grain.

They add, page 46. You must agree together quietly, or part friendly, or you
are no Preachers of Righteousness, whatever your Principles of Truth may be.

Rep. To what end do they propose this now, so long after they have actually
parted from us! They have had their separate Meetings these many years. And
more than a year ago, some of them gave us to understand in Print, that they
had chosen to meet apart, and had withdrawn. But since they did neither agree
quietly with us while together, nor did part Friendly when they withdrew, does
it not follow upon them, according to their own words, that They are no
Preachers of Righteousness, whatever Principles of Truth they may hold? They
urge the Example of Abraham and Lot, for parting by agreement. But they do not
take notice, that that was only a parting of outward Habitations, and that
through Necessity, because the place was not large enough to hold them. So that
this was not a Religious parting, muchless a parting through Opposition of
their Spirits. Yet this was in the Uncircumcised state too: for Circumcision
was not instituted till after this. But they would do well to consider, that
Lot, who took his Choice, and parted from Abraham the Friend of God, came to
great Loss, and suffered deeply thereby. For though, at first remove, he
pitched his Tent but toward Sodom, Genesis 13.12. yet quickly after we find him
settled in Sodom, chap. 14.12. And he had not long been there, before he was
made a Captive, and was glad to be rescued by him he had parted from. O that
all, that are in danger of being beguiled, betrayed and led away by this
Dividing Spirit and its Agents, would consider these things in a Spiritual
Application, and beware of Separating from God's Friends; lest, by the
pleasantness of the Plains (where liberty, freedom, room and scope may be had,
to walk at will) they be allured to pitch their Tents toward mystical Sodom,
and by degrees drawn into it!

It follows in their Book, But why cannot you agree together, whilst you own
one and the same righteous Principle?

Rep. By this it seems as if owning a Principle, were Terms of their Communion.
To own the Principle of Truth, is one thing: to hold it, keep to it and obey
it, is another. Many do the one, that do not the other. Many own the Principle
of Truth in words, that never came into Obedience to it: and some that have
departed from obedience to the Principle, have yet retained a verbal
Acknowledgement of it. And of them that have made Profession of the Truth, and
afterward turned their Backs upon it, how few are there that do not own the
Principle! They find fault with something or other in the Society, to make
themselves an Outlet, that they may thereby slip out, and shake off the Yoke
of Christ, which is as uneasy to the Wrong, as easy to the Right. But they
commonly cry up the Principle still. Do not Pennyman, Crisp and Bugg own in
words the same righteous Principle still? Let me turn the Question then upon
the Adversaries, and ask them, Why cannot you and those men agree together,
whilst you and they own one and the same righteous Principle? Nay, why cannot
you and they agree in other things, as well as in contending against Truth, and
writing Books against Friends?

They add, You came out together, have you not done the greater, and cannot you
do the less? That Is strange.

Rep. That Is not so strange, as they would make it. Israel of old came out of
Egypt together (and with them a mixed multitude, Exodus 12.38. or, as in the
Margin, a great Mixture.) But all they that came out together, did not agree to
travel on together. No, some grumbled and murmured at the Hardships in the way.
Some emulated and repined at the superior Gifts and Graces of their Brethren.
Some let in, and cherished Evil Surmises, and false Iealousies concerning their
Brethren, as if some of their Brethren took too much upon them, and lifted
themselves up above the Congregation, and sought a Principality or Lordly
Dominion over the rest, Numb. 16. Thus wrought the subtle Enemy after diverse
manners, to divide, scatter and turn aside, some after one manner, some after
another. Some were swallowed up of the Earth, and perished in their
Gainsaying. Some were for making themselves a Captain, (in opposition to the
Captain God had made,) and for returning again into Egypt, the Land of Darkness
out of which they came up together. Others were consumed by the Fire of the
Lord, which in hot Indignation brake forth against them. And all the Murmurers
fell in the Wilderness. Now all these things (as the Apostle says) happened unto
them for Examples: and they are written for our Admonition, 1 Cor. 10.11.
Therefore Murmur not ye, as some of them also Murmured, and were destroyed of
the Destroyer, ver. 10.

That which remains of the Adversaries Book is mostly a Recapitulation, or
contracted Repetition of their foregoing Reasonings, grounded upon a false
Hypothesis or Supposition, that Friends would impose new things, as matters of
Faith and terms of Communion; and would bring in blind Obedience, by pressing
Conformity before Conviction, and the like: which, I hope, the Reader will
find, to his Satisfaction, refuted before. That therefore I may not swell this
Book with unnecessary Repetitions, I will only recommend to the Reader's
Observation, what, after all their Outcry against bringing in new things (as
they call them) the Adversaries themselves grant, in page 48. in these words;
Any Particular, or any Assembly of the Community, may offer what is new, if
they sincerely believe it good and Serviceable, without breach of Unity, or at
least of Communion; but (say they) we cannot find to the bringing of new things
in, as matters of Faith, or terms of Communion, that any Assembly have any more
power than a particular Person.

Rep, What Power an Assembly may have more than a particular Person, I list not
here to dispute, because I would not (like them) pick occasion of Debate and
Quarrelling. But since Friends have not offered any of the things, the
Adversaries except against under the Notion of new things, as matters of Faith
to others, or as terms of Communion; but have only offered such things as they
sincerely believe are good and Serviceable: let it suffice, that Friends have
herein done no more, than the Adversaries here grant may be done, by any
Particular, or any Assembly of the Community, without breach of Unity or
Communion. The Breach therefore of Unity and Communion that now is betwixt them
and Friends, must lie, and does, at the Adversaries Door, who (by the heady,
willful, violent and turbulent Opposition they made, to obstruct and hinder
Friends from proceeding on, in the use and practice of those things, which the
Friends sincerely believed, and do yet believe, to be good and Serviceable)
have run themselves into open War, and that in Print, against Friends, and into
open Division and Separation from Friends. So that it is They have broken
themselves off from the Unity, Communion and Society of Friends, both inwardly
in Spirit, and outwardly also in Religious Exercises. The Lord (if it be his
good pleasure) give them yet a clear sight, and true sense of the great Evil,
and Mischief they have done against God, his Truth and People; that in the
sense thereof they may be truly humbled, and bowed down before him, and brought
to such an honest and sensible Acknowledgment thereof, as may evidence their
sincere Repentance, that, through Judgment, they may find Mercy, and obtain
Remission from him.

THE END.
Of the Mistakes committed in Printing, the most material that have been yet
observed, are here noted to be Corrected. Others of less moment, as
mis-spellings, mis-placing of Letters, or Stops, the Reader is desired to amend
in reading.

PAge 10. line 21. read is in. page 20. line 8. r. reprove. l. 13. for immoral,
r. Evil p. 22. l. 33. for not yet, r. nor yet. p. 23. l. 25. after
dispensation, make Comm^. p. 40. l. 13. f. present, r. recent. p. 44. l. 1. r.
John 6.56. p. 50. l. 27. r. Peter. p. 52. l. 9. f. of Evil, r. for Evil. p. 63.
l. 12. f. prevent, r. pervert.


