VINDICIAE QUORUNDAM Roberti Barclaii Noematum, Contra aliquas ARGUMENTATIONES
In eo Libro, cui Titulus est ANTIBARCLAIUS: UBI Reperitur Elucidatio Veritatis,
de Immediata and Interna Revelatione, de Scripturis, de Universali Redemptione.

EDM. ELISIO, Eccl. Ang. Praesb.

Magna est Veritas, and praevalebat. THe ph esti, kai Skota n ut ok stin
Oudema. A Vindication of some Sentiments of ROBERT BARCLAY, Against the
Arguments of a Book, Entitled ANTIBARCLAIUS: Wherein the Truth of Immediate
and Inward Revelation, of the Scriptures, of Universal Redemption, is further
Explained.

By EDM. ELYS, a Minister of the Church of England.

Great is the Truth, and it will prevail. God is Light, and there is no
Darkness in him. Printed for T. N. in George-Yard in Lombard Street. 1693.

The TRANSLATOR to the READER.
Reader,
THIS short Latin Treatise being sent to a Relation of mine in Manuscript, and
the Author being a Grave Ecclesiastic of the Church of England; I was willing
to Translate it, and make it public, that the Members of that Church may see
the most considerable Principles of the People called Quakers acknowledged and
defended by a Learned and Religious Minister of their own. I will not answer
for the Elegancy, but may for the Truth of the Translation. Which is, I hope,
enough to excuse, with the Candid, the first undertaking, of this sort, of,

READER, Thy well wisher S. P.

Spectabili Viro, Joanni Norrisio Edmundus Elisius. S.
TV mihi videris, Erudite vir, aliquatenus Errare in Opinione Tua de isto
hominum genere, qui vulgo QUAKERI vocantur. Ego quidem Incoctum generoso pectus
Honesto in Plurimis eorum videre mihi videor.

Per LVMEN INTERNVM Praecipue Intelligunt SPIRITVM Veritatis Propter Merita
PASSIONIS, and per Efficaciam INTERCESSIONIS Domini nostri JESV CHRISTI se
Omnibus Offerentem adeo ut Anima, Veritatis Sanctificantis Avida nunquam non
possit Eandem adipisci.

Si Mecum non Contentias in Defensione R. BARCLAII in hisce Chartis Tibi
exorbita, Scripta aliqua a Te Oppositio Mihi erit gratissima.

Vale
To the Worthy, John Norris.
IT seems to me, Learned Friend, that thou somewhat mistakest in thy Opinion
concerning the People, vulgarly called Quakers. Methinks I see a right honest
Mind in many of them.

By the Light within they chiefly understand the Spirit of Truth, as the fruit
of the merits of the passion and efficacy of the Intercession of our Lord Jesus
Christ, for the good of all; that the Soul which thirsts after the Sanctifying
Truth might be filled with it.

If what I here present thee, in these following Sheets, in defense of R.
Barclay, is not agreeable with thy Sentiments, it would obblige me much to see
thy Objections.

Farewell Edmund Elys.

Candido Lectori.
SCias velim, Amice Lector, Annotationum istarum Authorem istiusmodi hominem
esse, qui Doctrinam Coelestem avide Amplectitur, Vbicunque illa occurrit, a
quocunque Hominum quorunque modo Explicata. Huic liquido constat neminem unquam
percepisse Veritatem Evangelicam, nisi per Verum Charitatis Exercitium Notionum
Illi omnium Fons, and Origo est Noema illud, THESE GP ST.

To the Candid Reader.
I Would have Thee know (friendly Reader) that the Author of these Annotations,
is a Man who most heartily embraces the Heavenly Doctrine wheresoever he meets
it, and by what sort of Men or Manner soever it be explained. He also sees
plainly, that no Man has ever obtained the Evangelical Truth, without the true
practice of Charity. And this Principle God is Love, is the Spring of all his
Religion.

De Immediata and interna Revelatione.
ANTIBARCLAIUS P. 33. Apologetes in genere quidem scripsit, Patres una voce,
adjudicasse nullam Dei cognitionem certam, and veram esse, nisi quae intus
reveletur Spiritu ejus: Revelatione nimirum, inquit Author ANTIBARCLAII,
Immediata and Peculiari, sive cuivis Propria.

Resp. Imo, Vir Doctissime, cuivis Propria: sed non aliter, quam unicuique
Propria est ad unumquemque pertingens Affulgentia, seu Lux ab unoquoque
Participata SOLIS Splendentis Lucis nimirum, Omnibus Creaturis, quae Videndi
Facultate praeditae sunt, Communis, sed ab Unaquaque actu Participatae secundum
Peculiarem Cujusque Actualem ipsius Videndae Capacitatem.

P. 46. -- Nulla plane facta mentione ullius Immediatae Revelationis, quam
omittere nullatenus debuit, si tanta ejus fuisset necessitas, quantam
Apologetes hodie, cum suis sectatoribus urget, atque praetendit.

Resp. Non urget, atque praetendit necessitatem Immediatae Revelationis
alicujus Rei, nisi quae jam Revelata est in S. Scripturis. Sed necessariam esse
asserit Immediatam Revelationem, seu actualem Spiritus Sancti Operationem in
Animis nostris, ut Rite Percipiamus veritatem Sanctificantem in ipsis
Scripturis Revelatam.

P. 87. Studet Lectori persuadere has Revelationes Immediatas, and Internas
fuisse olim Formale Objectum Fidei Sanctorum.

Resp. Aequissimum est hoc ejus studium: Per Formale objectum intelligit
Idipsum, quod per FIDEM Intellectu Perceptum Percipientes Sanctos reddit, nempe
DEO in Animis eorum immediate Operanti similes.

P. 124. Ad quid inquit Anti-Barclaista, Perpetuitas Promissi Spiritus ad
Novitatem Revelationum?

Resp. Ad Mentes nostras jugiter Renovandas per Spiritum Sanctum jugiter opus
est nobis Novis Revelationibus, seu Operationibus Spiritus Sancti Mentibus
nostris Revelantis Veritatem Sanctificantem, cujusmodi Revelatio semper fit
secundum S. Scripturas: Saepissime tamen sine ulla Vocum Scriptarum in memoriam
revocatione.

P. 156. Quando, Ps. 34. 9. cunctos Fideles hortatur ut Gustent, and Videant
quam bonus, and suavis sit Dominus, nescio quid Apologetes habuerit in animo,
ut hisce verbis abuseretur, cum in Psalmo hoc Regius Vates ne minimam fecerit
mentionem suarum a Deo Revelationum, sed aliorum potius Beneficiorum, quorum
tempore Exilii a facie Regis Saul particeps factus est, in Deo scilicet
confidens; unde and eos praedicat beatos, qui in quavis afflictione in eo
fiduciam ponere didicerunt.

Resp. Haec verba Gustare, and Videre manifest ac indubie Significant
Sensationem, seu actualem Notitiam sensitivam, vel Intellectivam Rei
Praesentis, id est, Corporis, vel Animi sensibus se Immediate ingerentis, non
Traditae tantum per alios, qui eam Gustarunt, vel Viderunt. Istiusmodi
Sensatio, seu Immediata Perceptio Suavitatis Divinae fieri nequit, nisi per
Immediatam Spiritus Sancti in animis nostris Operationem Sanctificantem,
cujusmodi omnes Spiritus Sancti, Lucis nimirum Immensae Operationes recte
vocantur Immediatae Revelationes, nempe istiusmodi Illuminationes, quibus istae
fugantur Tenebrae, quae nos impedierunt, quo minus res ipsas Divinas a Spiritu
Sancto nobis (in Legendis, vel Audiendis Scripturis, vel sine ulla Vocum
Scriptarum Recordatione) Propositas Immediate Perspicere possimus.

P. 158. Id forte aliquam videtur habere difficultatem, quod Apologetes etiam
in primis hic and alibi urget: quando 1 Joannes Cap. 5. v. 6. scripsit post
alia, Spiritus est, qui Testatur, quod Spiritus Veritas est. Verum, si hic
etiam, inquit Vir Eruditus, Apostoli mentem ex integro Textu rite attendamus,
nihil aliud Eum auditoribus voluisse ad animum vocare observabimus, quam quod
Spiritus Sanctus, etc.

Resp. Nihil aliud! Certe voluit hoc ipsum ad animum vocare, quod Robertus
Barclaius Probare velit nempe opus esse nobis Immediata Revelatione, seu
Testimonio Spiritus Sancti in Cordibus nostris, ut firmiter, ac Practice
assentiamur Veritati Evangelicae; quia Spiritus est Omnis Veritatis Principium,
adeo ut nulla esse possit vera, and viva veritatis Coelestis Notitia, nisi quae
derivetur ab ipso Spiritu Sancto in Cordibus nostris Operante. Quaecunque
Impiis hominibus, seu veram Sanctitatem aversantibus contingit Rerum Divinarum
Notitia, seu Cognitio, revera nihil aliud est, quam quod Apostolus appellat
Romans 2. 20. tn rphosin t Gnoseo, Formam, seu Imaginationem Cognitionis.

Of Immediate and inward Revelation.
ANTIBARCLAIUS. P. 33. The Apologist writes in general, That the Fathers have
concluded with one voice, That there was no true and certain knowledge of God,
but that which is revealed inwardly by his own spirit: By a revelation, as the
Author of ANTIBARCLAIUS says, immediate and particular or proper to any one.

Answer. Even so, most Learned Sir, proper to any one: But not otherwise than
as all partake of the light of the Sun. The Light is common to all Creatures,
who are endued with sight, but every one actually partakes of it according to
the actual capacity he has of seeing it.

P. 46. No mention having been made of any immediate Revelation, which he by no
means ought to have omitted, if it had been so necessary as the Apologist and
his followers urge and pretend.

Answer. He neither urges nor pretends the necessity of an immediate Revelation
of any other thing, but what is already revealed in the Holy Scriptures. But he
affirms that Immediate Revelation, or the actual Operations of the Holy Ghost
in our hearts, is necessary that we may rightly perceive the sanctifying truth,
declared by those Scriptures.

P. 87. He endeavors to persuade the Reader that the immediate and Inward
Revelations were, in old time, the formal object of the Saints Faith.

Answer. His endeavor is very just: By the formal object he means the same
thing, which, being conceived by the Understanding, by faith sanctifies those
who receive it, and makes them like to God, immediately working in their Hearts.

P. 124. But, says the Anti-Barclaist; how can the perpetuity of of the promise
of the spirit prove the use and necessity of fresh Revelations?

Answer. To renew our minds continually by the Holy Ghost, we have continual
need of new Revelations, or of the operations of the Hol Ghost, revealing the
sanctifying Truth to us; which Revelation always agrees with the Holy
Scriptures: Nevertheless often without any remembrance of what is written of it
in our memories.

P. 156. Psalm 34. 8. When he exhorts all the faithful to taste and see how good
the Lord is, I know not what the Apologist means, to apply these words so
improperly; when the Kingly Prophet, in the same Psalm, has not made the least
mention of any Revelations he received of God, but rather of other blessings,
during the time of his Exile from SAVL; which he trusting in God, was made
partaker of: Whence he pronounces those blessed, who, in all their afflictions,
have learned to put their confidence in him.

Answer. These words to taste and to see, manifestly and undoubtedly signify a
sensation, or an actual Sensitive or Intellective knowledge of a thing present;
viz. immediately influencing the Senses of the Body or Mind, and not only, by
the Testimony or hearsay of those that have tasted and seen it. Such a
sensation or immediate perception of the divine sweetness, cannot be effected
but by an immediate and sanctifying Operation of the Holy Ghost in our hearts.
All such Operations of the Holy Ghost are rightly called the Immediate
Revelations of the Infinite light; namely, those Illuminations, by which the
darkness of our Minds is dispersed, which has hindered us from seeing those
divine Truths offered to us by the Holy Ghost (either in reading or hearing the
Scriptures or without any remembrance of the things therein written) by an
immediate sight or sensation.

P. 158. Perhaps some difficulty may appear in what the Apologist here as well
as elsewhere chiefly urges: when John 1. 5, 6. after other things, writ, It is
the spirit which bears witness, because the spirit is Truth: but if here we
also rightly consider the Mind of the Apostle in the Context (says our Learned
Man) we shall conclude that he meant nothing else but to engage his hearers to
remember, but that the Holy Ghost, etc.

Answer. Nothing else! He would certainly have them call to mind that same
thing which Robert Barclay would prove, viz. That we have need of Immediate
Revelation, or of the Testimony of the Holy Ghost in our hearts, that we may
constantly embrace and practice the Evangelical Truth; because the Spirit is
the Fountain of all Truth; insomuch, that there can be no true and living
knowledge of the Heavenly Truth, but what is derived from that Holy Spirit
working in our hearts. All knowledge of divine things, that the ungodly or
despisers of true sanctity have, is nothing, in effect, but what the Apostle
calls tn rphosin t Gnseo, the Form, Image or Shadow of knowledge, Romans 2. 20.

De Scripturis.
P. 164. Haec verba R. Barclaii recitantur: Quoniam solummodo sunt declaratio
fontis, and non ipse fons, ideo non existimandae sunt principalis origo omnis
veritatis, and cognitionis, nec adaequata primaria Regula Fidei, and Morum,
licet cum dent verum, and fidele Testimonium primae originis, sint and possint
existimari Regula secundaria, subordinata Spiritui.

Resp. De quibus R. Barclaii verbis sic explico Animi mei sententiam, Si per
Spiritum Divinum intelligimus Deum, Tertiam S. TRINITATIS Personam, mihi
videtur non licere nobis Eum appallere Regulam Fidei, and Morum; cum Regula
Fidei sit istud Instrumentum, quo Recte Investigamus quid sit Fidei Christianae
Objectum, seu quid sit id, quod a nobis Credendum CHRISTUS Proposuit: Sed per
Spiritum Divinum etiam significari possit nostra Spiritus Divini Participatio,
quo omnis anima Rationalis praedita est per insitam in Natura sua DEI OPT. MAX.
Ideam: Hoc sen su recte dicendum est Spiritum esse Principalem, seu Primariam
Fidei Regulam, cui ipsae Scripturae Subordinantur: Nam eatenus tantum sensum
earum Divinum esse Percipimus, quatenus ejus Congruentiam sentiamus cum illa,
quam ipse Deus Animis nostris indidit, Essentiae Divinae Idea. Placet mihi
admodum haec Roberti Barclaii Protestatio, quam p. 226. recitat Ejus
doctissimus Adversarius. Secum suis Doctrinas, and Mores suos libentissime
Examini earum (S. Scripturarum) concedere, and hoc tanquam positivum, and
certum admittere ex animo principium, ut quodcunque quis praedicans se Spiritu
duci, contrarium Scripturae perpetrat, delusio, and machinatio Diabolica
existimetur.

Of the Scriptures.
Anti-B. P. 164 are found Quoted these words of Robert Barclay: Because they
are only a Declaration of the Fountain, and not the Fountain it self, therefore
they are not to be esteemed the principal ground of all Truth, and knowledge,
nor the Adequate Primary Rule of Faith and Manners; though giving a true and
faithful Testimony of the first foundation, they are and may be esteemed a
secondary Rule subordinate to the Spirit.

Answer. I thus explain my sense of these words of R. Barclay. If we, by the
Holy Ghost, understand God, viz. the 3d. Person of the Holy Trinity, I confess
we ought not to call him the Rule of Faith and Manners; since the Rule of Faith
is that Instrument by which we rightly examine what is the object of the
Christian Faith, and what that is, that Christ has laid down for us to
believe: But we may also understand by the Holy Ghost, our partaking of the
divine Spirit, with which every Rational Soul is endued, by an Idea of the most
great and most good God, ingrafted in its nature: In which sense, we, by right,
ought to say the spirit is the Principal or Chief Rule of our Faith, to which
the Scriptures themselves are subordinate. For we only perceive they carry a
divine sense as far as we feel their congruity with the Idea or Impression of
that divine Being, which God himself has fixed in our hearts. R. Barclay's
Protestation, of which his learned Adversary speaks page 226, pleases me much.
That he, with those of his Religion, are willing their Doctrines and Practices
should be tried by the Holy Scriptures, and to admit, as a positive and certain
Maxim, that whatsoever any do, pretending to be led by the Spirit, which is
contrary to the Holy Scriptures, should be reputed a delusion of the Devil.

De Universally Redemptione Christi, and salutifero, necnon supernaturali Lumine
unumquemvis illuminante.
P. 294. De Praesentia, vel Inessentia, quae pertinet ad Regnum Naturae,
adeoque omnibus in Universum Creaturis est Communis, hic minime Sermo est.

Resp. Certo certius est Tn LGON in Omni Creatura Logica, seu Rationali Inesse
Peculiari etiam inessendi modo, non eo tantum, quo in reliquis Inest Creaturis.

P. 301. Quando Jacobus c. 1. 21. ad fideles and regenitos scribens Verbum Dei
vocat lgon mphuton, id est, Sermonem insitum; quod non de alia insitione, quam
quae per publicam praedicationem, ac ejus receptionem facta est, intelligi
debere ex integro patet Contextu.

Resp. Notandum est non Dixisse Apostolum Lgon mphuton, sed tn Lgon mphuton,
Innuens nimirum Eundem esse, de quo loquitur S. Joannes, n rch n Lgo, hic LOGOS
est certe, cum Essentia ejus sit Infinita, in Omnibus Creaturis, Modo Peculiari
in Natura Rationali. Haec Sancti Jacobi verba Tn lgon mphuton tn dunmenon ssai
t uch mn, atque illa in Epistola ad Hebraeos Cap. 7. V. 25. Szein e t pantel
dnatai, intelligenda sunt de Uno SALVATORE Nostro, Lumine illo Vero Illuminante
Omnem Hominem Venientem in Mundum. Ad Sententiam hanc nostram stabiliendam
maxim conducunt Verba ista Viri Celeberrimi, Graecarum Literarum Peritissimi,
DANIELIS HEINSII, Exercit. Sacr. Page 587. Quid est mphuton; certe t phusik,
certe quod Innatum est, and Natural: quod Empephukenai Vulgo Dicimus. Quomodo
mphuton t ^ t phsei, Hesychius, Idemque t k phseo, quod a Natura est, Suidas
interpretatur.

Ex integro, (inquit Vir Doctissimus,) Patet Contextu non de alia Insitione,
quam quae per Publicam Praedicationem ac ejus Receptionem Facta est, Intelligi
Debere. Integrum igitur Perspiciamus Contextum. Abjicientes Omnem Immunditiam,
and Abundantiam Malitiae, in Mansuetudine suscipite Insitum Verbum, quod Potest
Salvare Animas Vestras. Number aliter Suscipere Possimus VERBUM, seu SERMONEM
Illum, Qui in Principio, seu ab Aeterno erat DEUS, nisi Abjicientes omnem
Immunditiam and Abundantiam Malitiae and in Mansuetudine Corda Nostra Illi
Humilime Devoventes, qui Dicit, Discite a Me, quia Mansuetus sum, and Humilis
Cord? R. B. Hisce Verbis quae recitat ejus Adversarius p. 305. Clarissime
Exprimit Sententiam Vere Christianam, nempe Quod ij, quibus Evangelium Externum
Praedicatum est, non Salventur, nisi hujus Luminis, and Gratiae Internis
Operationibus.

Sententiae Orthodoxae de Innata DEI OPT. MAX. Notione, seu Idea sunt maxim
Consentanea haec Carmina PYTHAGOREORUM, Vere Aurea:

(...).

Of Christ's Universal and saving Redemption, as also of the supernatural light
which enlightens all Men.
Anti-Bar. P. 294. I shall not here speak of that Instinct or Indwelling
Principle which belongs to the kingdom of Nature, and therefore is common to
all Creatures in general.

Answer. It Is most certain that Tn LGON is present in all Logical or Reasonable
Creatures, and that in a more particular manner, and not only as it is in other
Creatures.

Page 301. When James Chap. 1. 21. writing to the faithful and Regenerate,
calls the word of God lgon mphuton (id est) the Ingrafted word; It appears by
the whole context that we ought not to understand it of an other Grafting, than
that which is made by a public preaching and reception of it.

Ans. We ought to note that the Apostle did not say lgon mphuton but tn lgon
mphuton; intimating the same thing which St. John speaks of n rch n Lgo, since
his Essence is infinite in all Creatures, but more particularly in Reasonable
ones. These words of St. James tn logon mphuton tn Dunmenon Ssai t^ uch mn, and
those in the Epistle to the Hebrews Chap. 7. v. 25. Szein e t pantel d^atai,
ought to be understood only of our Savior, who is the True Light, Enlightening
all Men coming into the World. DANIEL HEINSIVS a very learned and famous Man in
the Greek Tongue Exercit. Sacr. confirms this our Sense.

Page 587. What is mphuton? certainly t phusiko without doubt that which is
Innate or born with us: And commonly called Empephuknai. Hesychius interprets
mphuton t k phsei after the same manner: And likewise Suidas renders t k k
phseo, that which is Natural to us, or every one has.

It appears by the whole Contex^ (says our learned Man) we ought to understand
it of no other Grafting, than what is made by a public Ministry. Let us
therefore view the whole passage, Laying aside all Filthiness and Superfluity
of Naughtiness, receive with meekness, the ingrafted word, which is able to
save your Souls.

Ans. Can we receive that word which beginning, or from Eternity, was God
except we lay aside all uncleanness and Superfluity of Naughtiness, and in
Meekness, humbly devote our Hearts to him, who says, learn of me who am Meek
and Humble of Heart? R. B. by these words, which his Adversary recites, page
305, most clearly declares for Christian Doctrine, to wit, that those to whom
the Gospel has been outwardly preached, are not saved, but by the inward
Operations of the Light and Grace.

These Pythagorean Verses, which may truly be called Golden ones, agree much
with the Orthodox Opinion of the Manifestation or Idea of the most rgeat and
most good God, within us.

Follow thy Guide within, the Birth Divine, Man's Rule the Glass where Sacred
Truths do shine.

De Imitatione Christi Lib. 3. C. 2.
Loquere Domine, quia audit Servus tuus: Non loquatur mihi Moses, aut aliquis
ex Prophetis: Sed tu potius loquere Domine Deus, Inspirator, and Illuminator
Omnium Prophetarum: Quia tu solus sine eis, potes me perfect imbuere; illi
autem sine te nihil proficient. Possunt quidem verba sonare, sed Spiritum non
conferunt. Pulcherrime dicunt, sed te tacente Cor non accendunt. Literas
tradunt, sed tu sensum aperi, Mysteria pro ferunt, sed reseras Intellectum
signatorum. Mandata edicunt, sed tu juvas ad perficiendum. Viam ostendunt, sed
tu confortas ad ambulandum. Illi foris tantum agunt, sed tu Corda instruis, and
Illuminas. Illi exterius rigant, sed tu foecunditatem donas. Illi clamant
verbis, sed tu auditui Intelligentiam tribuis.

The Imitation of Christ Book 3. C. 2.
Speak Lord, for thy Servant hears Thee: Let neither Moses, nor yet any of
the Prophets, speak to me; but do Thou rather speak, O Lord my God, who art the
Illuminator and Inspirer of all the Prophets: For thou, without them, can
teach me perfectly: But they without thee, will profit me nothing. They indeed
make their words sound; but they cannot give them the Spirit. What they say is
excellent; but unless thou speak, they reach not the Heart. They give the
Letter, but thou openest the Sense. They speak Mysteries; but thou unlockest
them. They proclaim thy commands; but thou helpest us to perform them. They
show us the way; but thou strengthnest us to walk therein. They only act
without: thou Instructest and Illuminatest the Heart. They water the outside;
but thou give the fruitfulness. They speak forth words; but thou give us
Ears to understand them.

Liturg. Angl.
Omnipotens Deus, da nobis, quaesumus, ut abjectis Operibus Tenebrarum,
induamur Arma LUCIS in hac Mortali Vita, in qua Jesus Christus Filius tuus cum
magna Humilitate ad nos visitandos advenit, ut in extremo Die, quo rediturus
est cum Gloria Majestatis suae ad judicandos vivos and mortuos, resurgamus ad
vitam immortalem, per eum, qui una tecum, and cum Spiritu Sancto vivit, and
regnat in saecula saeculorum. Amen.

Ecclesiam tuam, Benign Domine, LUCIS tuae coruscantibus radijs illustra,
quaesumus, ut beati Apostoli, atque Evangelistae Joannis illuminata Doctrinis,
in viarum tuarum LUCE ita ambulet, ut ad vitae aeternae LUCEM tandem perveniat,
per Jesum Christum, Dominum Nostrum. Amen.

English Liturgy.
Almighty God, grant we pray thee, that the works of darkness being laid aside,
we may be clothed with the Armor of LIGHT, in this mortal life; in which
Jesus Christ thy Son came, with great humility, to visit us; that we in the
great day, when he shall return with the Glory of his Majesty to judge the
living and the Dead, may rise through him, to life immortal, who with thee and
the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns forever and evermore, AMEN.

Lord, bless thou thy Church, and adorn her with the bright Beams of thy LIGHT;
we pray thee, enlighten her with the Doctrines of thy blessed Apostle and
Evangelist John, that so walking in the LIGHT of thy ways, she may at last come
to the LIGHT of Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. AMEN*


