THE Atheist turned Deist, AND THE Deist turned Christian: OR, THE
REASONABLENESS and UNION OF Natural, and the True Christian Religion.

BY THO. EMES, Chirurgo-Medicus.

LONDON: Printed in the Year School.

Speak every Man Truth with his Neighbor; for we are Members of one another.

Ephesians. 4.25. AND

So speak ye, and so do ye, as they that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty.

Jam. 2.12. ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 10. for certify, read certify. L. 20. for Lier, r. Liar. P. 4.
l. 26. for ll, read all. P. 6. l. last, for unbeholding, r. unbeholden. P. 21.
l. 20. for then, r. than. P. 22. for beholding, r. beholden. So P. 34. l. 34.
P. 43. l. 36. r. Marriage-Constancy. P. 45. l. 5. for countervaile, r.
countervale. P. 84. l. 6. for God's, r. Gods. P. 95. after same, add time. P.
118. l. 26. blot and, after David. P. 181. l. 16. for they, r. the before Oaths.

Some of the principal Heads of this Discourse; under which diverse other things
are touched upon.
Numb. 1. WHAT necessary to the End of Man. Numb. 2. Three Ways whereby we know
Truth. Numb. 3. The nearest Way to prove the Being of God. Numb. 4. Self what:
The Necessity of supposing a Divine Being, thence proved. Numb. 5. God knowable
by Experience or Sense. Numb. 6. Self more largely considered, and said to be
Cogitation, or Mind. Numb. 7. Objections against Cogitation's being the Essence
of Self, answered. Numb. 8. God considered more largely, and as in himself, or
essential Attributes. Numb. 9. The common Notion of Omnipresence, false. Numb.
10. God considered in relation to the Creatures, negatively and positively.
Numb. 11. Of the End of God's making things. Numb. 12. Man's Duty or Religion,
considered in general. Numb. 13. The same considered more particularly in Love
to God. Numb. 14. And Love to his Works. Numb. 15. Love the Foundation of all
orderly Behavior. No. 16. The Natural Reason and Sense of the Dec^logue. No.
17. The Goodness and Well-being of the Creatur^ wherein it consists. No. 18.
The Ground of Unhappiness. No. 19. The true Notion of Sin, and that Sin is a
ways an Act; and Original Sin as suppos^ distinct from Actual Sin, a Mistake;
the tri^ Notion of it. No. 20. The Fall of Man from Innocence, natural^ known.
No. 21. The Aggravation, or Greatness of Sins Di^order. No. 22. How the
Creature should behave it self on the Conviction of Sin: With the Natural Dut^
of Repentance. No. 23. Forgiveness with God, apparently discoverab^^ by the
Light of Nature. No. 24. Why God made Creatures capable of Sin. No. 25. Free
will considered. No. 26. What an Arbitrary Command of God, and ho^ reasonable.
No. 27. All the Commands of God tend to Man's Happiness, or Pleasure:
Disobedience to the contrary; neither Obedience nor Disobedience add to, or
take any thing from God. No. 28. That the Creature having once sinned, is more
inclinable to go on sinning, than to repent. No. 29. Convicted Sinners at first
unapt to believe that God will forgive. No. 30. The Scope of all God's Dealings
with Sinners in order to their Recovery. No. 31. Immortality, and a future
Life, discoverable by Reason what Death is, and its use since Sin, with
Arguments for the Immortality of the Soul. No. 32. The Resurrection of the Body
rationally concluded. No. 33. Future Judgment necessary. No. 34. Man capable of
Repentance, and doing his Duty. No. 35. The diverse Motives and Arguments God
has given Men to persuade them to repent, and what the compleatest. No. 36.
Revelation chiefly for enforcing Natural Religion: Diverse Considerations about
Revelation, Miracles, Faith, etc. No. 37. Of Christ, and his Work. No. 38. Of
his Person. No. 39. All that are saved, saved the same way, viz. by Christ. No.
40. Scripture a Gift of God argued, and the need of Revelation. No. 41. Some
things taught in the World as Doctrines of the Bible, not tending to the true
End and Scope of Revelation. No. 42. As Mistakes about Reconciliation, Christ's
Death and Sacrifice, Propitiation, etc. No. 43. About Satisfaction. No. 44.
Mistakes about Punishment: God not to be thought the Cause of the Creatures
Misery. No. 45. Mistakes about Imputation of Sin and Righteousness. No. 46.
Mistakes about Merit. No. 47. About Redemption. No. 48. About Intercession. No.
49. How the Mediation of Christ becomes ^^fectual. No. 50. Of the Doctrine of
Fate, or absolute Predest^^nation. No. 51. A Reflection on the present State of
Christi^^nity.
1. THERE are Two Things necessary for Man in order to his attaining the End of
his Being: To know the Truth; And to Will well. Or in other words, To be Wise,
and Good.

As for Knowing the Truth, there are two Things wherein this Necessary Wisdom
does chiefly consist; The Knowledge of God, and the Knowledge of Ones Self. And
there is one thing wherein Man's Goodness does consist; and that is, in the
Conformity of his Will to the Will of his Maker, to will as God wills.

The Order of our Knowledge of these two Objects, God and Self, seems to be
this; We begin to know our Selves as the Objects, of which we are first aware;
and then we proceed to the Knowledge of God: But the Connection of the Knowledge
of God, and of our Selves is such, that we can never know our Selves well, tell
we arise to the Knowledge of God; nor know God as we ought, if we know but
little of our Selves.

2. There are but three Ways, I conceive, whereby we can have any Knowledge of
God, our Selves, or any thing else. 1. By Sense. 2. By Reason: Or 3. By
Revelation.

By the Knowledge of Sense I do not mean only the Sensation, or Perception of
Bodies; but also, and rather the Experience, Sense, or Conscience we have of
our own Thoughts, or may have of others. All those Notions we have as it were,
passively received, without reasoning; and which are as it were, the Matter or
Ground on which Reason works.

The second way of Knowledge. Reason is the Faculty of arguing or discoursing
with our Selves, whereby from considering our passive Knowledges, or
Sensations, we arise to get more full Knowledge of things, and of what we had
no immediate Sensation, or Intuition, and by getting the Knowledge of some
things, we proceed by Arguments, and get the Knowledge, and better Knowledge of
others. As by considering the Creatures, (especially our selves) we may arise
to the knowledge of God; and then by considering our Maker, we are led back
again better to know our selves; and from a better knowledge of our selves, we
get still the clearer knowledge of our Author.

The third way we may be made acquainted with God, our selves, or other things,
viz. Revelation is but as it were a compendious Assistance of the two former:
An express, or particular Instruction from God, telling the Creature in short,
what he would have been, either ignorant of, or not so soon, or easily have
known without such an immediate Teaching: As for instance; What God is, and
will be found to be, what we are, ought to be, and shall be hereafter. But of
this I shall speak more, when the Order of my Discourse brings me to it again.

By the Knowledge of God and our selves, which we may have these three ways, we
are rationally led, or persuaded to will well, by conforming our Wills to the
Will of God.

The Knowledge of God, howsoever attained, may be divided into Two Heads.
First, That he is, or that there is a God. Secondly, What he is. The Knowledge
of our selves likewise will bear the same division. The Knowledge of what God
is may also be divided in two parts: First, What he is in himself. Secondly,
What he is in relation to his Creatures.

3. Now that we may find out, and prove to our selves the Existence of a Divine
Being, or God, let us descend into our selves [the nearest step we can make,
and plainest way we can go, and that which I here shall choose to take, leaving
those other more commonly traced paths] and see what Arguments we can find
within us for the being of a God, yea by what necessity we are compelled to
acknowledge that he is.

First, Every Man has a Sense, or Experience of the Reality of his own Being
certain, beyond all demonstration; so that none can doubt of his own Existence,
or needs to have it proved; and if any could here doubt, that very doubting
would certifi^ him that he has a Being, or is. For if there be a Doubting, an
Enquiring, a Supposing, a Will to know, etc. there is something: Actions and
Passions cannot be without Being, or where there is no Being; of nothing
nothing can be supposed, affirmed, or denied: So that it would be but time lost
to go about to convince a Man of his own Being, of which he cannot but be
certain, and what he cannot deny, but he will at the same time affirm himself a
wilful Liar.

4. We shall therefore consider in the next place (so far as our present
business in finding a Divine Being requires) what we are: And because I have
but now made mention of Doubting and Considering, and find Men so apt to doubt,
question, and consider what we are as to our Essence, or Being, as well as of
other things: I say we are Doubters, Questioners, Considerers, and Supposers:
But what is Doubting, Questioning, Supposing, and Considering? It is Thinking,
and that an imperfect Thinking; Thinking that wants something, in which we find
an incomplete defective Understanding, and a Will or Desire of something we
have not. Now wherever is found any thing of Ignorance in the Understanding,
or any want of Power in the Will, it appears that that Being cannot in any wise
be thought to be of it self, or self-sufficient; but must consequentially be
acknowledged to be dependent, having some other Being its cause: For he that
finds himself insufficient to himself, can in no wise be thought to be
sufficient of himself: He that not only wants something he may have, but
moreover cannot give himself what he wants, is dependent on something else for
some addition; when a Being that is independent, and self-sufficient in its
Essence, cannot be supposed to need another than its own Understanding and Will
on any account. We all find in our selves a want of Knowledge; we know but a
few things, and we know but a little of those few things we know; and moreover,
of those things we do know, we come to the Knowledge of one after another, so
that we are sometime ignorant of what we afterward know, yea in all our
Thoughts we find a constant succession of one Thought after another; we cannot
think of all we think together, but we forget one thing while we consider
another, (and we do not see it possible that it should ever be otherwise with
us) which Imperfection of the succession of Thoughts one after another in
spiritual Natures or Minds, is the notion of Time, and that for which they are
said to be in Time, or Timous Beings, and would be so if there were no motion
of Bodies, or Body at'll; and while there is any Mind having this succession of
Thoughts before and after Time is, and will be, and that Mind in Time, or
Timous: Notwithstanding the Fancy of those who talk of Souls going into
Eternity, or being eternal, a part post, on the after half, half eternal,
which is a whole Contradiction: Now where there is a succession of Thoughts one
after another, there was a precedure of them one before another, till we come
to a first, or beginning Thought, which with us is past; and what is past was
present and future, and what was future was not then in actual being, (the same
must be said of Men, or other things that are before one another as well as of
Thoughts, there must be a first) and where a thing was not, but only might be,
if it be, or begin, it must be begun; and what is begun must have a Cause, or
be begun by another; it cannot be its own efficient, for so it would be
supposed to be before it is, which is a Contradiction. Now if there be
something that began to be, (as we must conclude of our selves) there must be a
Cause of our beginning, which Cause did not begin to be; for if it had it had
been alike insufficient, and itself wanted a Cause, and so must be caused, and
so we must run on tell we come to a first Cause, which is sufficient, and
necessary of itself, always the same; and this first Cause is God. And as we
find our selves from our imperfect Understandings and successive Thoughts,
necessitated to grant our selves caused, and that the Cause of our Being must
be sufficient of itself, or perfect; if we come to the particular
Consideration of our Wills, we shall find two things there denoteing
Imperfection and Insufficiency. First, Variableness. Secondly, Impotence. As to
the Variableness of Will, we all find our Wills changeable, sometimes willing
one thing, then another; yea sometimes one thing then the contrary; in which
Variableness of Will, is also seen a farther Imperfection of our Understanding:
For we will the thing which at the present appears best to us; but what at one
time seems good or best, at another is not so in our Judgment, but bad: Now at
one of these times the Judgment fails and errs. Secondly, We find the Impotence
of our Wills in that we will things we cannot effect. This every one is
sensible of; he that affects to be an Atheist himself. We see a Defect in our
Knowledge often, we would know somethings we don't know, and what we cannot
cause our selves to know when we would; likewise we would sometimes do the
things we find we cannot do, so we still find our selves insufficient; so that
there may be something added to our Knowledge, (nay we find there daily is)
which we at our pleasure cannot add; and that there may be some increase of our
power, which we of our selves cannot cause. How will this prove a God, may the
Atheist say? I answer, most evidently: For if we want something which we see we
may possibly have, and cannot at our pleasure have it, we could much less have
Being of our selves; if we cannot know, or do without being beholden to some
other, even things we may so come to know or do: Want some other cause than our
own Wills for a small addition to our Perfection, we could much less have Being
itself unbeholden to any other. Again, he that wants something, he that knows
but some things, and can do but some things, but may know and do more, has but
so much Knowledge, and so much Power, and may have more, might have had less
and less, and consequently the least, yea none at all, and so no Being; and
where Being might have been wanting, there cannot be Self-existence. Moreover,
whoever is not the cause of all other Beings, is not necessary to the Being of
other things; we are certain that there are other Beings besides our selves,
and we may be as sure that we are not the cause of their Being: For we do not
know our selves to be so, nor experience our Production of them; but whatever
is the Cause of the other Beings, cannot be supposed to be ignorant of its
being so, or to have produced them at unawares, an act of Will being necessary
to the effecting of a thing, of which none can be ignorant. Now if we are not
necessary in order to the Being of other things, but that they may be, and are,
and that unbehold^^^ to us, we are not absolutely necessary; and if not
necessary we might have wanted Being; but we have Being, we know by Experience
or Conscience, though we are such imperfect Beings, such unnecessary Beings. Now
if we are, and are not of our selves, we must have Being from another, and that
other Being must be perfect, necessary, self-sufficient, or it would be
in-sufficient to give Being to me, or any other; and this perfect, necessary,
self-sufficient Being, is God.

5. Again, Besides the Consideration of our selves as in-sufficient Beings,
that of necessity must have a sufficient Cause, which by Reason proves the
Being of God; There is another way whereby we may be certain of the same Truth
(which for some reason I omitted, as Order required, to speak of first) and
that is a certain Sense or Experience of God, which we may find in our selves
if we will attend unto our own Thoughts. Thus we find several things done in us
which we do not, nor can do; we have Thoughts wherein we are merely passive, as
in Sensible Perceptions, or Thoughts we have by the Occasion, or Means of Body,
if we are not the cause of them, as we may well conclude when we find we cannot
alter them; if we cannot but see, and hear, etc. while the Organs are rightly
disposed, and that so and so, and the Bodies that we have the Perceptions or
Thoughts of, cannot be the cause of those Thoughts, being more imperfect and
impotent than our own Minds, having not so much as Wills, or any power to
effect Reality, or cause Being, but are caused themselves, and cannot create
Perceptions; as we find our selves affected, or sensible of those Thoughts, we
shall (if we consider) find our selves forced to acknowledge our Sensibility of
the Cause of them. If I see, or hear, and so suffer a Thought, and am not the
Cause of this Sensation, nor can the Objects of these Sensations cause them in
me; there must be some Agent or Gause of this Passion, and that can be none but
God. And as we believe God, and he only is able to create or cause Thoughts, or
Perception in us, by the means of other our Fellow Creatures, and Thoughts or
Perceptions of them; so it is not less reasonable to think that he can cause
Thoughts in us, and apply an Object to our Understanding without the use of
those means, even by an immediate Act of his Will, and present himself as the
Object of our Understanding. We may farther suppose, God could have created one
only Mind, then that Mind must have had an Object besides itself, it being not
self-sufficient; and there being nothing else but God, it must have thought on
God, and without any means, God's immediate Will being sufficient, which would
have been a a Sense of God. And that there are other Minds, and other things
besides Minds, does not hinder but that God may cause a Sensation in the Mind
immediately: And some Persons perhaps of considerate Judgments will not think
me far out of the way, if I say I have known such immediate Sensations, and
think others have, or may have the like Experience, (if they attend to their
own Thoughts) especially in diverse Passions tending to the rectifying the
disorderly Will, where perhaps they cannot be said to be more sensible of any
thing, than of God's acting strongly upon them, and that not barely in making
Impressions on their Understandings, and no more, where they merely suffer the
Objects; but by those Impressions giving the clearest and mightiest Arguments
to persuade and change their Volitions, and better determine the Acts of their
Wills, their own proper Actions.

Again, Every Man if he considers will find he has a Will as it were
disproportionable to any thing in himself, or in other Creatures; a mighty
Desire, feeling as it were after something that can satisfy, and fill it with
a kind of Perfection of Satisfaction. This boundless and unwearied Desire, that
cannot fill itself with any imperfect thing, must have another manner of
Object, and must have a Cause, and none but that Cause can be the Object
sufficient to satisfy it. Whence could there be such a Desire, if there were
no Object suitable? and if the Cause of this Desire had not made it to be
satisfied, or capable to be satisfied, he had made it in vain; but he is
supposed perfect, and so can do nothing in vain, or to no purpose, for so to do
is an Imperfection: Now if this Desire be to be satisfied, when ever it is so,
it cannot be insensible, or want Experience, of its Satisfaction; for so to
suppose would be to suppose it not satisfied, and none can satisfy it but its
sufficient Cause, that is God; therefore there is possible, yea sometimes
actually, (in those who have been convinced of the Insufficiency of imperfect
Beings) a Perception or Thought, and that a sensible one, of God; if
Sensibility be not unduely confined to the Reception of those Thoughts, we have
by Occasion, and Means of Body.

That all Bodily Nature is insufficient, and must have a Cause or Beginning, I
need not urge, when we our selves, whatever we are, find our selves imperfect,
and so that we cannot be without one.

6. We are come so far as by considering our selves as Imperfect, or
Insufficient Beings, to find that we cannot be of our selves, Uncaused, but
must of necessity have a Sufficient Cause; which is all one as to say that
there is a God our Author; and in doing this, we have also found in some
measure what we are, and what He is: I shall now go on to consider a little
more largely both our selves and God, as to what kind of Beings we are, and
what God may, and must rationally be thought to be. And as, I say, I shall
consider, and consider our selves first, I say.

First, We are Considerers; What is Considering? It is Thinking, and he that
considers, or thinks seriously, will find nothing which he can properly call
Himself but Thinking, or his Mind. That Organick Frame or Body of a Man, is not
the Possessor of a Mind, or the self-using a Mind, but a thing the Mind, or
Cogitation uses, that which says, I, Me, Mine, is the Mind, and nothing else.
And though Thinking is called by diverse Names, as Soul, Mind, Understanding,
Will, Memory, Conscience, etc. yet it is all the while but one thing, Thinking:
The principal Diversity of which, we can possibly make, is but according to its
diverse Applications to its Objects; which if well considered can be but two,
1st. Understanding, 2d. Will: Or in other words, Knowledge and Desire. Under
these two Heads or Divisions, come all the Modes of Thinking. The threefold
Division of our Mind into Understanding, Conscience and Will, which some make,
and call the Threefoldness of a Creature, is not Good, but a Mistake; for
Conscience differs not from Understanding, but in respect of the Objects. Other
things, or Self; for whether I know my own Thoughts, or know any other thing,
it is Knowledge still; the Understanding is understanding as much when applied
to one Object, as when applied to another; Conscience is but another name for
Understanding, when applied to one's own Thoughts: So Memory is but the
Thinking again that we thought before of such or such a thing. I need name no
more, any one may find who considers the matter, that our Knowledge of things,
and the Acts of our Wills, or our Desires about them, are the two essential
Parts, or rather Modes, or Properties, we can make in any Mind; and yet Knowing
and Desiring, or if you like better the words Understanding and Will,
(whatever the Object of either may be, or the manner of their Application) is
still but one Thinking; and my Thinking is one, and the same Being, whatever
Mode or Object it has; and what I call my Mind or Soul, my Self or Person: So
that Understanding and Will are essential to a Person, or Intelligent Being;
this Duality, and nothing else, or but what is reduceable to these. Where there
is these there is a Person, and whatever is more, or other than these, is not
of the Essence of a Person, or Intelligent Being. Those that make Understanding
and Conscience two things in God, considered in himself, calling them two Modes
or Relations, or the like, (as some witty Men have done) have not considered
the matter closely. For where there is nothing but God, (and nothing else is
necessary and eternal) his knowing himself or Conscience, is the only necessary
or essential Understanding, there being no other Object. So that to consider
God, as having necessarily or essentially an Understanding, other and distinct
from Reflection or Knowing himself, is but to give him so no Understanding, and
comes to no Distinction at all. That original Mind or Wisdom which some Wise
Men of late talk of as something other than what they call Reflex Wisdom, or
God's Knowing himself, considering God solitary, and in himself, is just no
Wisdom, his self being the only Object; unless they persuade themselves that
his thinking on Creatures is his Original Wisdom, which I suppose they will
hardly dare to do, but this by the way.

Against this Notion, That Thinking is the very Essence of the Mind or Soul,
the very Person or Self, I find two principal Objections.

First, That Thinking is not that which is real, substantial, or constant
enough to be the Soul or Mind.

Secondly, That it is but an Act, and requires an Agent, or an Attribute
requiring a Subject; which Agent or Subject, is more likely to be the Soul or
Mind.

To which first, I answer, That Thinking of any thing we can imagine, is most
real and constant; for we may suppose Bodies not really existent, but only in
imagination, (and there is no notion we have of any thing but Body, and
Thinking, wherefore we cannot honestly suppose any thing else) but we cannot
suppose Thinking to have no Being, because while we suppose, or think, we are
sure it is actually present, we may suppose we might have been without the
Ideas, or Figure-thoughts of Bodies, or any Thoughts that come by occasion of
them, as we find sometimes we are. We may also suppose Bodies not to have been,
and yet we be, they being not necessary Beings; and if they had not been, we
must have always been without the Ideas of them: For if we try we shall find it
as hard, as if we consider unreasonable to suppose, that we can frame, or stir
up in our selves Thoughts of things that are not, as that we can bring things
into actual Being, or Create, the Creating of Perceptions of things, I will
call it, being to be done by the same Power as the Creating of things
themselves. And we may suppose God himself, being an Almighty Mind, might have
created Minds without Bodies, the Notion of a Mind, or Cogitation, not
necessarily including Body or quantity. But to return; As we find Thinking so
real or truly existent, that we experience its Existence when ever we consider
it, and cannot suppose any thing to be without supposing Self-existent
Cogitation, or Almighty Mind, so as to the continual, or perpetual Existence
even of our Thinking, [I do not mean as applied to any one Object, for it is
variable, and inconstant in that respect; and as it is a Creature cannot be
applied to many, or all its Objects at once, and yet it is still Thinking,
whatever it is applied to:] As to its Continuation, I say, we know of no time
since we began to think, or have a Being, wherein we did not think; for
whatever we remember, we remember we thought on, Memory being but thinking
over the same Thought, with reflection on it; and though we do not remember what
we thought on at such or such a day, or hour, yet we are sure we then thought,
or were thinking: To be short, we are sure we continually think except in
sleep, say some, which seems to be the chief Objection against continual
Thinking. To which, I say, we think always, one Thought still following
another, Sleeping and Waking, but we soon forget all those Thoughts that make
no considerable Impression on our Wills, or whereby we are very little
affected. In the continual Succession of Thoughts we experience when we are
awake, great numbers go as fast as they come, without being dwelt on, or
repeated, of those Objects that very little affect us, and so are presently
forgot, and are as if they had not been, or as if the Objects had not been in
our Mind. Besides, as a great, if not the greatest number of our Thoughts are
of, and by the means of, external things let in by the Organs of the Senses,
which are as Conditions (in this life at least) of our receiving such
Cogitations, the Indisposition of the Senses, or want of those Conditions,
leaves us without those Thoughts, if wholly indisposed; but if only in part,
the Thoughts are weak, and pass unremembred, and not reflected on, and so are
by some inconsiderately supposed not to have been: But though our Eyes are shut
in sleep, and we then see nothing, we have visible Ideas sometimes from the
Remembrance of things seen, though confused, (for no one born blind, and so
continuing, ever dreams he sees;) yet the other Senses are not quite laid by,
we feel, hear, and smell, etc. though but remisly, and our Thoughts or
Perceptions are but faint, and so it is no wonder if we forget them as fast as
they pass, and so suppose we had none. And which to me makes the matter past
doubt; I have discoursed with a Person fast asleep, who has answered me
distinctly to many Questions, without so much as dreaming of any thing that was
said. But moreover, if we do not think when asleep, we do neither understand,
nor will, or which is the same, have no Understanding or Will, but every
Morning; or perhaps twice or thrice every Night a new Mind; for Understanding
that understands not, or Will that wills not, is no Understanding or Will, but
an Absurdity: And it is the same as to say, I am Thinking, and yet do not
think. But we remember we think sometimes in sleep, and that strongly; and
though most commonly it is but weakly, yet it is Thinking. And such weak
Thinking we may suppose a Child in the Womb may have; none perhaps but what
comes by Feeling or Tasting, I speak according to the common Meaning; for all
Senses are but different ways of Feeling, and yet the very Ideas that come by
the grossest of the Senses are Thoughts still, it being the Mind that
perceives, not the Body.

From these Considerations, to name no more, we may be persuaded that we always
think, though we don't always reflect and remember our Thoughts, and so that
Thinking is real and constant.

But to the second Objection, That Thinking is but an Act of something else,
the Agent, or an Attribute of something, else the Subject.

I answer, First by demanding what this more real and noble Agent is? What
Notion have we of it? I have long tried, and can find nothing an Object of my
Understanding but either Thinking, or Body; what others may chance to do, who
never tried, and are resolved they never will, I know not. Let them tell us
what thought they have of it, different from Body and Thinking, if they can:
But if neither they, nor we have any notion of such a third Being, we cannot
with any reason affirm any thing of it, or that such a thing is. If they have
any thought of it, they have some knowledge of it, and so need not acknowledge
themselves at such a loss, as they commonly do when this Question is put them,
What is the Soul? or expose themselves as they commonly do, by talking of that
whose Essence they acknowledge themselves wholly ignorant of. But if any
suppose Thinking an Action, or Attribute of Body, or that it is Body some way
or other posited, or moved, (how they cannot tell) that is Thinking, or that
(as they rather would say) thinks; they must suppose Body more noble as the
Cause, or Agent, which I believe they will hardly do. But we can suppose Body
not to be; we may be ignorant of it, and yet think, which could not be if it
were Body that thinks; besides, if Body thinks, it knows it self to think, and
so the Dispute is at an end; but Body does not know it self to think, because
it is doubted whether it thinks or no: Whatever thinks cannot be ignorant of
its Thinking, nor can any thing be well thought to be an Agent, that is
ignorant of its being so, or does not will to be so. If Body could be supposed
to think, and know it self to think, it would be Thinking, consequently not
Body; for of Body and Thinking, there are wholly different Notions. But Body we
affirm to be no Agent of any thing, or Creator of Ideas, or Thoughts; God alone
must be supposs'd, with good reason, to be the Cause and Contriver of our
Thinking. As we find our Thoughts do not cause our Body, much less can we
suppose Body to cause our Thoughts, or act any thing in us; our Body is moved
according to our Will, and our Will and Understanding is often affected by
means of our Body, but Body is not the Cause or Agent of either. Besides, one
half of our Thoughts are Passions; nothing but our Desires, or the Application
of our Will about Objects, seems properly our Action. And though Thinking be
looked on as an Attribute requiring a Subject different, we may as well suppose
an essential Attribute, or Attribute that is Identical, the same with the thing
it self in the created Mind, as to say whatever is in God, is God, or that
there is not another thing, which is not Wisdom, Goodness, Power, etc. which is
God; in which Wisdom, Goodness, Power, etc. reside as things accidental. Nor is
it so strange an Expression as that it may not be admitted to say, Cogitatio
est cogitans, or Thinking thinks; for in truth I take it to be the same as to
say, Thinking is Thinking, which is no worse than an Identical Proposition.

But to leave this Question, (with these few touches to give others occasion to
consider) as besides my main purpose, I shall pass to that Knowledge of our
selves which most concerns us; and even that Knowledge is the Knowledge of our
selves as Thinking, and that as Thinking well or ill. If our Thoughts are well
in order, that something else, that some fancy is the Agent of the Action
Thinking in us, that unknown Soul, that Chimera, or that Body whose Particles
are very far from one another, or friggle about very nimblely, (such is the
common Notion of a Spirit) is of little value. If my Thoughts are duly applied
to their due Objects, I care not for that unknowable Soul; for it is in the
right order of our Thoughts that Happiness consists, and whereby we come to
attain the End of our Being.

8. Having thus found our selves to be imperfect Minds, variable, limited,
caused or created Cogitations: let us consider our Cause, or Creator, and that
First, as he must needs be thought to be in himself, and then we shall the more
fully discover the Second thing, (which has been partly discoursed already)
What he is to us. And the first notion that occurs to my Mind of God, or the
Cause of caused insufficient things, as considered in himself, is, That he is
Self-sufficient, or Self existent. Having found my self insufficient, and
consequently that I must have a Cause sufficient to be so, which he could not
be were he himself caused, it consequently follows he is sufficient for
himself, or self-existent, though I were not. And as I must necessarily suppose
him, because I could not be without him, so he must necessarily be
self-sufficient or existent, though I should cease to be.

From the Consideration of God's being Self-sufficient, it appears he is but
one; for if he be Sufficient, another is not necessary, and that which is not
absolutely necessary, or may be supposed not to be, is not God. If one be
sufficient of himself, another is to no purpose, or not necessary; one such
Being must be supposed, but there is no need to suppose another. If God is one
Self-sufficient, Self-existent Being, he is but one Self, or Mind. He cannot
properly say I, Thou, and He of himself, or of any thing in his Essence, but
always I; nor can we say Thou and Thou, or He and He of him, if we speak
properly and truly.

Again, if he is necessarily Self sufficient, he must consequently know
himself, and will, or love himself, desire himself, be pleased, and satisfied
with himself, with the Knowledge and Love of himself, and so be a Thinking
Being, Mind or Person. Other, either Persons or Things, therefore are not
necessary to him who is satisfied with himself, no not so much as in
Imagination, Notion, or Thought; nor needed he produce any of them.

From God's Knowing and Loving himself, arises the Notion of the highest
Wisdom and Goodness, or that he is most Wise and most Good. He that is
necessarily Self-sufficient, and so has more Reality or Being than all other
Beings, (supposing them made) must needs in knowing himself have the greatest,
as well as the only necessary Knowledge; and in loving himself have the
highest, and only necessary Goodness. For he that has most of Being, most
Perfection and Reality, is the greatest Object of Knowledge, and most
desirable, most to be loved; and while he does not, create the only Object of
Knowledge and Desire.

And here arises the Notion of God's Essential Justice. That he love himself,
and approve himself; because he is most worthy, it is most right and just that
he love himself chiefly, and only necessarily; he is not so obliged to love his
Creatures, when he has made them, he cannot love them as himself, because he
knows they are not so good, nor does he necessarily love them, because they are
not necessary to be.

From God's Self-sufficiency is seen also the Notion of his absolute Felicity,
or perfect Happiness, or absolute Perfection, admitting no increase or
decrease; for he that is enough to himself, that needs seek nothing out of
himself, must needs be most happy.

Again; He that is Self-sufficient necessarily so, can suffer no Alteration,
nor can he cause any in himself; and hence arises the Notion of Eternity, an
Attribute only belonging, and essential to God; the consideration of the manner
of God's Being as having no Succession or Alteration, but being still the same;
he does not think one thing now, another thing anonforgeting one thing while he
thinks another, as Creatures do who are insufficient, to be all they are at
once; but he is always complete, or sufficient; has not something ceasing, and
another thing succeeding in his Essential Perfections.

From the Unity or Simplicity of God, we are informed he is immaterial, a
Spiritual Being or Mind. All the former Considerations imply God to be
intelligent and voluntary; that is, Thinking. Now Thinking and Body being two
things wholly different, the Notions of them being not at all the same, God
cannot be both, if he is one simple or single Being. Those that fancy Thinking
and Body is the same, or that Thinking is, or may be some Mode of Body, as some
certain degree of Rarifaction or Motion, would do excellently to certify us,
just at how much distance the Particles of a Congeries of Matter must be, or
how fast they must be stirred to the Production of Thought: One Particle cannot
be supposed to be rarefied, or less sollid than another, and consequently
cannot by Rarifaction attain Thought; and how many of them must dance together
to that end, or what Jigg, he would be a curious Master that should discover.
Till which is done, we shall be confident that Knowing, Perceiving, Desiring,
or Loving, are not Quantity, Figure, or Motion, (it being Nonsense to say a
Pound, or an Ell of Knowledge, or Love;) but different names of the one thing
Thinking: And Quantity, Figure, and Motion are not Thinking, but essential, or
belonging to Body; so that Thinking and Body are two things. Now, as has been
said, God cannot be both these, because they are two wholly different things,
and God is but one.

God cannot be Body, because he knows himself, and has no Ignorance in him;
Body knows not it self, to speak improperly in calling it self. If Body did
know, there is no reason why all Body should not know; and we have the greatest
reason to affirm some Body to be ignorant. If God did not know himself, he
could not be happy, wise, or so much as intelligent. Knowing is Thinking, not
Body or Quantity, therefore God is a Mind, and not a Body. Father, he is not a
Mind and a Body, for so he would be a Compound, or Congeries of diverse things
or parts. Again, whatever consists of Body and Mind has some Imperfection, and
consequently is but a Creature; God is all Perfect, or Self-sufficient. Body is
not so much as a Person, or Self. God cannot be something besides himself, or
besides his Person; Body is but a Thing, Mind only, and alone is a Person. If
God's Person, Self or Mind, is sufficient, he is not Body also; for Body is not
necessary to the Consideration of Mind, especially of Selfsufficient Mind; nor
is it necessary at all, being imperfect, therefore God neither is, nor has a
Body. Besides, God cannot be a Body, or a Compound, forwhat ever is so may have
more or less; Body may be more or less, or otherwise in Figure or Motion, God
cannot be more or less, or otherwise than he is. The greatest, or all Body, may
be supposed to receive an Addition, and the least to cease to be. But God (as
has been said) can have no Alteration, or Imperfection, or unnecessary thing in
his Being, therefore Body can be nothing of his Being. Finally, Body is
visible; God is invisible: Body is finite, or so much, and no more; God is
infinite or unbounded, not in Extension, but, which is a better Notion of
Infinity, he is all Perfection; to us incomprehensible, for Quantity does not
belong to God's Infinity.

So that to sum up all, God considered in himself, is the Self-sufficient or
Self-existent, necessary Mind, knowing himself, loving himself, satisfied with
himself, the only necessary Being, in whom is no Diversity or Composition, or
any thing but what may be supposed in mere Cogitation, viz. all Perfect
Understanding and Will.

9. But if God be an all Perfect Being, a mere Mind, and not a Body, or not so
much as partly Body (as I think is evident) that Opinion of his Omnipresence
that supposes him locally present, or essentially present in Bodily Nature, is
untrue: For whatsoever is supposed to be in place is Body, or Quantity, has
Dimension, or is nothing. Thinking has no Dimensions, Quantities or Bulks, and
can be said to be present with Bodies only as having Ideas of them, or willing
about them, as they may be Objects of the Understanding or Will. So God is
present with Bodies only as he knows them all, and wills about them. He is said
to be eminently present here or there, as the Effects of his Will are seen more
eminently in one place, then in another. He is more intimately present with
Minds, because he does not only think of all that is in them, and continually
wills about them, but that they also are often very sensible of the Acts of his
Will about them, which Bodies are not: But he is especially present with
himself, because he always is the chief and necessary Object of his own
Understanding and Will. But an Essential local Omnipresence is absurd; for if
God be a Body, as he must if locally omnipresent, it would follow that there is
no Body besides God; for if you suppose Bodies that are not God, they must have
some place among one another; which cannot be if God sill all with himself, two
things each of which fill a place, cannot be supposed in the same place. And to
suppose God every where among Bodies, will not make local Omnipresence; but
Interspersion, whereby he would be supposed as a porous Body, filling the void
spaces between other Bodies, which would be a very foolish Thought if we think
it of God. Besides, whatever fills any thing, fills it with its whole, or with
but part of it; if God fills any, or all Bodily Creatures with his whole in
this local way, he himself is contained, and so according to this foolish fancy
is wholly finite, they being finite. If he fill them with a part of himself, he
is present but in part not wholly, and so is partly finite; which is absurd.
Nor can Bodily Nature be said to be infinite even in Extension, because it
consists of Parts; and where there are Parts there is a whole; and that of
which it can be said here is all, may be supposed capable of Addition, and so
is not infinite. But nothing can with good Sense be said to be in all places,
but all Bodies; and Place is nothing but the relation of Bodies to one another,
as containing and contained, on this side or that. God's more excellent and
real Omnipresence is virtual, as we have said; and his Infinity is nothing of
the nature of Out-stretchedness, (whatever is extended being finite) but is the
boundless or absolute Perfection of all his Attributes, incomprehensible to our
created and limited Conception. And he was the same, infinite, or complete,
when he had not made Body, (and consequently there was no space or place;) or
any other Creature to be in, or present with, and he cannot be beholding to
Creatures for any necessary Perfection. He fills Heaven and Earth, it is true,
but not with himself, but with the Bodies they contain; Bodies, I say, because
no Minds are capable of Place, or Being contained by Body, or here or there
among Bodies, otherwise than as thinking of Bodies that are here and there.

Now whatever God is in himself, is that without which he cannot be conceived,
and that which is necessary and essential to him, and implies him a necessary
Being.

10. But as to what he is in relation to Creatures, or unnecessary Beings, that
might have had no Being, he is Indifferent, or Arbitrary, which is the second
way of considering him we now come to. What he is in relation to Creatures, he
is not necessarily or essentially; because he was indifferent to cause them, or
not, no necessity compelled him to produce them. They are not necessary Beings,
they may be supposed not to be; and if they had not been, he had had no
relation to them. Neither the Existence, no nor the very Ideas or Thoughts of
Creatures, or unnecessary Beings, can be supposed necessary to the Divine Mind,
while we suppose him Selfsufficient. So that to be a Creator or Father, a Lord
or Governor, is not necessary or essential to God; but he freely chooses or
pleases so to be. God must be supposed Self-sufficient, or he cannot be
supposed to be, and Creatures must be acknowledged not Self-sufficient, or they
cannot be supposed Creatures; if so, there can be no necessary relation between
God and Creatures. There can be nothing but God and Creatures, and so God can
be related to nothing but Creatures; relations are of diverse things. The Notion
of Relation is what one individual thing is, if compared to another. Creatures
may be related as Individuals of the same kind, but God and Creatures cannot be
so related; they are infinitely different, Relations must have their Correlates
indeed; but where the Relations were not necessary, the Correlate depends on
the Relation supposed; one Individual cannot be relate and correlate, so that
there can be no relation essential in God. God is but one Self, or Mind, and
there can be nothing in God different from himself; he is but one Individual,
not Individuals, or else the Divine Nature could not be called He; one
essential Property, or Attribute in God, cannot be related to another essential
Property or Attribute, as a Causer, Creator, or Begetter. God's Understanding
cannot have the relation of a Cause, Father or Lord, to his Will, or his Will
to his Understanding. The Cause, or Begetter, or Lord, must be supposed before,
or greater than the Effect Begotten, and Subject: but nothing in God's
essential Properties can be said to be before, the Cause of, or greater than
another; nor can one of them properly say thou to another, they all being one
selfsame, or Mind. God's Fatherhood might rather be said to have the relation
of an Effect to his Will the Cause; for he was not a Father as he would not,
but because he willed to be so; so that Fatherhood more properly is a Notion
resulting from the Existence of things he has willed into being.

Again, God could not be a necessary or eternal Creator, Producer or Father;
because things created, produced or begotten, would on that Supposition be
eternal and necessary. But Creating, Produceing and Begetting, imply Cause and
Effect, and nothing essential to God can be an Effect, or thing caused; an
Effect or thing caused was not before it was caused; and it would be the
greatest Absurdity to suppose something in the Divine Essence, which was not.
This would contradict the Notion of Eternity, or the manner of Being that has
no fore and after in it, or any alteration. God alone is such: The Creatures
all of them have something past, and to come; what ever has any thing past, and
to come, in its nature is a Creature, had a beginning, might have had none, and
may have an end. Whatever has a former and a later, had a first, and may have a
last. Nor can Fatherhood, or Creatorship, be thought an essential Attribute in
God, because whatever is in God's Nature is a necessary Perfection, and he
cannot be supposed to receive any such Perfection from the Effects he has
produced, which he had not before, which would be in effect to deny him to be a
Self-sufficient Being. Nor can we with any consideration say, God might have
made things sooner or later; for when he did make then began the first moment,
there being no fore and after in God, from which time could be named.

Now though the Attributes of Creator, Cause or Father, began with Time,
resulting from things related to God, as Products and Effects, there cannot be
said to be any alteration in God, or increase of his Perfections; the things
that are made are but the Images, Pictures, or Characters of his Perfections;
and he is not any thing more, since he has painted out some of his
Excellencies, than he was before. Nor can God be supposed ignorant for not
knowing what is not; mere not being, is no Object of Knowledge; God knowing
himself only, knew all when there was nothing else to know; and knowing all
that now is, he cannot be said to be ignorant for not knowing more than all, yet
we dare not say he cannot produce more Creatures: when he alone was, he knew
himself the Original and Fountain of all Perfection, and knew himself able to
paint out, or make Pictures of his Perfections, and when he willed them they
were; but before he willed them to be, they cannot well be thought Objects of
his Understanding.

Now though God may be supposed solitary, or singlely in himself, without any
real relation, without so much as the Thoughts of Creatures in himself, the
Creatures cannot possibly be supposed to be without supposing their relation to
God as their Creator or Father. As it is our experience that we are, and that
we find by consideration that God must be, or we could not be, it presently
appears what he is to us, viz. our Cause, our Maker, Producer, or Father, and
consequently that he is our Owner, Sovereign, Lord, and Ruler. He that knows us
perfectly, both as to what he has made us, and what his Ends are in making us:
He cannot be supposed to make any thing of which he is ignorant in either of
these respects; he must also be supposed to have Will and Power, [yet Will and
Power in God are properly but two words for the same thing] and his Power or
Will to make, must be agreeable to his Wisdom or Knowledge how, or what would
best become him. He could make nothing but what would be an agreeable
Representation of himself, fit for such a Being to make, such as would
represent him as he is, and that must needs be good. He could make nothing ill,
there could be no disorder in his Works: It cannot be said that any thing might
have been done better than he did it, either as to the manner or end of being.

11. The final Cause or End for which God made things, (if it be not
Presumption to enquire) seems to be no other than the Manifestation of his
Wisdom and Power, and the Communication of his Goodness to his Creatures; for
in respect to God there can be no final Cause, God being all perfect and happy
in himself that is Self sufficient, there can no good or end come to him from
any thing; but we would rather say, he acted as became him when he pleased to
make Creatures, and some of them such as were capable by considering
themselves, and other things they find to be made by the same power to
acknowledge and admire him, and to move one another to acknowledge, and admire
his Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, so conspicuous in the curious and mighty
System of the Creation; and in so doing, to be pleased or happy. God being in
himself absolute Goodness, and so perfectly happy or pleased with himself, was
pleased to make Creatures capable of Happiness, or Pleasure, by the
Communication of his Goodness; who is not only good, or perfect enough in
himself to be altogether happy or pleased, but his Goodness is also enough to
make a world of Creatures happy, or pleased also by having Him the Object of
their Understanding and Will. The Creature experiencing God's Wisdom, Power and
Goodness, being duly affected with it, and endeavoring to affect its Fellows,
is said to glorify God, not to make him glorious; that is, showing forth
Perfections, but to see him such, and be an Instrument to cause him to be seen
such. God being essentially Wise, Good, and Powerful, that is Knowing, and
Loving himself, and able to make Representations of his Excellencies, if he
please to make any things, cannot but make them such as become him, viz. good,
and for good; that is such as are capable of being pleased with being what, and
how he has made them, and wills them to be; that is, Knowers and Lovers of him.

So that there appears in God, as considered in relation to us chiefly, Power
in producing us, Wisdom and Goodness as to the what, and to what end he has
made us. What God is, and will be found to be to us, considered as otherwise
than he wills us, may come to be considered better hereafter in another place;
nor shall we here enlarge, these Considerations having laid them but as
Foundations or Principles.

12. We shall now come to consider what we ought to be, or how we should behave
our selves to God, and for God's sake to one another. And this Obligation is
that which is properly called Religion.

Man having by considering himself, found God, or his own Cause; having found
what God is and does, in himself, and in relation to us, what he has caused us
to be, who are nothing of our selves, the great Question that concerns us is,
What we ought, or what it becomes us to do? And that is in short, to exercise
our Wills aright, that is suitable to, or becoming the Relation we stand in to
God, and one another: so as becomes such Creatures of such a Creator. We are
sure he cannot be, or act toward us, but as becomes him, that is best.

And that we may do this our Duty aright, we ought first to seek God, that is
study to know him more and more, that the regular Acts of our Wills may be
stronger and stronger: for the more truly and clearly we behold him the
Object, the more orderly and the more strongly will the Acts of our Wills be
about him.

Now God being an absolutely perfect Being, and consequently one who can have
no Acts of Will, but such as become himself, or are pefectly good in relation
to himself and his Works, our willing suitably or orderly is determined, and
made such by the Conformity of our Wills to the Will of God, willing as he
wills we should.

Now to will what God wills us to will, is the Essence, Sum, and Substance of
all Religion: I do not say Religions, for Religion is but one, even this one
thing; and there is not properly any false Religion. For if Religion is nothing
but the Obligation to will as God wills us to will, whatever is not according
to God's Will, is no Obligation, and though called Religion, is not so, but a
Mistake.

This therefore, To will as God wills, we must fix as the general comprehensive
Rule of our Obligation, Religion or Duty. And in order to the Compliance with
this Obligation, or Payment of this Debt, there are these things to be
considered.

First, We ought to be willing, and so endeavor, to know what God wills
concerning us. Then having found in particular what God wills, we shall
consider how it appears that to will those things that God wills, most becomes
us, is our greatest Obligation and Happiness.

13. These things we shall discourse a little more particularly.

First, That we should will to know, or be willing to enquire what God wills.

Having found, or rather knowing certainly that God has willed our Being, and
considered what we find our selves, and that God has showed himself powerful,
wise, and good, in causing us; it naturally follows that the Creature finding
himself an Agent, or capable of acting, and inclinable to be doing, should some
how or other direct his Actions. Now in as much as he finds himself imperfect,
but a Work or Effect of a higher Being exceeding him in Wisdom, Goodness, and
Power; it also rationally follows that this Being, viz. God, his Maker, must
needs know better than he, what he has made him, and what is most fit, or best
for him to do: And that he may know, and do what is best for him to do, he had
need (as abovesaid) be willing to know it. For although we know many things
without, or even against the Acts of our Wills, yet it is apparent, that for
want of Will or Desire, we don't know many things that we might and ought to
know, and so also loose some Happiness we might enjoy. We find various Subjects
of consideration offered us, and lying before us; and we have power to apply
our Minds to this or that, as more necessary to be considered.

Now as it is evident that the Will of him that is most wise, must needs be
best, it follows that we ought (even on the account of Interest) to desire, or
seek to know it. But the Reasonableness and Necessity of such a search, will
more appear in our finding out, by consideration (as we may) particularly what
the Will of God is.

And here the first Act of Will orderly considered in God, is in and toward
himself, without relation to any Creature, as he is before, and without them,
and that must needs be Good Will, or Love to, and Approbation of himself, and
Pleasure in himself, being a sufficient or all-perfect Being. Now if he loves,
approves, or is pleased with himself above all, as he is best, and only
necessary; he wills we should to our Capacity have like Thoughts of him, viz.
that we should love him, approve of him, esteem him, be pleased with him above
all; that is, think of him as he is, and not otherwise; for to think otherwise,
is unjust or a Lie. That which is most excellent, that which is best, is to be
loved best, is most desirable, such is God, or the first Cause. He is that
Being that has most, yea all absolute Perfections. It is just and good for God
to love himself best, because there can be no better Object. And it is just for
us to love, or desire, and esteem him better, or more than our selves, or any
thing else, because he is better, yea best: It lies as an Obligation in Justice
that our Desires ought to go out after him, and tend to him more than after, or
to our selves, or any thing else, not only because he is the only Object that
can satisfy, where Interest comes in, and has our self at the bottom, but
because he is in himself infinitely more excellent, it is his due.

True Love is of that nature, as to go out from self where it finds an Object
more excellent and desirable, and to prefer the Will of that more excellent
Object to its own Will, and the Pleasure of that more excellent Object to its
own pleasure, as distinct from it. Where the Creature's Will most agrees with
the Will of its Creator, the Creature acts rather because its Maker wills it so
to act, then because its own advantage is in the Action; the Creator, and his
Will and Pleasure, being infinitely more valuable than the Creature's Will and
Pleasure, or very Being. But the Creature agreeing with the Will of God in
loving him best, cannot possibly but find its greatest Advantage and Pleasure
therein; and the more it goes out of self, the more it turns its Eye and
Desire, from its self, toward God that infinite Good, the less it beholds
self, and thinks of, or acts as for advantage; as the more noble the Action is,
so the more Happiness it finds. And if Justice is not enough to persuade us
that God is to be loved, rather because it is our Duty, or his due as he is
best in himself, than because we have pleasure in loving him; the very
Happiness or Pleasure will tell us afterward, that it comes most by that just
and noble Neglect of seeking it in comparison of God, or making him but
subservient thereto. And indeed the Creatures will seems to be made so large,
and as it were unproportionable to all the rest in the Creature, that it cannot
possibly, as well as ought not to endeavor to be satisfied with acting in,
toward, and for it self. And from this Greatness of the created Desire is seen
the supreme Cause, Reason, and Excellency of the Creature's Love to God to be,
because God is in himself most excellent, (we on this account owe him the the
first and greatest Offering) and not chiefly, because we are happy, or our
desire filled in so doing; the higher Love (I mean in a Creature to God) is a
love of Justice, a Duty of being just and true; before which if the Love for
Interest come, it is in the sight of God an unworthy and impure Offering: Though
we are highly obliged to love God out of Gratitude for his Benefits, yet if we
love God most, or think we are obliged to love him most because we receive Good
from him, we love him for self-sake, and consequently love self best, though it
is not best, which is the very root of evil, in which we belie both God and
Self. The Creature complying with God's Will always finds its advantage, and so
also is bound as to a debt, to love God in gratitude; but self must have but
the second place, because it is a Creature consequent to the Creator's Will,
and but an imperfect thing; which in its self has also an evident Indication
that it is not to be best beloved, because of its incapacity of satisfying its
own Desire; but it is most fully satisfied, and perfectly pleased, (I mean as a
Creature can be) in acting toward God with a certain noble Neglect of it self,
as delighting (if it had any thing to bring to God) rather in giving than in
receiving. The Creature being but an Image of God, it is highly reasonable the
Creature should value, and esteem it self but as such, but should value and
esteem God in Truth and Justice, as he is that Self-sufficient Being, the
Creature is but a shadow, or Representation of, least the Good or Pleasure of
the Creature be set in the place of its Cause. In Love is found the height of
the Creature's Happiness, and the Act of giving in the created Desire, always
contends with the Passion of receiving, the Creature affects, and is pleased in
the Act of affecting, and is again pleased with the thoughts that its Affection
is welcome, or agreeable to the Will of the Affected; but that it is God's Will
and Pleasure we should love him, is a greater reason that we should so do, than
that we are pleased in doing it; for God's Will or Pleasure is better, and more
requisite than ours. When we love God best, who we know would be loved, and so
we ought to love, and who loves us again, or rather first, then will be found
whatever can be in love possible to the Creature. God we rationally believe
cannot be profited, or have any increase of pleasure by us, or our loving him,
or loose any, by the contrary, he being sufficient in himself; but as his own
Thoughts are in most perfect order, as he thinks aright of himself, as he is,
knows himself, and his own Will, to be most high, best, etc. so he loves and
likes that the Thoughts of his Creatures should be orderly, or that they should
think of him as he is, and of themselves as they are; and hence as Creatures
are many, and whoever loves God, and is happy thereby, cannot but suppose
others capable, to be, and actually are such Agents and Recipients as himself;
we in loving God for his Benefits must never forget to love him, because he is
good to others, as well as because he is good to us.

14. Now as God having all absolute Perfections in himself, cannot be supposed
to have any thing disagreeing in his Will, he must needs be supposed if he
work, or make any thing to make it, such as becomes him to make, that is good;
and consequently he must be supposed to love, and approve his Works, he cannot
be thought to disapprove any thing he himself does; and what he makes, as his
Work cannot be thought unworthy of his Approbation and Good Will, though he
himself is the greatest and only necessary Object to himself: And if God, who
is most wise, love and approve his own Works, it is highly reasonable we his
Works should be determined by him to do so too; and of God's Works it is
reasonable first, that we should love our selves (as well as we can) with such
a Love as God loves us, and esteem our selves with such an Esteem as God has
for us; we should be well pleased, and rejoice in being what God has made us,
and be ready to do what ever God wills us to benefit our selves, and make us
happy, and think of our selves just as we are; that is as nothing in our
selves, but as the Shadows, Images, and Creatures of God, and not as God's our
selves, or not as such whose pleasure is the chief thing. Now if we are bound
in compliance to the Will of God, as well as by interest to our selves, to
love, or wish our selves well, and to his Truth and Justice to think of our
selves as we are, to esteem our selves such as God has made us, and be pleased
in so doing; certainly the same Will of God obliges us in conformity thereto to
love our Fellow Creatures, and be pleased with what ever of God's Will, or of
Goodness, or Truth, or Loveliness we see in them. God loves them as well as he
loves us, as equally good, and excellent with us, as they are as much his
Creatures, who are as much his Images, and as near to him as we are, and we
ought to imitate God as he is imitable: He is pleased with his own Works, as to
what he has made them; so we should be pleased with, and in them as they are
his Works; we should like his Works, and admire him in them; delight in
beholding his Wisdom in making them, and endowing them, as well as in what he
has made us.

And as God is good to his Creatures, and loves them, that are capable of
Happiness, with a Love of Beneficence; so we should desire also to be good, and
beneficial to them, to endeavor to confer to their Happiness, because God
wills their Happiness. This Love of Benevolence, or Act of Good Will to our
Fellow Creatures, this desire of being good to them, because God is so, and
wills us to be so, has not only the Argument of Duty in Conformableness to
God's Will to persuade it, but has also that of pleasure in the very action,
greater than any is ready to believe that does not practice it; and as it lies
not idle in the Mind, but is unsatisfied tell it effects some Good, if
possible, to the Object, and confers to its Happiness, it tends to bring back
advantage as it naturally inclines the benefited Person to the like Re-action.

But this Love of Beneficence when it most nerely imitates God, proposing no
advantage to self, is most excellent, and perhaps has a greater delight
attending it than can be found in that Love which is forced by the sight of
Good in the Creatures.

There is also a Love of Gratitude when we love them, because their Love and
Beneficence to us deserves it; this Love is just, and so a Duty, but it is a
less God-like Love; being grounded in Creature imperfect self, which without
the higher Love to keep it right, would become evil: As to love God himself
merely for his Benefits (if there can be such a Love) would be to make our own
Will, our own Pleasure, the beginning and end of all, to make our Will as ours
the chief thing, and God who is infinitely better than we, and other Creatures
who are, if not better, as good, but subservient to us: which is unreasonable,
yea the root and foundation of Evil.

Now to love God First, because he is best, and wills that we should love, and
esteem him as such, it being just and good so to do. Secondly, Because he is
good to us, is the Author and Giver of all we are, and have of good; to love
him for these Reasons with all our Heart, all our Soul, and all our Strength;
that is truly, or unfeignedly, according to our Knowledge of him, and intensly
or strongly as we can: And to love our Neighbor, or Fellow Creature, as our
Self, viz. as truly, and for the same Reasons, viz. because God loves him as
well as us, and would have us love him because it becomes us to imitate God as
much as we can, and it is good for us so to do: This I say is the whole Law,
naturally written in our Hearts, and legible by the Consideration of God, what
he is in himself, and what he is to his Creatures, viz. The most perfect, or
Self-sufficient Being, and our most wise, good, and powerful Author, and of our
relation to him, and our Fellow Creatures.

15. Now from this fountain of Love proceed all the orderly streams of our
Thoughts, and external Actions. If we love God as we should, or desire as he
desires, we shall hate to do otherwise, fear to do otherwise, our aversation,
and avoiding that which is not right is determined by our loving that which is
right; and when we once truly love God, we shall be willing to study his Will
that we may not ignorantly act contrary thereto.

Having found God our Cause, Self-sufficient, and All-perfect in himself, we
cannot but acknowledge it fit and proper to be true, and acknowledge him such
as he is; there can be no reason that we should deny what we know to be true;
it is apparent that he is the Most High, the Greatest Being, and we are things
infinitely less, nay nothing of our selves; we are but the Effects of the Will
of the most wise, good, powerful Cause; on which consideration it is most
evidently fit for us to submit to his Guidance and Direction, as confiding in
his Wisdom, Goodness and Power, that he knows, and wills, and can do that which
is best for us, and to confess the Shortness of our Understandings, as we are
but Creatures, and know infinitely less than he; and consequently our Wills
cannot be so good as his. Hence also it naturally follows, that if God has made
us good, or as becomes the Best Being to make, and capable of Good or Pleasure,
we should be thankful for our Being, and rejoice or take pleasure in
considering God's Wisdom, Goodness, and Power; so should we be ready to comply
with his Will as Instruments in manifesting and communicating his Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness to our selves, and our Fellow Creatures, and hate, fear,
and avoid being a Hinderance in any of these. Again; We are rationally obliged
from the Consideration of God, and his Will to us in relation to those parts of
the Creation he seems to have made for our sakes and use, to use them so as we
may see most of God's Perfections through them; and as we may receive most Good
or Pleasure by them, and how this is to be done, he has made us capable by a
little reasoning and attention to find out, as his Will, which we have all
reason to submit to, trusting his Wisdom as the absolute Rule wherein he
directs us, he knowing best how these Ends may be attained, and his Goodness,
that he is willing they should. God has made all things to show his own
Perfections to those Creatures he has made capable of seeing them, and to make
them happy or pleased, whom he has made capable of Happiness or Pleasure, in
the use of them. We are ready to believe these Creatures have nothing in
themselves that can affect us with pleasure, but it is the Will of God we
should have pleasure in the use of them, that thereby we might be brought to
him, the fountain of all Satisfaction.

16. If this Account of the Will of God be not particular enough, yet a little
farther.

First, It is apparent, that having found our Author, or Cause, that only
Self-sufficient, and All-sufficient Being, we call God, the Father of all
things, we should not only take him for such, but that we should have no other
in the like esteem, or let him have any Corrival in our Thoughts. That One
single Supreme Being, must have no Fellow in our Hearts. The most exact or
perfect Image of him, that which he has made most like unto himself, must not
be by us exalted into his Throne. He is not an Image, and whatever is a
Representation of him, he himself has made such. We must not think therefore
of any Second, as we think of him the First, nor desire Another equally with
him. He must have the highest place, or be the only God both in our Judgments
and Affections; who is Highest, First and Best, or we shall be unjust, untrue,
and ungrateful.

Secondly, Nor must we (if we are obliged to think aright of him, and duly
esteem him) presume to make of our own fancy any thing as an Image, or
Resemblance of him; we must have no other Representations of God than what he
himself has made. He must not by us be misrepresented, nor must we reverence,
bow to, or honor any of our Fictions that we may fancy to resemble him; no,
nor whatever does indeed most resemble him, with any such honor as is due to
him. We cannot rationally think any Image exactly like him, nor in our Acts of
Worship have the same Thoughts of him as we have of any thing his
Representation, because there can be no Image of him but what he has made a
Creature infinitely distant from him, and so far unlike him. Nor must we be so
foolish as to think that we can offer our Homage more acceptably, or to better
purpose through any of our devised Mediums, than if we come to the Fountain
himself of all Goodness and Beneficence.

Thirdly, Neither (if we are obliged to prosecute the Ends and Designs of God
in the Manifestations of himself) must we mention any of his Attributes, or
Properties, whereby he is known to no purpose, or idly: For God is no vain or
trivial Being, nor is there any thing small, or of little weight, belonging to
him, who is the Supreme, or Self-sufficient Being, or a Matter lightly or
boldly to be played with by his Creatures, who are, even the highest of them,
unnecessary Beings, or nothing in themselves, and compared with God infinitely
beneath him: Much less may we dare to take his name into our Mouths, who is
Goodness and Truth, in wishing Evil, or asserting Falsehood.

Fourthly, And as God always ought to be had in most honorable esteem in our
Thoughts, and be by us acknowledged to be what he is; so consequently we ought
to set apart some time for the Profession of our Acknowledgment of our Maker to
others; that thereby they may be taught, stirred up to, and strengthened in the
same Acknowledgment, and due Homage to their Author: And that at the same time
we all may enjoy the necessary Benefits of a Cessation from the Fatigues of
Bodily Works, which commonly take up six times as much time in proportion as
our mental and more noble Exercises. Besides that our whole time is rather
numbered by Sevens, than by Eights, or any other numbers, may be seen by the
Natural Scale of numbers in Harmony, (wherein God has created all things)
which perpetually runs to a Seventh, and no farther; the Eighth being a new
First, or the First but doubled, and which of the seven is the Seventh, is
determined from whence we begin.

Fifthly, As God is to have the Supreme Honors, and Worship, as our Cause,
infinitely above us; so even those Creatures God has made the Instruments of
our Being, or before us in Excellency and and Dignity, should be acknowledged
as such, and so more worthy than our selves; and being honored by us, this
Honor should be shown, and testified by proper Submission to them, with other
Testimonies, whereby we may show our due esteem. Those that we are immediately
beholding to, though but as Instruments for our being, or well being, those we
have been necessitated to depend upon, though but as means for the continuance of
our Being in this life, have in all reason due to them from us, a debt of
Honor, Esteem and Regard; and those that in any respect are better, and more
excellent than us, can with no Justice be denied the Acknowledgment, as we find
occasion, of what they really are. Nor is the giving all our Betters
(especially those we have had our Dependence on as Parents) their due Regard,
without a natural Tendency to our long, and happy Continuance in this Life, as
they are thereby farther encouraged, and provoked to contribute the more to our
Felicity; and we may also hope for, as our Desert, the like Honor from our
Offspring, or bear the contrary with the less Regret.

Sixthly, And as God has made us all the means of manifesting his Excellencies
to one another, the Representations or Images of himself, it is the highest
Presumption and Boldness that we should attempt to put an end to, or spoil, or
put out of sight so excellent an Image of God, as he has made Man. And this is
first most unreasonable and culpable if practiced on Self, it being every Man's
Duty and Interest to be, as God would have him, and a high Affront and
Rebellion to refuse the Gift of Life and Duties thereof; and as it were a bold
revenging the Crosses of our foolish Wills on the Author of our Life, spoiling
as much as we can his Work.

And though we may be persuaded that possibly there may not be so much Excellency
in some others as in our selves, yet we should have so great a Love and Respect
to the meanest Man, as he is the Image of God, an Epitome of the Creation, a
Lord of the Corporal, and a Bond of Corporal and Spiritual Nature; wherein God
may be seen, as in a Map of all his Works, that we should not desire, or
presume to blot out so great a draught of the Divine Painter, or deface so
great a Representative of his Majesty. And as Man is a Lord over the inferior
Creatures, under God, to put him as much as possible out of his Office, his
Stewardship, or Viceroyalty, is an Affront to his Sovereign; for which he that
does so, ought himself to be put so far out of the same capacity, (though he
ought not to put himself out:) which he himself vertually acknowledges, since
doing as one would be done by, is a most apparently equitable Rule: For if a
Man loves Life as a Good, (as every man in his right mind does) and would not
that another should take that from him on which, as well or ill used, depends
so much of Happiness or Misery; consequently he ought not to take it from
another, whom God has made a living Man as well as he, capable of as much Good
as another, and in this at least better than he that would break this Rule,
that he does not purpose like him, to be a declared Enemy to his Kind, and
thereby adjudge his own Life ought rightly, and also necessarily to be taken
away to prevent a greater Mischief, viz. the loss of another Life more valuable
than the Life of this declared Despiser, and Enemy of God and Man; which
Reasons do not only convince us that we should do nothing tending to hurt the
Life of another, but that we should do what in us lies to preserve it as well
as our own.

Seventhly, As it is most reasonable we should Esteem and Honor particularly,
and in especial manner those that have been the means of our Being, and not
slight and despise them; that we should do as we would be done by, and do
nothing tending to destroy any of our Fellow-rational Creatures, but labor to
preserve them. So also that we may avoid the said Mischiefs, and perform the
opposite Duties, it is reasonable and necessary that in the business of the
Propagation of Mankind, Man should observe the Laws of Order and Convenience;
that is, that one Man and one Woman should be joined together in free Love and
Constancy, and become one in that matter, never leaving one the other to join
with a third. That one Man should not use more Women than such a one as a Wife
while she lives, nor one Woman more Men than her Husband before he is dead, is
most reasonable from many Considerations, though Men are so inclinable to
Disorders in this Matter, and so willing to be blind, and not see them. As if
the promiscuous use of Men, or Women be practiced; it will be the unavoidable
Confusion of Relations, and Cause of the many evil Consequences thereof:
Relative Duties cannot be performed where Relations are not known: As for
instance; A Child will be sometimes ignorant of his Parents, and so will not
only omit the Honor, Gratitude, and Reverence due to them, but may sometimes
be liable to slight, despise, contemn, or even abuse them, or do those things
to them which though lawful to others, not at all to be done to Parents; which if
ever they come to be known, might cause great disquiet of Mind. Again, By the
promiscuous use of Men or Women, the Right of Inheritances will often be
perverted and confounded; one Man's Child will enjoy another Man's Land, or
Goods, the true Heir being unknown; a Man shall labor for another's Children,
and not for his own. Again, As all Children of Men are more helpless than any
other Animals; if both parents are not concerned for them, they will many ways
be exposed to Misery, in the want of that Care and Love, and all the Effects
thereof which orderly Parents have for their Children: And the Women who are
not able to go through their Bringings forth, and Breeding up of their
Children, alone as other Animals, would be often exposed, with their Children
to great Miseries, without the constant Help and Care of such a Relation, as a
Husband and Father ought to be. Again, if one Man should have diverse Women,
though he were as a Husband to them all, diverse Inconveniences would follow; The
Man would love one better than another, and so not be equally just to them all;
for which cause they would not agree, or live in Love and Content together;
they would have Jealousies and Strifes against one another, and have many
Temptations to Inconstancy; when one Man is not enough ordinarily to satisfy
the natural Desire of more Women, some must be defrauded; so on the other hand,
if one Woman should have more Husbands, and if one Woman does not happen to be
enough in the Conceit of her Husband, or the Man for his Wife, the seldom
Enjoyment will render the Satisfaction the greater, and better answer all the
Ends of Marriage. Besides, if one Man should have many Wives, some others who
have as much reason to be allowed such a Help and Satisfaction, must have none,
whereby Propagation would also be much hindered. Again, Whoever loves a Woman
peculiarly, would also have her love him peculiarly, so on the other side.
Which Rule of doing as one would be done by, cannot be kept without loving
singly. No Whoremonger can possibly do as he would be done by; he would not
have his Wife or Daughters prostituted, or common: Nor would any Man of reason
be willingly exposed to the many Miseries not only of Diseases, but of other
natural Consequences following that high Injustice of breaking that most solemn
Contract, Bargain, or Oath, Men make at their Marriage; which need never be
made but freely, and to one they themselves have chose out of the rest of Men
or Women. Nor is the Benefit, Convenience, or Pleasure of single Love, and
Marriage, Constancy small, if the choice be well made; that is, of such as are
naturally suitable to, or for one another: Neither is this State to be
equaled, much less exceeded, by the extravagant, and roving Affections of
those that take most liberty in their Actions relating to Propagation. But I
need say no more, these Disorders being seen by all Men to have so great a
stroke in the Miseries of Mankind, and appear so base to all who behold them in
others. Only one thing remains, which I shall here touch upon; and that is the
reason of the Disorder, or Inconvenience of Marrying our Kindred, and that is
founded upon the Honor due to a Father and Mother; that they in themselves, or
in their parts, should not be profaned, made common, or inferior by their
Children, which nothing but Necessity could ever excuse, and which also would
unavoidably be by the promiscuous use of Men and Women.

Eighthly, No less evident is the Reason founded in the Order of things, and
discoverable by the natural Light that we should not either privately, or by
force, take away, or pervert the Property of, any Good that is our Neighbor's;
every Man acknowledges this unjust, in that he himself would not part with
that which is his Propriety, otherwise than by his Consent.

Ninthly, Not so much as the Good Name of another ought to be taken away, or
hurt, if we will do as we would be done by, nor our Fellow Creature represented
worse, or otherwise than he is, to his damage; we must not accuse him falsely at
all, much less in the name of the God of Truth; whom to invoke in testifying a
Lie, is the highest Affront, and daring'st Folly. Nor can we pretend that we
our selves, or our Neighbor, can have any advantage by a Falsehood; which by
observation we shall find sooner or later tending even to the external damage
of one or both; but if for a time there seem to be some profit in what has
been inconsiderately called an Officious Lie, it is but external, and at the
same time brings an Evil to the Mind greater than that outward seeming
advantage can counterva^^.

Tenthly, And that we may be exactly conformable to all these Laws of Order and
Equity, we are to observe them in our very Desires. It is most reasonable our
Desires should be conformable to the Will of God as manifested, in the order of
his Works tending to our Good. If we ought not to be unjust, untrue, or evil to
another, either God or Man, we must not so much as desire so to be; for Will to
do Evil is the Action of doing Evil, and wants only (and that but in some
cases) to be signified externally, or to affect another, to make it as much
Evil as it can be. But Love is the fulfilling of the whole Law, that which
prevents, or as much as possible amends these Disorders; he that loves God will
study to comply with his Will, to be just and true to him; he that loves his
Neighbor as he ought, will do him no harm in Body or Mind, but labor to do
him good in both: The absence of all the Good, and the presence of all the
Evil, relateing to our selves and our Neighbor, comes from the want of true
and regulated Love.

17. Now as the Free Will of God is the sole Cause of the Being, and Suchness
of Being of the Creatures; so whatever God has made cannot be thought to be
otherwise than Good, from Goodness it self can nothing but Good proceed: And
though it may be said in respect of the Power of God, he might have made things
otherwise; yet in consideration of his Wisdom and Goodness, it cannot possibly
be said, he might have made any thing better, without the greatest Presumption
and Folly: So that whatever God makes any thing, such is its Bestness. Let us
but once know what a thing was as it came from the hands of God, and what it is
the Will of its Maker it shall be, such is its Goodness, and the bounds of its
Creature Perfection; what it shall be, I say, because it does not appear that
God made things unchangeable, but rather in a condition tending to alteration;
so that though it be good, yea perhaps best for the Creature to be so, and so at
one time; yet it is good, or best at another time, to be in some respects
otherwise. The Intelligent Creature, at least Man, as he comes from the hands
of God, appears capable of an increase of Knowledge and of Satisfaction; and
though at first it is very good, yet it is capable of better being, in that
respect, and the Good Will of God in making things, is not to be considered
merely in their first Make, but as a continual Act reaching to the Creatures
whole Duration.

Now the way of the Creatures well Being, better Being, yea best possible
Being, viz. its most clear beholding the Perfections of God, intensest Loving,
and compleatest Satisfaction in him, depends on the most Wise good Will, and
Pleasure of God, which must be known as a Rule and Guide unto that end, viz.
that the Creature will as God wills, to its utmost Capacity, and be pleased
with whatever God does, who can do nothing but Good. This Conformity to the
Will of God, is the only possible way for the Creature to be as much as it can
be pleased, or happy; and so long, and so much as it wills no otherwise than
God would have it will; so long, and so much will it be joyous and satisfied,
as God made it to be in him.

18. But if ever the Creature wills otherwise than God wills, it must of
necessity find the Disorder and Inconvenience of that Will, and be uneasy, and
displeased; it will certainly be some time or other discontented and uneasy,
either that it cannot have Satisfaction in, and by its own foolish Will, not
being able to get it, (it not becoming God to comply with its disorderly
Desire) or that it was so foolish or wicked to seek Satisfaction that way. The
Creature can no more be satisfied in its own Will as independent, than have an
independent Being. It is the Property of God alone, and only possible to him
who is self-sufficient and all-perfect, to be pleased in himself: But as for
the Creature, so far and so long as it continues in its private and self-will,
so far and so long it must be unhappy; that which it wills cannot always or
long be done, unless God wills the same; and to will what one cannot have, is
the ground of all possible Unhappiness. And though a Creature may be supposed
uneasy sometimes in willing Good, it may be because another for whom it is
concerned, wills Evil against its Will; and this springs from its Creature
Nature that it is not sufficient in it self as God is, who therefore cannot be
affected with Uneasiness because of any thing another does. And this Uneasiness
of the Creature, on the account of another's Evil, may be grounded even in love
to God, and be because God's Will is disobeyed by others, it being a Property
of its imperfect Creature Nature to have Passion when what it wills is not
done: Which may be permitted also to stir the Creature up (who would otherwise
be more negligent) to seek, and endeavor its Fellow Creatures Good, Creatures
being mightily carried on to things by Passions, Pleasure, and Uneasiness; just
as there is a troublesome Sense of things hurting the Body, that we might be
thereby presently drove to avoid them: But this good Sorrow or Discontent,
because Evil is done wherever it happens, will end in, and be out-ballanced
by Joy, either in having done the Duty of Love, viz. of endeavoring that God's
Will may be done in and by others, as well as in and by one's self, or also
that the Person has by his endeavors brought another to Good, to Happiness in
willing as God wills, as he would have him. Nay this Sorrow is seldom void of
its present mixture of Joy and Satisfaction in doing one's own Pleasure, as
conformable to the Will and Good Pleasure of God.

On the other hand, though a Creature may possibly some time rejoice in willing
otherwise than God wills, as having for a time its disorderly Will, it cannot
be so always, but will some time or other find it has crossed it self by the
loss of a greater Satisfaction. And every such Joy will but add, multiply, and
lay up a greater Ground or Stock for Discontent and Anguish; in as much as if
the bare willing otherwise than God wills, is so very unreasonable, the
rejoicing in such Unreasonableness, is still a greater Disorder, and will yield
uneasier Reflections whenever it comes to be justly thought upon.

But that God made Intelligent Creatures capable of continual Pleasure or
Satisfaction, is evident, because it cannot be thought that God could make, or
create a Desire (how large so ever) greater than he can satisfy, who is
infinitely greater than it, and yet satisfied with himself, or that he would
make a Creature with such a Desire, and design it should not be satisfied,
because such a desire would be to no purpose. But that the Creatures Desire
should be satisfied with it self, is impossible, because the Creature is not
Self-sufficient, or God. But the Creature may possibly err, and suppose its
Happiness to lie in doing its own Will, as its own, and otherwise than God
wills.

19. To will otherwise than God wills, is the only true and bottom Notion of
Sin. And to will is always an Act, and there is no Act where there is no Will;
and it is as much an Act to will one thing, as it is to will another: If I will
an Absurdity, or a Contradiction, a Disorder, a Defect, such as is to please my
self in all my foolish Imaginations; it is as much willing, or an Act of the
Will, as if I will a Truth, a Good, or what is convenient, orderly, and
suitable to my nature. And there can be nothing culpable in the Creature, but
an Act of the Will must bear the blame; all other Thoughts of Created Minds
besides Volitions, and all Motions of Bodies, are rather Passions, and wholly
blameless; but where an Act of the Will, disagreeing with the Will of God, has
determined them amiss, in which Act of the Will, the Fault lies. So that Sin
can be nothing but an Act, or Volition that is contrary to the Will of God, and
consequently there can be no Sin but actual Sin. Sin in other words is said to
be a Transgression of the Law of God; that is, a doing something contrary to
the Law, or Will of God; and Doing is an Act, and nothing acts but what wills.
Sins that are properly called Sins of Omission, are not without Acts of the
Will; even Acts of Will to omit what ought to be done, the not willing a Good,
is never without willing something else, even Evil. It is from Ignorance, and
want of considering, that some Men talk of Original Sin as distinct from, or
other than Actual Sin, and it is an idle Notion as they understand it; for
wherever there is a Thinking Being or Mind, there is a Will willing something
or other; and if that Will be contrary to the Will, or Law of God, it is Actual
Sin: Where there is no such Act of the Will, there is no Sin. The not knowing
the Will of God is an Alleviation of the Sin, but though the Creature
ignorantly wills otherwise than God wills, that Ignorance if at all the
Creatures fault does not make it cease to be the Creatures disorder, or what
ought not to be. Nor is God ever the Cause of the Creatures inevitable
Ignorance of what he would have them do: He cannot be supposed to cause any
thing he wills not, that would be a great Imperfection; therefore he cannot be
said to cause the Creature not to know what he would have him do; that would be
all one as to will what he wills not, which is a Contradiction. But he has made
the intelligent Creatures capable of knowing and doing his Will; those Beings
that have no Thoughts, are incapable either of Sin or Obedience. Original Sin,
if we must use such a term, is nothing but the first Act of Will contrary to
the Will of God: the first disorderly Act of the first Creature that so acted,
is the Original or Beginning of all Sin; the first undue Act of the first Man
is the Original, or first Sin of Men; the first Act of Will, contrary to the
Will of God of every particular Creature, is its Original or first Sin; and the
Creature is never guilty of Sin, or acting contrary to God's Will, till it has
so acted. Most absurd therefore is it to suppose me guilty of that Sin which
was the Act of the Will of another; committed before I had so much as any act
of Will, or Being it self.

20. So far we have considered Creatures as coming from the hands of God, and
Good; or possible to be changed, and become evil in their Actions. We now come
to consider them as actually evil: And it is, or may be apparent to any Man
that will descend into himself, and consider that Man has not always and
exactly done as he should; but has sometime willed, or does will otherwise than
God wills. Of this, I say, we may be soon convinced by our own Experience or
Conscience, the surest of all Convictions. If it be true that as God is all
perfect, or sufficient in himself; so that he has created things to manifest
his Wisdom, Goodness and Power, etc. to the Intelligent Creatures, that they
may be as happy as they are capable of Being, it is most certain; First, that
if I have not considered my self, being once capable of Reasoning, and so found
my Cause, and enquired and found what he is, admired, and loved him, and had
thankful Thoughts of him, it is not because I was incapable of doing so, but
because I would not, and I have not willed as becomes me; as God wills I
should, but have sinned. Secondly, If I have willed any thing that does not
tend to make me as happy as I can be, or as much pleased with God in himself,
and in his Works, as I should, I have willed otherwise than God wills, and so
have sinned. But I find even after I have found God, and somewhat considered
him, I have very much forborne or neglected to consider him, and considered
other things unworthy such consideration more than him; nor have I loved him as
the Self-sufficient Being, and my Cause, ought to be loved; but have loved my
self, or other things unworthy such Love, more than him; while I am convinced
he is better than me, or any thing, and the Cause things are, and are any way
condusive to my Good or Pleasure; and in so doing, as well as in other
Instances, I find I have sometimes willed those things which at other times I
have found not tending to make me as much as may be happy. I have willed things
before I have considered, or informed my self of the Nature and Tendency of
them, slighting those Directions God has made me capable of receiving from him;
and so acted, or willed disorderly, or otherwise than becomes me. I have not
always been pleased, or glad, in contemplating God in himself, and in his
Works, and therefore I find I have not always willed as God wills. I know (or
may soon do) that God's Will is best in relation to himself, and his Creatures:
I have been convinced such and such a thing is according to God's Will; yet I
have done otherwise, and chose that which my Judgment informs me is not God's
Will, thereby asserting my own Will therein better than God's, or my Judgment
truer than his. Again, I am convinced (when I seriously consider) that God's
Will is that wherein I can best be pleased; but I find I have been displeased,
and uneasy in mind many a time, either because I have found I chose something
not best for me, or because for want of Consideration I have thought something
good for me, and willed it, which I could not possibly have: Thus I find
infallibly I have willed otherwise than God wills, and so have sinned.

Here we have from the Light of Nature, or our own Reason, an evident
Conviction of Sin, or of Man's Fall and Degeneracy; every one may see it in
himself, and the same we may observe though not some ways so apparently in
others. And all Mankind in general, how dark soever their Light, and how little
soever their Reason is, having once attained to the use of Reason, have been
sometimes ready to confess themselves indeed guilty of doing amiss, and forced
to accuse others as guilty of Evil. What Man is there but that, if I do any
thing to make him less happy, is sensible I do not as I would be done by, and
so do not my Duty, but am a Sinner? Now God cannot be supposed to make Man thus
evil, and out of order, because he can do nothing but what is good; though he
made Man capable of sinning, or going out of order: And as Man must needs be
supposed to come out of God's hands good, and orderly; but is become evil,
acting a miss, Man must be supposed to be fallen, and degenerated from his
Primitive state.

21. The Greatness of Man's Sin in willing otherwise than God wills, the
Grievousness of his Fault in falling from what God made him, is apparent, or
may be so if we but consider; That Man is nothing of himself, but is beholden
to God for his Being, and All. It is therefore most highly unreasonable that
Man should deny to acknowledge such a one his Author, or dare to contradict or
disbelieve his Wisdom and Goodness, in acting as if God did not know, or would
not do what is best for his Creature. How unreasonable is it that Man should
foolishly, and with an ungrateful Stubbornness, refuse the Good, yea any Good
God offers him? Had God made him less capable of Good, he had been bound to be
thankful for any capacity; had God denied him some Good, he had made him
capable of, he had been endebted to Love, and thank his Maker for any Good he
had given him. It is a high Slight of the boundless ever-overflowing Fountain
of Goodness, for Man to refuse any, or the greatest Happiness God offers him;
and whoever does not study God's Will as a Director to Happiness, will
certainly miss some Good. It might be Love to refuse what the Giver would loose
or want, by giving it, or could not well spare; but a Slight not to take where
the Giver has abundance, and will have never the less by giving. For Man to
refuse any Happiness God offers him, is so far to desire not to be beholden to
God. But he that is most beholden to God, is most happy; and he that is most
happy, must consequently be most beholden to him. This will remain an
everlasting Truth while God and Creatures have a Being. Is it not the height of
Folly, yea Madness, as well as Injustice, to choose Misery rather than
acknowledge one's Maker as the Author of Happiness? To desire not to be
beholden to God, our Cause, our Lord and Sovereign, is the highest Affront to
the highest Majesty, and no less than an absurd Endeavor to dethrone him, and
be of our selves, that is be God: To substract our selves from our Dependence
on his Will, and to prosecute our own, in Distinction from, and Contradiction
to his, is so unreasonable, bold, and mad a Presumption as to endeavor to
overcome, and destroy him; so great a Folly and Absurdity as to endeavor the
Impossibility of adnihilating the Being of all Beings, and consequently our
Selves and All. So great a Treason, Boldness, Perverseness, Madness and
Injustice, is contained in Sin, or willing otherwise than God wills. And all
Acts of Sin are essentially the same; and every reiterated Act of Sin, is
virtually the Approbation and Ratification of all Sins past, and to come.

22. Now for as much as the Creature is found guilty, and convicted of this
mighty Disorder, has done Evil, and it cannot possibly be undone, but that it
will eternally remain true that the Creature has sinned; it follows to be
considered what is now to be done, or how the Creature ought to behave himself,
as guilty and conscious of Sin.

And there are these things which by natural and right consequence, should
arise in Man from this Consideration: First, an humble Acknowledgment and
Confession to God of what he has foolishly done, not to fancy he can hide his
Sin from God, or to go about to extenuate it, and excuse it. Secondly, A
Sorrow, Regret, and Displeasure with himself for so foolish and unreasonable
Doings; which Sorrow, though it supposes, and is naturally consequent of Evil,
yet it becomes a Medium in order to future Joy, because the troublesome
Thoughts, or Sense of what we have done amiss, urges and instigates to that;
which is the Third, and chief thing Man should do, having sinned, viz. Repent,
or study what is God's Will, and resolve to do it, or will as he wills for the
future. Which things on the same reason ought to be reiterated as often as Man
shall fall again, or reiterate Acts of Sin. With these there should be a hearty
Desire to God that he will forgive, or manifest to us anew some Acts of his
Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, whereby we may be effectually influenced to see as
it is the Disorder, or Evil of our sinful Will, to change our Mind fully to
conform for the future to God's Will, that God may be to us for time to come,
as he would have been if we had never sinned. This, I say, is the natural Duty
of a Sinner, To repent, or be sensible of his doing amiss, and to change his
Mind to do well; and such a Sinner may boldly, if humbly ask, and expect
Forgiveness of God. Now if we consider the Forgiveness of God well, I think
nothing can be truly and properly Forgiveness but (as I have said) the New
Manifestation of some Acts of God toward the Creature upon its Sinning and
Sense of it, whereby it is effectually persuaded to change its Will, and go on
to change it till it comes to will again as God wills: In which God relieves
the Creature (more or less, according to the degree of its new Obedience it
finds in it self) from the uneasy Thoughts of its past Sins, and affects it
with the same Pleasure and Satisfaction (proportionable to the progress of its
Repentance) the Creature would have had in God if it had never sinned, God
abating so much of his due as cannot possibly be paid, viz. the keeping of his
Law, which has not been done for the time past. This is the (...), Forgiveness
of Sin, to be prayed for, and believed, and expected in God. But whatever Acts
of God we may suppose toward the Creature, if it is not brought to will again
as God wills, sometime or other to do its Duty, it is not really forgiven, its
Sins pardoned, or done away, divorsed, or loosed from it, as the word (...)
signifies.

23. Now for as much as the Creature considering the Unreasonableness of its
Sin, its Will not being quite changed, or but little changed, and its
Understanding not fully informed, may be apt to doubt [as too inclinable to
measure God by its self] whether God will indeed thus add to act toward the
Happiness of a once Rebellious Creature: We shall consider by what rational
Arguments we may be persuaded that God will indeed, yea is ready to forgive.
First, it is God's unchangeable Will and Command that the Creature be obedient
to the Will of his Maker, as what is most just and reasonable; for God cannot
be supposed to change his own Will, or will what is not just and reasonable: To
suppose he can is all one as to suppose him imperfect, or not God, or not wise
and good. If so he must needs be supposed willing Repentance, or a Leaving, or
Remission of Sins in the Creature that has sinned, and God cannot cross or
contradict himself. Besides, it is better that the Sinner repent, and become
obedient, than that he go on in Sin and Disobedience; and God cannot be
supposed to will that which is not best. Again, if it be a Good to will as God
wills, and the Creature having found the Unreasonableness of the contrary some
what desires so to do, is somewhat inclinable so to do, it cannot be supposed
that the Creature should desire more Good than God does, or will any real, and
to it possible and suitable Good which God does not will. God will therefore
hear the Creatures desire, forgive, or promote the Creatures good desire, and
give it fresh Arguments effectually to persuade it more and more to will as he
wills; and when it is brought perfectly, or exactly so to do, it is perfectly,
or fully acquitted, and fully justified, or made just, and not till then,
because it is not so till it is so; nor can God reckon, think or account, or
declare it so till it is so, because he can neither be deceived nor deceive.
But as Repentance is a work of time, even of our whole Life; so Forgiveness, or
Justification, is a work of time, not perfected till Sin is done away.

That God has given intelligent Creatures a Capacity of willing as he wills
they should, is evident: If he had not, they could not be obliged so to do; and
that they might possibly, and have willed otherwise, is as apparent as
Experience can make a thing: It is moreover manifest, that he has given them a
Capacity of knowing when they have willed otherwise than their Maker wills: An
Understanding capable of seeing the Unreasonableness, with a Will sometime
sensible of the Unhappiness of so doing. We have already found, that he wills
his own Will to be done, and that his Will is best, and unchangeably so, is
evident; that he adds upon the Creatures Sin fresh Arguments to persuade the
sinning Creature to change, and go on to change its Evil will, till it is
changed wholly; that it becomes God so to do, while nothing can be supposed
better, or possibly so good, either to the Manifestation of God's Excellencies,
or the Creatures Happiness, makes us positively conclude that God will never be
wanting on his part to the Sinner.

But here perhaps some will start a not-altogether impertinent Question.

24. Why God made the Creature capable of sinning, or willing contrary to his
Maker's Will? I answer;

That it was most becoming the Perfections of God, and their Manifestation in,
and to the Creatures, and the Creatures Happiness thereby, to make them
capable, or able either to obey, and will as God wills; or to disobey, or sin,
by willing the contrary. For the Illustration of this, consider; First, God's
Dominion, Sovereignty, or Lordship, could not otherwise have been acknowledged:
For if the Creature had not been capable of Sinning, it had not been capable of
Obeying; Obedience to God being nothing but willing what God wills, because he
wills we should, when we can possibly, will otherwise; and Disobedience to God
can be nothing else than willing what God does not will, when we may will what
he does. There is no Obedience properly so called, or of Mind, but what is
free, nor no Disobedience of Mind but what is spontaneous. To Be or Do what we
cannot but Be or Do, is no proper Obedience; and not to Be or Do what we cannot
Be or Do, cannot well be called Disobedience. And God did not make Man capable
of Obeying or Sinning, that he might Sin; but capable of Sinning or Obeying,
that he might Obey, and so acknowledge, and show God's Dominion and Lordship
over him. Again, if Man had not been a Voluntary, or Free Being, he had been
incapable of Pleasure or Happiness, (which consists in the Satisfaction of
Will, or having ones Desire) and so had had no such occasion of acknowledging
God's Goodness. Nor farther would he have had the Excellency of Being so much
the Image, or Representation of God, who is a Free Agent, or has a Will though
not indifferent to Good and Evil: God's Will being the Rule of Good, he cannot
but will what he wills, nor can he suppose any thing otherwise than it is, his
Wisdom being absolutely perfect. But Man is the Image of God as he is a Free
Agent, or has a Will capable of willing Good. God's Will is his own Rule, he
being Self-sufficient, can have none to obey that is wiser, or that can will
better. Man's Good depends on God, as the Shadow on the Substance, as the
Picture on the Thing painted out. When Man's own will interposes between God
and him, he so far cease truly to represent God, and be happy. God's Will,
which is best, is Man's Rule, or Exemplar; and the Creature can be no more like
God than an Image can be to a thing it represents. An Image can never be the
same thing it self of which it is the Image, (to say it may, is all one as to
say it is the Image, and not the Image, which is a Contradiction) nor can any
Image be equal, or in all respects such as the thing it is the Image of, or
like it more than in some respects: For if we could suppose two things every
way alike, neither of them could be said to be the Image of the other; because
the other would with as much reason be said to be the Image of that: Nay it
would be absurd to talk of a Distinction where we have supposed no difference:
And the Image of a Creature may be more like, or nearer an Equality with the
Creature it represents, than an Image of God can be like God; for nothing can
be the Image of God but a Creature; for there is nothing but God, and Creature,
and between God and Creature, there cannot be less than infinite Distance and
Inequality; which is not between Creature and Creature, though one be the most
perfect, the other the most imperfect of Creatures, being both finite. Nothing,
I say, can be said to be the Image of God but a Creature, unless there could be
conceived any Third Being between God and the Creature. I say farther; God
cannot be said to be the Image of God, or, which is the same, that which is the
Image of God cannot be said in a proper sense to be God; for so the Image would
either be said to be the Image, and yet the same thing it is the Image of,
which is all one as to say it is the Image, and not the Image, or what it is,
and something else than what it is, which is a Contradiction. But if the Image
of God, being something Else, or Another, than what it is the Image of, be yet
said to be God, it is consequentially said to be Another God, and such a One
who is but an Image of Another; which also affirms it in the Consequence at the
same time not to be God, though inconsiderately said to be so: For what is in any
sense but a Resemblance, or Imaginary, is not God. Things may be said in some
respects to be like God, but God cannot be said to be like any thing, he being
First, Original. Besides, nothing in God can be the Image of God, because that
one thing would not be the Image of God, viz. of the complete Divine Being, it
being supposed to be the Image but of Something Else in God, not of All in God,
it Self (if it were not absurd to call it, Self, there being not more than One
Self in God) being something supposed in God. But to conclude this Digression;
God being altogether Substance, and Original, there can be nothing Imaginary,
or but a Copy in him; whatever therefore is an Image, or Copy of God, is but a
Creature; and whoever affirms the contrary, affirms he knows not what, a
Chimera, or his own vain Imagination, if not worse. But to return again from
this occasional Digression.

If Man could not have willed Evil, he could have had no Temptation to it,
either from within or without; and his Disobedience could not have been so
signal and great, could it be supposed any at all: Virtue that is never tried,
is not so eminent. God did not make the Creature capable of supposing something
preferable to its Subjection to the Will of its Maker, that it might seek such
a thing, or venture to try whether it were so or no, but that it might have
occasion to resist and overcome such a Suggestion, and own its Dependence;
without which it had been incapable of, or wanted that Happiness or Pleasure
which is found in a sort of Selfdenial in doing what is pleasing to a more
excellent Person which one loves, which is not little, as every one may
experience, the love of Men perhaps being always placed on the account of
something seen of excellency in another which is not in one's self; and the
degree of such Pleasure consists in the degree of Love, and the degree of Love
in the degree of Excellency in the Object; and God is the best of all things
that can be loved.

25. But here may be objected what by many is asserted; That Man is not free to
will either Good or Evil. And here some affirm, That Man since he has sinned,
and remains impenitent, is free only to will Evil. Others from more
consideration, (though it may seem a Paradox to the former, and ought to be well
explained) are persuaded that Man is not free to will Evil, but only to will
Good. Let us for the farther clearing this whole matter, consider it
fundamentally.

Good, or Pleasure, I take to be the same thing, and the Pleasure of the
Self-sufficient Being is the supreme Good; he being of himself, and beholden to
none for any Pleasure, but all beholden to him for whatever can truly please,
it is but just and right that all Pleasure should be according to his Will and
Pleasure, who knows what is best for all: Who though he take pleasure in his
Works, it is because they are his, made according to his Wisdom and Goodness.
He who is the cause of their Being, is consequently the cause of any Pleasure
he can be thought to take in them, as well as of that which Creatures may take
in one another. Now Pleasure and Good, being the same, it is to be considered
as in the different Subjects, God, or his Creatures; God being Self-sufficient,
nothing can affect him with Displeasure, or uneasy Thoughts, all his Pleasure
arising from within, even from his unchangeable Self, who cannot will to be
displeased, or uneasy, nor can any thing be supposed to force him to be
displeased. Nor can the Creature properly be said to desire its own Unease or
Displeasure, its Pleasure lying in having its Will; if it could desire to be
displeased, it could will, and not will at the same time, which is a
Contradiction as bad as to say a Will is not a Will. But the Creatures Will
becomes evil two ways. First, When it wills or desires that which in it self is
a Good (yea perhaps the greatest Good) but to it impossible, or not belonging;
as to be satisfied in its own proper Will, without regard of another, as if
the reason of Good were to depend on its Will, which is a Prerogative only
belonging and possible to God, whose Will can give Being to things, and who is
sufficient in himself. The Evil of this (and indeed all sinful Desire includes
it) lies in this, that the Creature wills a Contradiction, or Absurdity, and
not only so, but foolishly and unjustly attempts to rob God of his Prerogative,
or his very Being, and to become God it self, or to be another God equal with
him. And though this Attempt, which is virtually in all Sin, can really take
nothing from God, or make him uneasy, yet in common Speech, or speaking
improperly as if we were speaking of Men, God is said to be displeased or
angry, with it; but it is indeed no more but that it is not according to God's
Will, he does not will it, or does not take pleasure in the Creatures Folly and
Absurdity. So that the Creature thus affecting Supreme Good, does not only
commit the Evil Act of Injustice in attempting to take what is not its own, and
of Folly, in affecting what is impossible; but also has willed that which will
bring in the Consequence, its own Displeasure; because willing what it cannot
have, while it so wills it is uneasy, or else is so when it reflects on its
Folly. Secondly, The Creature wills Evil in willing that which has really but
the Appearance of Good, [Appearance, I say, for at least a Seeming, or Supposed
Good, must be acknowledged the Object of Man's Will] as when a Man wills a
thing which when he tries, has no Satisfaction in it at all, or when he wills a
created Good, I mean the Enjoyment of some Creature that does really give him
some small Satisfaction; but that present and small Satisfaction, takes away a
greater and more lasting it might have had, if it had not willed that thing; it
being according to the Will of God, as well as for Man's Interest that Man be
as much as possible pleased: Man really wills Evil, though under the form of
Good, or even though there is some Good in the thing when he wills that which
tends to hinder, or lessen his own Pleasure or Happiness, which is according to
the Will of God. Thirdly, A Man's Will is evil when, although he will that which
is in it self a Good, and good for him he wills it so, or in such Circumstances
as hinders good from another Man; for there is the same reason why another Man
should be pleased as much as may be, as that I should be so; and in hindering
the Good of another I want the reasonable Acts of Love and Justice, and not
only so but even also hinder Good from my self in thus disorderly seeking it;
for I could be more happy and pleased if all my Fellow Creatures were so, than
if they be not; and the more of them happy and pleased, the more may I; for the
Unhappiness or Displeasure of others, adds to my Unhappiness, if I have been
any way the cause of their Unhappiness, when I see my Injustice; or if I have
not, as I am affected with Compassion, or as I therein do not see so much of
the Manifestation of the Wisdom and Goodness of God, in the order of his
Creatures, I have not such cause of Joy, as if I see my own pleasure as it were
multiplied in my Fellow Creatures, or have the Satisfaction of being
instrumental to their good. And perhaps from diverse other reasons, the more of
my Fellows are happy, the more in degree may I be so. But let us consider
wherein the Evil of Man's Will consists, for more Clearness in an Instance or
two. A Man desires a Bodily thing in the Application of which to his Body, God
has annexed a Pleasure to the Mind; this Gratification of the Sense is good,
and God causes it; but when the Man wills it in such a Circumstance, as of
necessity robs him of a greater Pleasure he might otherwise have had, or gives
him in the consequence greater Displeasure than the want of that thing could
be, the willing of that thing becomes an Evil to him in abating his Happiness,
and which is worse an ungrateful Slight to his Maker, a greater Disorder in not
consulting his Will to guide him, or not confiding in his Wisdom and Goodness,
who would have the Man as happy as might be. As the Pleasure a Man receives in
Eating and Drinking is good; but if he eat or drink too much, he dulls his
Appetite, and renders it less sensible, and often lays the foundation of a
Disease that not only affects him with its consequent Displeasure, but renders
him incapable of the pleasure of Eating and Drinking for a much longer time
than he had of pleasure when he disorderly, or immoderately sought it.

Or if he do not thus abate his Happiness, if he rob his Neighbor for it, that
act of Injustice never fails one way or other to give him more Displeasure than
he had Pleasure so unduly attained. So likewise the Pleasure in the Act of
Generation is good; but when ever a Man goes out of the order God has set Man
in the reason of that Satisfaction, he acts Evil, either in rendering himself
less capable thereof, or by procuring himself far greater Evil or Displeasure,
in the many Mischiefs that the satisfying that Desire, any other way than with
a Wife, naturally produces to him, and his Fellow Creatures, with the
troublesome Reflection that he will sometime have on such Disorders, when he
sees not only that he has deceived himself, but also the Unreasonableness of
his Disbelief, slighting, disbelieving, and affronting his Maker in not
studying, but rejecting his most wise Order and Direction. So that if a Man
wills that which is good, but impossible to him, or what belongs not to him,
that which is but little good, and takes away more good, hinders good to
another, is but an appearance of good, his Will is evil. He that desires his
Neighbor's Wife, wills Evil though she be the best Woman in the World; for though
she be good, she is not his; he invades another's Property, and so wills an
Injustice; nor can he have his desire without abating the Happiness of his
Neighbor, and the Woman's too in her becoming Evil, and finding its
Consequences.

And here I cannot but take notice of the a foolish Abuse, common among
Mankind; that is, they confidently call the Desire One Man has to Another's
Wife, or a Woman to Another's Husband, with all such disorderly Desires, by the
name of Love, meaning Love to the Person desired, when it is nothing less;
being always that which so far as it is satisfied diverse ways effects the
Unhappiness of the Person said to be beloved, which such a Lover can hardly be
so blind as not to see. Yea farther, that it is but a Self-love, (if it can be
called Love at all) and a grossly mistaken one too, rendering the Lover himself
more unhappy than he would have been had he never so affected, though he enjoy
the Object of his Love, I would say his Lust, for that is the proper name on it.

But to draw toward a Conclusion of this matter; I say, whatever a Man
desires, the Act of desire is free; to suppose otherwise would be all one as to
suppose Volition not to be Volition, or a Will not a Will. A Will cannot be
said to be compelled; for though it cannot but Act, or Be, it is freely, or
willing, Compulsion, and Volition are contrary and incompatible. But the Will
is led by Arguments, and at least Appearances of Good. If there could be
supposed but one Object of the Will, it could not but apply to that, yet it
would be freely; but where there are many Objects, it chooses by appearance.
But Man having the Faculty of Reasoning as well as Desiring, ought to suspend
the Acts of his Will by a kind of Indifferency, at least as to their Effects,
till he is sure his choice will be good. The Will is led by Arguments: I say,
whether the Act of Will be according to God's Will, or no, and Volition is
Volition, or to be willing is to be willing. And a Man is (in short) more
properly said to will, or desire Evilly, than to desire an Evil, I mean to
himself; for that a Man may be so wicked as often to will, and consequently
freely, yea and knowingly an Evil to another Man, and sometimes effects it, and
would also affect God with an Evil, or a real Displeasure, if it were possible
that Man's foolish Will could be so done, is daily apparent, and true beyond
all dispute. And that Sinners may be said to will Evil continually, is not to
be understood as if they never desired any thing that is good, but that every
act of their desire, though they desire Good, has some Evil Circumstance or
other, as an Evil Manner, Evil Means, or Evil Ends, etc.

Now God, as abovesaid, cannot will either an Evil, or Evilly, his Will being
the Rule of Good; and to suppose God to will Evil, would be all one as to
suppose him to will what he don't will: Nor is it for want of Power or Freedom
that God cannot will or do Evil; but it is rather a Note of Power that he cannot
be deceived, but can know all things as they are, and cannot be supposed
ignorant of any Truth, because he is the Exemplar and Cause of all Truths: He
cannot be supposed to do amiss, because he is All-perfect: He cannot will one
thing now, another anon, because he is unchangeable, always knowing what is
best.

And as God, in whose Being is no now and then, cannot will contrary to his own
Will; so he cannot be supposed (without the height of Contradiction) to will
that the Creature should will contrary to his Maker's Will; this would be to
suppose God to will contrary to his own Will, or will a thing, and yet not will
it. Besides, if God please to make known his Will, which he must be supposed to
do one way or other, or the Creature cannot well obey it, or be determined to
its Duty, when the Creature knows it, or has reason to believe God wills so and
so, he can have no reason to suppose God can have a Secret Will, or
Determination, that the Creature should do the contrary: This would be to
suppose God a Liar, and to deceive his Creature, yea to deny God to be either
true or good. I have the greatest reason to believe God would have me do what
he commands me, that is any way causes me to take for his Will, and that he
commands me what is best for me to do. I cannot err here, if I am sure he
commands. If God could be supposed to will one thing, and command the contrary,
he would contradict himself; for the Commands of God can be nothing but his
Will made known to the Creature, and he cannot be supposed to frustrate his own
Will. Such an Absurdity foolish Man would hardly be capable of as to will his
Child to do, what he commands him not to do; or to command him to do that which
he wills he should not do: Yet I have known some so bold, or inconsiderate, or
displeased with the good Will of God, as to affirm in plain words, so
unreasonable a thing of God, as that he willed Man should do what he commanded
him not to do. But God has done very great things, both within us and without
us (and will do) to vindicate his Wisdom, Truth and Goodness, against all those
that are so hardy or foolish, as to deny them, either plainly, or in
consequence.

26. And though God may oblige his Creature to a thing for a time, (especially in
that which seems an Arbitrary Command) which he may not will him to do always,
but afterward something else, it is no Contradiction or Change in God's Will,
(who wills that which is first, and last in respect to the Creature,
altogether) but the Creature being changeable, what is best for him, or his
Duty under one Circumstance, is not so under another: Which Will of God the
Creature comes to know part now, part anon. As for instance; God wills me to do
that when I am a Child, or a Servant, which is not my Duty when a Father, or a
Master; and that when I am a Father, or Master, which is not, or cease to be
my Duty when I am in no such relation.

An Arbitrary Command of God I call that which Man sees not, or not clearly the
reason of to himself; nor has any evident Argument to persuade the doing, or
not doing of it, but because God commands.

That which is not evidently a Natural Duty, but some Express Command, God may
please to give the Creature without giving him the reason of it. Such a thing
also God may oblige his Creature to, if he please only for a time: But those
Duties that result from the very notion of our being God's Creatures, as Love,
Reverence, Trust, Dependence, etc. are unchangeable while God is God, and the
Creatures are Creatures, whether God expressly command them or no. But if God
shall expressly command his Creature a thing, and yet not give the Creature the
Reason of it as good to the Creature, it must nevertheless necessarily be
supposed to be good, and must so far at least appear to him as that he sees it
is not evil, or contrary to a natural Duty, or former Command. And if we
consider, we shall find it most reasonable and convenient for Man to obey the
Will of God, not only in things that are apparently agreeable to Man's relation
to his Maker, and for Man's Benefit; but in things he may not readily see the
Agreeableness or Benefit of: if first he be sure God commands them, though
therein God may seem for the present to limit, or abridge Man's Happiness;
concluding God is wiser and better than the Creature. For the Creature is
beholden to God for all he has; and if God deny him something that he may now
fancy a Good, he has no more reason to be displeased with God, (who arbitrarily
gave him his Being) than because he made him a Man, and did not make him an
Angel. As a Man who should have the Gift of a good Estate from a Person who was
no way obliged to him, would be thought most unreasonable to deny a small quit
Rent as an Acknowledgment to his Benefactor, from whence he received the Estate.

Such a Reservation, of at least a Seeming Good from Man, was very suitable in
his first Creation Make, and Excellency, as he was in the Likeness of God, Lord
of all the Inferior Creatures, that he might thereby acknowledge his
Subjection and Dependence on God, and God's Sovereignty and Dominion over him.
And yet it must also be affirmed most for Man's Profit to part with this
Acknowledgment, though the thing he fore-go should be supposed a Real, and not a
Fancied Good for him; because he would have kept a vastly greater Good than can
be supposed in any one particular Creature, that is the Satisfaction comes to a
dependent Mind in obedience to his beloved Maker and Sustainer, with the most
pleasing sense of his Love, and Favor to him, the Sweet Familiarity, Presence,
or Converse with his God, which was consequently interrupted, or destroyed by
Disobedience. Yet it may be a question whether whatever God may be supposed to
will Man to abstain from, is not in it self inconvenient for him, and whether
it may not be thought a sufficient trial of Man's Submission and
Acknowledgment, when only the Reason of the Command is reserved from him.
Whatever God has created is certainly Good, and for some wise End: Those things
we call Poisons, or which eaten, or applied in a small quantity, will destroy
the Frame of Man's Body, are good some way or other; but it is not always
necessary Man should know the Uses of them.

If a loving and wise Father a Physician, should thus warn his beloved Son;
Meddle not with that Drugg though it has a pleasant Taste, if you eat it 'twill
kill you; giving him no farther account of it, or for what use he keeps it: Yet
this Son would not believe it, or be satisfied tell he had tried the
Experiment, would he not be highly to blame, as discrediting his Father's Truth
and Goodness, and disobeying his Will? How could he come without Shame to his
Father for a Remedy? So much more is Man blameworthy if he refuse the
Direction of God in the use of the Creatures what way soever he gives it.

27. But the keeping all the Commands of God, or whatsoever he can be known to
will, certainly tends to Man's Happiness; and though he be obliged to abstain
from many things good in themselves, or rather from the use of them, according
to his own hasty inconsiderate Fancy; yet a general Conformity to the Will of
God, is so far from being an unpleasant Burden or Yoke, that it is the only
way of the greatest Happiness and Pleasure: The more obedient, the more easy,
the more joyous a Man is, or will soon be. And that Man is not perpetually, and
as much as may be so, is because in some thing or other he has disobeyed, or
yet disobeys, or the Disobedience of some other Creature affects him: But to be
fully obedient, is the height of the Creatures Felicity. The life of Obedience
even at present is not a way of Unpleasantness, Sadness and Thraldom; but a
Path of Pleasure, Joy and Liberty. There is nothing in doing the Will of God
that in it self tends to make a Man uneasy, or that hinders his being pleased
or happy as much as possible; and whoever fancieth there is, it is from some
Mistake; as either a Supposition of that to be the Will of God which really is
not, or that the Actions of the Creature tend to one thing when indeed they
tend to another. I cannot forbear not only to assert this as that of which I
have a most clear Rational Conviction; but also to witness it, as having here
had something of unquestionable Experience: And that short Pleasure which a
Sinner may take in an unduly enjoyed Sensual Good, in stealing or snatching as
it were from God what he would in better Time and Order have given him; I have
found more than equaled by the bare Satisfaction in the Thoughts of not having
transgressed, were the pleasure of Innocence no longer than the pleasure in
Transgressing. But in obeying are sometimes, even in this life, Joys
unspeakable, as Fore tastes of Joys future, full and perpetual, accompanying a
State of perfect and perpetual Obedience. Those that know nothing of these
Felicities that are greater than can be in the disorderly Enjoyment, or abuse
of God's Creatures; let them but try the Experiment (as I have done) of God's
Goodness, of the pleasure of Divine Love, as they easily and freely may, and
they will be for ever convinced. Neither let any think they loose any thing,
even of the good of the Creatures themselves, by being restrained, or rather
directed by whatever Rule God gives us how to use them; no, he envies us not
the greatest Pleasure we are capable of taking in them. We cannot be supposed
while Creatures, to be capable of all Pleasure, or of full Satisfaction in
Creatures. God has indeed given Man a quick Sense of Good, or Delight even in
the use of Bodily things; and that not that it should be unsatisfied, but the
Creatures designed for Man's use are so numerous, that they cannot all be used
by any Man, no nor by all Men; nor can a Man enjoy what he is capable of
enjoying altogether, and at once. So that where ever God forbids what we could
desire, it is but where a smaller Enjoyment will hinder our having a greater;
one frustrate our having many; a small Present and short one, disappoint us of
a future, great, and lasting one. And what Folly is it to be displeased,
because God some way forbids a Bodily or Sensual Pleasure, that we may have a
better, a Rational, or Mental one? or a Joy in a Creature, where it would
hinder our Rejoicing in the Creator himself? I believe if we had time to trace
in particular, the Disorders of Men, we should find that all and every of them
(even their most beloved ones) do but abate their Felicity. Where is any that
does not tend to destroy our Health, or Peace, or Wealth, or Ease, etc. and so
bring upon us some Mischief or other, by which the little Pleasures in them are
very much out-ballanced? Is it not highly reasonable, as well as for our
Interest, that God who is most wise and good, should be our Chooser, if he
condescends to choose for us? Is it not the greatest Presumption, and Affront
to our Maker, who is the Cause of all our Good, that we should act as if we
knew better than he what is best for us? Is it not the greatest Injustice not
to love him, and study his Will to obey it, who has no profit by us, but does
all for our Benefit? If we may receive all the Profit, shall we deny to give
him all the Honor?

For God indeed cannot be profited by his Creatures; he sees his own
Excellencies in them as Shadows, but in himself as in the Substance; but there
can be no increase of his Perfections, who is Self-sufficient necessarily. Nor
can Man's Disobedience take away any thing from his Happiness, or affect him
with the least Infelicity. Sin does indeed obscure his Glory; but not from
himself, but only from the Sinners, who thereby loose that most pleasant and
happy Vision. And a cause of that great dislike of Sin in God, which has been
sometimes expressed by the Symbols of Anger and Wrath, is that he loves his
Creature so well, that he cannot approve any Action that in the least hides his
Glory and Goodness, from his beloved Works. And as God neither looses nor gets
any thing by the Creatures Sin, or Obedience; so in particular his Justice or
Righteousness, cannot be impaired. He is not unrighteous or unjust, though he
suffers Man to be unrighteous and unjust: The Creature cannot possibly bring
any change upon God, or lay him under any necessity or obligation; God alone
can oblige himself by his Promise, and that is not properly an Obligation in
God, for it is but the Declaration of his constant and free will. To say God
cannot in Justice break his Promise, is no more than to say he will not. If he
leave the Creature to reap the fruits of Sin, he does him no wrong; if he
persuade the Creature to leave his Sin and be happy, he wrongs not himself: He
can neither loose nor get any thing by the Creatures Sin and Unhappiness, or
Repentance and Happiness. God is essentially righteous, or just, before
Creatures had a Being; and his Essential Righteousness, or Justice (as I have
elsewhere said) is to love, and approve himself, and to do his own Will. His
Justice in relation to the Creatures, is his Approbation of them so far as they
are his Work, and according to his Will; what he has made, he shows his
Approbation of by upholding and continuing the Being of. He approves not the
Creatures denial of him in disobeying his Will, but shows the greatest
Testimonies of his Dislike of its Disobedience: So that if the Creature goes on
in willing or acting contrary to God's Will, God will not; or which is all one,
he cannot make it happy and joyous, in its continuing so to do, unless he could
make it to be God, and cease to be God himself. For the Creature cannot be
satisfied with willing Good, while it wills Evil; nor can it be pleased in
having its Will, while it wills that which is impossible; and while it leaves
God's Will, or willing that which is good and possible, it must be miserable,
more or less, according to the strength of its Evil Will; and if it for ever
goes on seeking Pleasure in vain, or to satisfy its Will so as it cannot be
satisfied, it must for ever be unhappy, and reap the Natural Fruit, and Work of
its own Doings; unless and until it acknowledge God's Will Sovereign, just and
good, and its own Will as disagreeing with its Maker, unjust and evil, and that
it ought to be subject, and be persuaded to change its foolish Will, and desire
to know and do the Will of God for the future; that is, unless or until the
Sinner repent.

28. But the Creature having once chose its own Will against the Will of God,
having committed one Act of Rebellion against its Maker is, or seems much more
inclinable and propense to go on, and persist in its Sin, than to repent and
will well again. For having once affected to be its own Lord and Arbiter, or to
be independent, which is the greatest Perfection, and best Manner of Being,
(though impossible to a Creature) it goes on with a strong Desire; whose
perpetual Acts, perfuing so great a Thing, hinder its Understanding to judge,
and reflect on the Impossibility, Absurdity, Injustice, and Consequents of such
an Attempt. And every fresh act of Sin does but strengthen its Disobedience, in
which perhaps it would go on for ever if God did not upon its mistake, give it
abundant Arguments by one means or other, to bring it to a stand, cause it to
consider, convict it of its Folly and Disorder, and so change its Will: Till
which change is effectually begun, it is always, and only endeavoring the
Impossibility of separating the unpleasant, or bitter effects it finds either
in, or following, or fears may find the fruits of its disorderly Actions: So
that it would not be saved from its evil Will, the Cause, but from the
Displeasure it finds attending it, the Effect.

29. But when it is once thoroughly convinced that its own Will disagreeing with
the Will of God, is an impossible way, or means of Happiness, or lasting
Pleasure; and sees the Unreasonableness and Badness of such an Attempt, the
Soul is very unapt to believe that God will forgive: And considering it Self
and its Sin, more than God and his Goodness, the sight of its most irrational
Acts which it has committed, with the Tendency thereof, often makes such a
horrid Impression on the Soul, and takes up its Thoughts so much, that though God
has given Arguments enough to persuade that he wills all Men to repent, with
various and clear Notices that he is ready to forgive, and yet make happy those
that by persisting in Rebellion do not render themselves incapable of
Forgiveness and Happiness; yet it is commonly blind to see God as he is, and is
more apt to fly from him than come to him, measuring God by its own standard,
it having been very apt to account it Justice to revenge the crossing its Will,
on those it was able to affect, thinks God like it self; not considering that
the perfect Good Will of God cannot take Pleasure or Satisfaction in the
Miseries of his Creatures, though they are Enemies, much less in their Sin, or
continuing Enmity, the formal Cause of their Unhappiness.

But though Man is so apt to look upon God as an enraged Enemy, hardly to be
appeased, severe to reckon with the Sinner, resolved that the Sinner shall
never be happy, unless something can be given him to purchase his favor, that
he values more than the Sinner's Repentance, or new Obedience: Yet, I say, though
Man is so apt to look upon God as such, like himself, we must affirm that God
is not, nor can he properly be said to be, an Enemy to Man, or any of his
Creatures, as they are to him, and to one another. He hates, or sets himself
against nothing but their Sins, their Unhappiness; wills nothing but what is
for their good, nor can he but love whatsoever is his own Work; as the Beings
of all his Creatures are, and their Good Order, which is their Happiness;
therefore he cannot but will their Reconcilement to him, or to their Duty.

30. Now all that God has done, does, or will do in order to Man's Recovery
from Sin and Misery, tends unto this one thing; To bring Man again to will as
God wills. Where ever this is done, it is done, and the End of God's Dealing
with Sinners is accomplished, whatever the means were by which it was brought
about; and so far as we are come toward this, so far we are in the way of
Salvation, or saved. To will as God wills, or to love our God with all our
Heart, Soul and Strength, and our Fellow Creature as our self, is the whole
Law, that God does so much to persuade Man to keep. To will, and n'ill the
same, is perfect Love; and Love is manifested by doing the Will of the Beloved.
In doing the Will of God is Life, I mean Happiness not only in this Present
State, but also in that which is to come.

31. And that there is a Life to come, and Immortality, discoverable clearly
even by Reason, and diverse Notices thereof implanted in Nature, we shall a
little attempt to show.

That Men are mortal, and live in this Life but a little while, is the
experience of the whole World. That the Body is subject to decay, or the Order
of its Motions wherein its Life consists, liable to be destroyed and cease; and
by another as to Life, disorderly Motion to be separated, and so its Organical
Figure to be spoiled and changed, all Men perceive by the least Observation.
But that Death is not a Termination or End of our Being, I think will appear by
these Considerations. First, We have no reason to conclude that the End or
Design of our Being, is fully accomplished in this Life. The Manifestations of
God's Perfections to Man, and Man's Pleasure or Happiness in beholding them,
(the End of Man) by reason of Sin, are not so clear and so great in this Life
as they may be, should be, and are to be desired. God is not seen and enjoyed
by any now, as he may be, by some but very little. The desires of some (I may
say of all) that desire God, are not satisfied in this short and sinful State.
None have unerringly and sufficiently beheld the Divine Excellencies, and
acknowledged God as he ought to be acknowledged. Some have lived and died, and
hardly ever truly confessed and owned their Maker; few or none have loved and
obeyed him to their capacity, and been as pleased or happy in him as they may
be: Therefore it is reasonable to conclude (nay we cannot well think otherwise)
that there is a Life to come wherein the Ends of the Creation shall be
accomplished. God cannot be thought to let his Works perish without fulfilling
his, or their true Ends in them. The Good, those that have been so far
convicted of the Disorders of Sin, as to repent, and change their Minds from
willing contrary to God's Will, in some measure to will as God wills, and to
desire that they may do so more, yea perfectly, and always: Those that have
somewhat beheld God lovely, have not yet, or in this Life, been brought up to
so great a degree of Obedience, as they are convinced is their Duty, nor seen
so much of God's Excellence as they desire to see, nor been satisfied with the
sense of his Love as they would. If these their Desires, Duties and Happiness,
are good, convenient, suitable to the Natures of God, and his Creatures, as
evidently they appear to be, certainly God wills them sometime or other to be,
and that more than the Creature can will them, because God is the Supreme
Good Will. So that it is altogether unlikely that the Good Man should perish,
and not attain the Good that he is capable of; desires, is convenient, and God
wills more than he. Nor is it any more likely that the Bad Man, he that has
seen no greater Delight than in contradicting the Will and Order of God, by the
disorderly Enjoyment of the Creatures should perish, or cease under so great a
Mistake as never to see, and be convinced of the Absurdity and Evil of
prosecuting his own proper Will as the chief Good; as never to find that the
way of Happiness is not in acting contrary to the Will of God. That God should
have an Intelligent Creature never to be made acknowledge his Maker, is a thing
hard to be thought. It is more probable that even the Bad Man will remain one
way or other, to be convinced of his Disorders, of his Rebellion against God,
Injustice, and want of Goodness to his Fellow Creatures. The Good Man in this
Life seems often to be the Man of Sorrow, the Son of Adversity, that does not
gather the full-ripe Fruits of his Repentance and Obedience; being among a
world of unhappy and injurious Impenitents. Therefore it is requisite there
should be a Future State, wherein he may reap in Joy what he has sowed in
Tears. The Evil Man seems often to be the Man of Joy and Pleasure in this Life;
he rejoices, and even glories in his Disorders, yea in that very great one of
afflicting the Man that is better than he: Now it is most equal and just that
he should some time or other come to see the Good Man beforehand with him,
rejoicing, and happy in God, when he is sorowing to see he has turned from the
fountain of Joy and Blessedness. These things are not accomplished in this
Life, therefore we must necessarily suppose a Future.

Again; It is certain that no Creature can cause it self, or another to cease:
Nothing but the withdrawing the Same Power that caused the Creature to be, and
continues its Being, can be supposed a reason of its Cessation. We can prove
no such Death as an Adnihillation of any thing; nor does it appear to any that
consider the matter, that even any Bodily Creature cease to be. But the
contrary might be shown by many Arguments, if it were doubted of: Even those
things which seem to the ignorant and inconsiderate, to be most likely to be
destroyed, such as things that are burnt; I can at any time demonstrate, even
to the eye, that none of their parts cease, but are only separated, or altered.
The Death of the Body is but some kind of alteration, or change of its Modes or
Circumstances; as a Separation of the parts of its Organical Structure, or an
Alteration of such and such Motions, requisite to continue its Particular
Mechanism, or Animal Economy. The Body remains, I mean all the Matter of it,
after the Division of its parts; and it cannot rationally be supposed that the
Mind, the more Substantial, and (as all are ready to acknowledge) the more
Noble Part of Man should suffer more alteration by the Dissolution of the Body,
than the Body it self does. The Change the Body undergoes is apparent, but what
Change you will say may the Mind be reasonnably supposed to suffer at its
Separation from the Body, or whether not enough to be called Death? Many
Treatises have been written, and Discourses made to prove the Immortality of
the Soul, and some for its supposed Mortality; but the Authors have not been so
happy as to agree in the Notion of Life and Death with one another, nor all so
considerate as to fix any determinate Notion for themselves, or to tell their
Readers what they mean by its Living or Dying; so that it may be true or false
for them. But I shall here state the question more plainly, and tell you first,
that by the Life of the Soul, I mean a Continuation of Thinking, or of
Understanding and Willing. Where there are these Actions and Passions, there is
enough to be called Life; and that which better deserves to be named Living
than any whatsoever, Organization, and Motion in Bodies. And the plain Question
is this; Whether upon the Death, or Dissolution of the Body, Thinking wholly
cease? A Cessation of some of the Modes of Thinking, cannot be enough to be
properly called the Death of the Soul; for so it would not only be always
dying, but dead, as it alters so continually, at least every night and day. An
Alteration of some of the Modes of Thinking may in a figurative and improper
Sense be called Death; but the Question is not of any such Death. It is
probable that many, if not all those Thoughts and Ideas we have by occasion, or
on condition of our Body as so and so disposed, may cease; though it cannot
easily be thought absolutely necessary: for we cannot conceive the Body to be a
natural Occasion of any Thoughts, but so by the Will of God; who if he please,
we may well think, can cause the same Ideas and Thoughts without it, though it
seems not to any purpose, or probable that he will. For on the other hand, it
is more likely that God permitted Death for the Cessation of those Thoughts (or
at least many of them) the Body is the occasion of, since Man's fall into Sin,
in Good and Bad: For as much as we are tempted to most of our Disorders by
occasion of the Body, and to gratify some Sense or other disorderly, or
besides the Direction and Will of God, seems to be the first and most constant
Temptation every Man is drawn aside with. Now the Good Man, or Repenting
Sinner, through the Goodness of God, (on this Supposition of such Thoughts
ceasing) gets this by Death, though in it self an Evil, that he is freed from all
the Allurements of this Life occasioned by his use of this Body. The undue
Gratifications of Sense can now no more persuade him, the unprofitable care of
avoiding little Bodily Displeasures, now takes not up his Thoughts, the
Difficulties from the Injustice and Cruelty of Sinners press him now no more to
act against his Maker's Will; but he seems perfectly freed from Temptation,
having perhaps now no Object of desire present but God, and nothing to
interpose for his Love, as a Rival with his Maker. Nothing now seems necessary
for him to know but God, and himself: Nor needs he, or values he, could he have
them, any little pleasures in Creatures when he is at God, the Fountain and
Cause of all. On the other side, the Evil Man also looses all those
Gratifications of Sense he so much affected, and erringly counted his chiefest
Good; and must needs find that he foolishly set his Heart on that which would
not make him happy, but so soon left him. And as his Will is not reconciled,
and subjected to God's; but he desires still that which cannot be, God cannot
so communicate himself to him to make him joyous, but he must be subject to all
that Anguish that the Reflection on the loss of the Creatures he so much
delighted in, and that he has missed the Fountain of all Good can cause in
him; with all the Vexation and Trouble that all the disorderly Thoughts of such
a Soul can raise to it self. But to come to the point in hand again; It cannot
well be thought that the Soul or Mind of either Good or Bad should die, or
Thinking wholly and for ever cease; or yet for a time, upon the Body's Death;
because the Continuation of Thinking, or Life of the Soul cannot rationally be
supposed to depend on the Body, (a thing more ignoble than it self, being very
unlikely to be its cause) but upon the Will of God its Author. And God cannot
well be supposed thus to let any of his Creatures cease, or disown his Works
that are good, as the Beings of all things are; much less can Minds, the
Intelligent and Active Beings, be thought to be adnihilated, or cease Thinking
so soon, and to no purpose. Change they may, and do, as all Creatures are
mutable; but what of God would be seen in the Cessation of any, especially of
Minds, who are the only kind of Beings capable of beholding God? If the Soul
cease to think, and so dies more than a figurative Death, it cease to be;
for Thinking and Mind are the same Being: which if you will not be persuaded to
believe, you must at least acknowledge them inseparable. For a Mind that does
not think, or a Thinker that cannot think, is a Contradiction; and to call that
a Power or Agent, that can do nothing, is absurd; for that which can do
nothing, is no Power or Agent; and a Power or Agent that will do nothing, is as
great a Contradiction; for Willing is Doing, even Thinking.

Again; Nothing is more strongly implanted, I may say concreated in the Mind of
Man, than a desire to continue; and if Being is good, the Continuation of Being
is good; if the Desire to continue be good, God is the Cause and Implanter of
such a Desire, and consequently wills we should have such a Desire. I think
none can but desire to continue, if it were the Will of God we should cease to
be, the desire to continue would be a Sin; but God cannot be supposed to will we
should desire that which he don't will should be; that would be to will us to
will contrary to his Will. Now whatever God wills to continue, cannot be
supposed to cease. If God wills to manifest himself in, and to his Creatures,
to be loved and feared by them, he must continue them; for by their Cessation,
all these things will cease and be impossible. Every Good Man that loves God,
would continue to love him; it is God's Will he should love him: Can God be
supposed to make him cease to love his Maker? To what purpose? Let it but be
granted, that it is not God's Will I should cease to love him, and the
Immortality of my Soul is secured; for while I love I live, viz. mentally. Nor
can the Evil Man, that don't love God, nor fear to act contrary to his Will, be
supposed to be for ever, or for a long time exempted from the Evils of his
Rebellion against his Maker, or rendered by God himself incapable of all
Conviction: Or can it be thought probable, that God should make Creatures to
deny him a little while, and then cease under so great a Mistake as never to
believe and confess God to be their Sovereign Lord, and Sufficient Benefactor.
But if God approve himself, and his own Works, he will rather continue them,
and suffer them to make themselves miserable, and find they are not God's, than
not assert himself God, one way or other, to all his Intelligent Creatures.
Besides, the Soul either of Good or Bad cannot with any reason be supposed to
cease for a time, and then be again; for if it cease to be it is not, and
nothing can be properly affirmed or denied, but of that which is. Where there
is no Being, neither Life nor Death can be asserted. So that if a Soul cease to
be, and a Soul be afterward, it cannot be the same, but a new one, to whom can
be charged no account of the ceased Souls past Actions. There must be a
Continuation of Being, or there can be no Identity or Sameness; and the
Essentials of the thing must remain, or there is not the thing, but another. If
there be not a Continuation of Thinking and Conscience of former Thoughts, it
cannot be conceived how the Sameness of a Mind can be ascertained; and if a
Soul in this present State be wicked, and cease at the Dissolution of the Body,
it can neither be just nor good, that a new one should be miserable, because
the ceased Soul was unrighteous, nor be determined what new one should be so:
Nor that a Soul, penitent in this World, should not it self be happy hereafter,
but have its hopes of future Happiness utterly frustrated, and be put off with
the Mock-happiness of being happy in another Soul. What Encouragement can I
have to my Duty, if I suppose I must not continue to the Perfection and
Happiness of my Obedience; but must perish, and only now be contented to think
that God will create a Soul hereafter, and perhaps give it my Dust, to be
happy, because I only began to be holy? Or how shall I be deterred from Sin, if
I am persuaded I my self must be discontinued, and that it is not I but another
Mind that is in danger of everlasting Vexation; (it may be with my old Body) if
I now die impenitent? When we say a Man is dead, (if we talk like Rational
Creatures) we must have some determinate Sense of those words; He is dead: Who
is dead? He. The He or Person must remain. What is dead? Such a thing. A Man.
The thing or Man is, tho'dead. A Man is a Compound of Soul and Body: Or a Mind
doing and suffering, with, or by occasion of an Organical Body. A Man's being
dead is the Cessation of this manner of Life, not of either of the Components,
Beings, or Essential Properties. The Body unacted by the Mind, is useless among
Men, and tends to Corruption, or Dissolution of parts; so the Living, put it
out of their sight: the Soul or Mind is invisible of its self, and can neither
converse with Men, nor Men with it, without the use of Body; so when separate,
it is not to Men; yet it no way follows but that it may well be to God, and to
it self, which is Being enough. But the Soul considered apart, can have no
Dissolution of parts, having none to be separated, nor can it die otherwise
than in a figurative, or Metaphorical Sense. As it may be said to be morally
dead, or dead in Sin, when it is impenitent, and not conformable to its Duty.
To be Spiritually dead, when it thinks not of, or is not busied about Spiritual
things: To be dead to Sin, or dead to this World, when its disorderly Thoughts,
or undue Manners of Thinking on earthly, vile, sordid things cease: It may be
said to be dead to Joy or Comfort, when it has lost all pleasant Thoughts, and
has only grievous, horrid, anxious ones, without all hope, or rest continually;
and if such a State always continue, whether the Soul be separate from, or
joined to a Body, it is that which is properly called everlasting Death. Thus,
I think, it is apparent that the Soul is immortal, and that which is its proper
or natural Life, viz. Thinking, does not cease.

Though to suppose the Soul immortal of its own Nature, or that it is, or has any
thing in it self, which necessarily infers its Continuance, would be as great
or a greater Error than to fancy it mortal; for that would be to suppose it
immortal, as its Author is. But it cannot be supposed thus to be immortal; for
whatsoever had a Beginning, or had not Being always, may be supposed to have an
End, and cease to be. Such are all Creatures, who would fall into nothing, if
God should not will their Continuance. But that he does will them to continue,
I think we may be persuaded by the foregoing Considerations.

32. Moreover, we have not only reason to believe that Souls do continue though
separate from, that is disusing their Bodies, and such a Life they lived with
them; but that they shall have their Bodies again after some time; because the
end of the Souls having a Body, cannot easily be thought to be fully attained
in this Life. This material World seems to be made chiefly for Man to be
concerned with, and the things therein to be Objects of his Knowledge, and
Subjects of his Actions. It is by means of his Body that he is now capable of
knowing and acting in Bodily Nature; but what he knows and does therein, is so
imperfect, notwithstanding all the Wonders that have come within the reach of
his Understanding, and great things have been effected by his hand, that we
believe God will not let him loose his Body, or cut the bond of Corporal and
Spiritual Nature for ever; but rather give it him again, and that so altered as
wherewith he may be more capable of all those things he ought to do, and be in
Bodily Nature. The Creatures, inferior to Man, and subject to his Knowledge
and use, are but very little known, or duly used in this Life; therefore it is
probable they will in another: and without a Body we cannot see that the
material World can signify any thing to the Mind of Man. Man at his (...), or
Dissolution, probably ceases to be to the BodilyWorld, and the Bodily World to
him; but in his (...), Resurrection, standing up, or using a Body again, he is
again united to Bodily Nature, to do, and be something again therein. And that
he may be more capable of what he should be and do, than he was in his first
State, or of finding the great Unreasonableness and Unhappiness of persisting
in the contrary to his Duty, it is requisite that the Body he receives should
be altered, or not exactly the same, but otherwise modified; so as to be
capable of the state the Soul is then determined to. And if we have reason to
believe the Body shall be changed, we cannot well think it shall be exactly the
same numerical and like figured Parts of Matter it had before; such a
Supposition is needless as well as groundless, if not contradictory. The Body a
Man of Forty or Fifty has, is not the same numerical Matter he had at his
Birth, but has received the greatest part of its bulk from the various matters
of his Food; so that he was truly eating from his Trencher, what is his Body.
But every Soul has its own Body, though the Body now be in continual change. The
Matter of the Bodies of Men and Brutes, in the long tract of the Ages of this
World, has been confounded; and the same Matter, or part of it, that was the
Body of one at one time, has become the Body, or part of the Body of another,
at another time; but that needs not trouble us, when the Sameness of a Person
does not consist in the Sameness of the Matter of his Body, but in the
Continuation of his Thinking, and Conscience of his Thoughts. Nor perhaps have
we any ground to suppose the raised Body will be altogether unchangeable; it
will be enough if to the happy, it be such as will never any way hinder their
Happiness; to the wicked such as will continue, though in the want of all the
disorderly beloved Gratifications of Sense. To believe the Possibility of a
Soul's having a Raised or Refitted Body, either from the common Matter of the
Earth, or partly from those very Particles it formerly had, is no difficulty,
when the Will of God is supposed the Cause: Nor need we persuade the
Possibility of a Recollection of dispersed Matter, or tell you that even the
Art of Man can gather together that which seems to be separated as much as a
rotten Corpse. There is no manner of Difficulty or Contradiction in believing
the Resurrection to those that believe a God. The Difficulties that some have
pretended in the notion of the Numerical Sameness of every Particle of Matter,
are nothing, when we are no way obliged to believe it such a Resurrection.

33. Moreover, as all things in this sinful Life are very much out of order,
and Men do not sufficiently see their Disorders, but think well of that which
is ill, and ill of that which is well: It is very requisite, and becoming the
Perfections of God, beseeming his Justice and Truth, or his Approbation of his
Will to Man, and of his Constancy, with the Manifestation of the true Causes of
all Good and Evil; that there should be some time or other after this Life, for
a time of Discovering, Determination, Judgment, or Declaration of the Truth of
things. That the Work of Repentance and Obedience may be approved, and appear
to be good, and most profitable for the Creature; and Disobedience and
Impenitence may be no more mistaken by Sinners for the way of Goodness and
Happiness: That Justice and Injustice may no more be taken one for the other;
that the Good may appear to be delivered from the power of the Wicked, and the
Wicked appear to be the Fools that were deceived: And that the Truth of things
may be most manifest, and the Determination of them clear even to wicked Men,
it is not only highly probable, but necessary that Men shall appear again in
such Bodies, as whereby they may be known to one another; and these things be
effected by such a means, and in such a manner, as may most aptly tend to the
undoubted Determination of all things to their due, and lasting Condition.

34. Now as it is evident that Man's Business is to be conformable to the Will
of his Maker, according to that order the Most Wise thinks fit, wherein his
Perfections may be most seen, and whereby the Creature may be most happy or
pleased; and since it is as evident that Man has failed, and gone out of this
order, and vainly sought out himself an impossible way of Happiness, wherein
his Maker cannot be duly seen: It follows that Man ought to repent, and change
his Mind. To the doing of which, it is necessary that Man should be capable of
so doing. It cannot be an immediate Obligation on a Creature to do what he
cannot do. Though the Creature has disobeyed, yet the Obligation to future
Obedience still remains, so consequently a Capacity of obeying. It would be
very hard to be required to give what one has not, and cannot have. The
Difficulty that may seem in several Instances wherein a Man may in some sort
render himself incapable of what he ought to do, may be solved by this
Consideration: That Man cannot be thought to be disabled of a Will, or Faculty
of Desire: While he has a Being he always wills, or desires something, and his
Will is changeable by the strength of Argument, or new appearance of Good from
one thing to another. There are the greatest Arguments on the side of Duty,
which may possibly appear to the Man, whereby his Will may be changed; and the
willing according to God's Will, is the act of Obedience, which God accepts
where the Soul cannot effect the outward things, which are to Men the
Testimonies, Signs, and Effects of it: And such hearty Desires continued, God
often assists to be shown forth, and have their Effects to others; or by his
Providence some way or other rectifies the matter.

As for instance; If a Man borrows Money, spends it, and then cannot pay it, he
repents that he has done amiss, desires and endeavors to get Money to pay, but
cannot; God forgives his Sin wherein he willed amiss, accepts of his Will to
pay, for the deed, supplies his Creditor another way, or incites him to forgive
him: If he forgives him, the Debtor is no longer obliged to pay the Debt, or a
Debtor in that matter; if the Creditor will not forgive the poor Man that
would, and cannot pay, he loses the Condition of Forgiveness with God, who
will not require what the Creature cannot do. God has not been wanting to the
Creature; he first made him innocent, and capable of continuing so, as well as
of sinning; and he has made him capable of repenting, and becoming obedient and
happy, though he has sinned: He has given him a Faculty of considering, and
reasoning with himself, whereby, as aforesaid, he may be, and is, whenever he
is convinced. Now if Man notwithstanding he has sinned, shall repent, and
become (as he should be) obedient, he will also become happy, and the end of
his Being will be attained whatever means God may please to make effectual to
this end.

35. And that God has given diverse means tending to this end ever since Man
has sinned, is plainly seen. Every Man has a Conscience, a kind of Court of
Judgment in himself, accusing more or less, as he has seen his Actions to have
been more or less disorderly, and telling him he ought to do otherwise.
Besides, the experience of the Disquiet, or Unhappiness every Man has as the
fruits of his own, and other Men's Sins, a little consideration will make an
Argument to persuade him to repent, or do no more such things as make him so
uneasy. The due Consideration of God and himself will certainly give every Man
an Argument enough to persuade him to behave himself according to God's Will,
even for his own profit. But besides this Natural Light of Conviction, and
these Motives in self to Repentance, which are or may be always present with a
Man, it cannot be thought unbecoming the Goodness and Power of God sometimes
himself to make more strong Impressions on the Mind of Man, or immediately to
cause him to have such or such more serious, and right Thoughts. He that made
us Thinkers, may if he please inject particular Thoughts into our Minds without
any Medium; yet it is not unreasonable to suppose that he may, and does often
employ the Good Spirits in such Errants, to instigate Men to Good, as he
suffers the Evil ones to tempt to Wickedness. The Existence of both which sort
of Spirits any one may easily be persuaded to believe from the consideration of
his own Mind, as a Spirit capable of subsisting without a Body, either obedient
or disobedient. But to distinguish these Thoughts which come into our Minds by
the silent Language of Spirits, (if I may use such an Expression) may not be so
easy: The Good Thoughts are easily known from the Bad; the bad must be our
own, or from Evil Spirits; but commonly those that come thus by way of
Injection, are strong and sudden. But to distinguish the Injections from Good
Spirits, and those from God himself, seems more difficult. Some will not be
pleased with these Considerations; but those that attend seriously and
judiciously to what passes in their own Minds, may easily find something of
these things. But to leave this Digression: God has made Man capable of, and
given him yet more External Motives to Repentance, for the rectifying his
Disorders; as the beholding the Actions of others, in whom the Disorders are
more easily seen. The fond Love of Self may sometime make my own Action seem
well to me, but an Action in another is judged more impartially; but then from
the Judgment I make of another I may reflect back again to my self, and say: If
a thing seem uncomely, and ill in another, I may easily conclude the Action is
alike ill in me. For instance; I presently see the Injustice of another, doing
any thing that abates my Happiness, or takes away any Good from me, or confers
to my Misery; thence I cannot but conclude there is the same Unreasonableness
in my hurting him or another. But there is yet a more extrinsick way of
Conviction, and leading to Repentance; and that is the express Admonitions, and
Persuasions of those who have repented, and do repent. If I have seen the Evil
of disagreeing with my Maker, the Unhappiness and farther Tendency to Misery of
Sin, and have left it; if I have seen the Reasonableness of loving and obeying
God, and consequently do it; I shall also be desirous that my Fellow Sinner
should come to his right Mind. What measure of Love to God I have, or see I
ought to have, I shall desire in another. The Love of God infallibly influences
me not only for God's sake, but even for the Creatures sake, to love my Fellow
Creature, and endeavor to persuade him to Repentance, Obedience, and
Happiness. Such repenting Sinners have there been in all ages, (though sometimes
but a few) persuading others, and one another to Repentance; and such repenting
Sinners God may expressly command to preach Repentance and Obedience to others.
But yet in all these (though by them many have been persuaded) there is still
wanting something of the height of external Argument. These repenting Sinners
have been Sinners sometime, and in some measure Sinners still, and may possibly
err, as well as my self, and be partial in their Admonitions and Councels, and
speak more or less than God's Will; and above all may sometimes give Examples
not agreeing with their Precepts, or may change, and say, and be one thing now
another thing anon, as the balance of Good and Evil goes up and down with
them. Therefore if God will give the greatest, and most suitable means to
persuade Sinners, as it is agreeable to his Wisdom and Goodness to do, there
ought to be some Infallible Instructor in the Will of God, confirmed to be such
beyond all exception, giving an Example (with his Instructions) of perfect
Obedience to his Maker; a Creature persuading both by Perfection of Precepts,
and Exactness of Example, to the perfect way of Obedience: One that has no
false by as for which he may be questioned to be defective of being a perfect
Rule to the rest of the Creatures, but is capable and sufficient to give the
most convincing Arguments to enforce Repentance and Obedience. That God has
given such a means to reduce Man's disorderly Will, we shall consider by and
by, when the thread of our Discourse brings us to speak of Revelation, and the
Perfection and Substance of all Revelation.

Diverse repenting Sinners God has expressly commanded, and sent to the rest of
Mankind to manifest his Will and Pleasure by them, and to assure them that they
will therein find their own Interest and Advantage.

36. And this Consideration brings me at length to the business of Express
Revelation, which when considered in the Sum and Substance, Design and End of
it, will be found to dictate, and enforce no other thing to Men than what we
call Natural Religion, of which we have been somewhat discoursing. It is but as
it were a more fair Edition of the same Law, a more particular and express,
more clear and convincing Manifestation of God's Will, a second Witness of the
same Truths, confirming what is testified by the natural Light of Reason: which
alone were enough to leave all without excuse who do not hearken to its
Dictates, and sufficient to lead all to the way of Obedience were it hearkened
unto. But Revelation being added, dictating and enforcing in a manner plain,
and clear enough for any Capacity, whatever is absolutely necessary for Man to
believe, and do in order to Happiness; is enough to inform, and convince any of
their Duty that do not strongly resist. For the clearing of which matter, let
us take these Considerations.

As God is the Fountain and Cause of all Truths, so he is the Giver or
Discoverer of all Truths that come within the reach of Created Understandings.
But he does not make known things to his Creatures always the same way. He has
given us Sense and Reason; by which, with his general and common Assistance, we
most commonly come to know things for some time unknown to us. But whenever
it pleases God to discover some Truth in an express, particular, or
extraordinary manner, then there is that which we call Divine Revelation, Now
this Revelation may be considered two ways: In relation to the thing made
known: And in relation to the Manner, or Measure of the Manifestation. But
before we come to consider it these ways, let it be noted, that as we have said
Revelation is some Truth discovered, or made known to the Creatures; so we at
the same must necessarily suppose it a Truth knowable to the created
Understanding. For to suppose a thing that is above our Understanding to be
revealed to us, is to suppose a Revelation, and yet no Revelation; whatever is
made known to us we know, and what we know is not above our Knowledge. The
Capacity of Man's Understanding we readily believe may be enlarged; so that he
may hereafter know what at present he is not capable of; but till he is capable
of knowing such or such a Truth, or at least seeing it knowable, it can be no
Revelation to him. As for instance; None can pretend that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is revealed, while it is that which is inconceivable. That
all the Properties wherein the Nature and Essence of Bread consists should
remain, and yet the Bread be changed into Flesh, is that which is
unintelligible, and not a Revelation. Nor can they well say that though the
manner how this unseen Change can be, is not revealed; yet that it is indeed
changed into Flesh, (and yet more strange! the Flesh of Christ) is revealed:
For how this Change can be conceived to be made, and that it can be conceived
to be made, is the very same thing, or at least as unintelligible: Nay such a
supposed Change is a Contradiction, and a Contradiction can with the least
reason of all be supposed a Revelation. For Man is not only unable to know how
it can be, but is able to know, yea clearly sees it is impossible to be. With
as good a pretense might a Man say, that though to any Man's Understanding, two
and one make three, yet God has revealed to him that in God's Understanding,
two and one is but one, or is nine, or what you please.

But as to Divine Revelation, it may be (as I said) considered either as to the
Thing revealed, or the Manner of the Revelation. As to the Thing revealed, it
may be either that which is, or can be known no other way, viz. a Truth God has
reserved to such his Peculiar Teaching, or that which might be known without
Revelation; but not so clearly, easily, or soon, and in both it may be of a
Truth past, present, or to come. As to the Manner of Revelation, a Truth may be
communicated either immediately to the Understanding, supposing only that it is
God's special Will that I, or he thus immediately know such or such a Truth we
knew not before; or yet to the Understanding mediately by the Ministry of some
superior Intelligent Creature that God first made know the thing; or yet still
more mediately a Truth may be made known in way of Revelation, even by our very
Senses; by means of some Bodily Object, as a Voice, Vision, or the like. Again,
as to the Manner of Revelation, it may be more general or particular, more
partial or full; or in other words, fewer or more Truths may be thus made known
at the same time. Now that God can, and may in a particular and express manner
make a Truth known to his Creature, or to one and another, and yet not to the
third, or to every one; that he may give a Revelation to some immediately, and
command them to tell it others; none but those that disbelieve the Power
Goodness, and Sovereignty of God, can deny. It cannot rationally be supposed
but that the Author of Truths, can make a Truth known. He who has made
Creatures sensible, and capable of Reasoning, and finding out Truths by way of
Induction and Argument, may if he please sometimes give Men the Knowledge of
some Truths, a nearer and easier way, or cause them to understand Truths not
knowable by Sense and Reason alone; and this immediately to whom he pleases,
and to others by them. Creatures that can come to the Knowledge of many things
by their own Industry, or Application of Thought, may either know the same
things, or things they would never have found out so, by a special Instruction.
As a Man unassisted by a Master may find out many things in Arts, but by the
Instruction of a skilful Artist he may come to know the same and more, and in
far less time than he could have known without such a Teacher. Now it cannot be
thought unbecoming the Wisdom and Goodness of God, or unsuitable, or
unnecessary for the present Condition of Mankind, if we consider it, that God
should have had some special Scholars of his own particular instructing, and
have commanded them to teach other Men in things most profitable and necessary
to them; or that he should have sent some particular Messengers to the rest of
Mankind to teach his Will to those that through their own Negligence, or others
Hinderance knew it not, or to teach it more clearly and fully to those that
knew it but in part, and to urge it upon all that were negligent to do it. That
God may do thus, I think is now undoubted: That he has done so, seems to me the
only thing needs farther to be proved to any rational Man. And that we may
rationally be persuaded that God has thus instructed, or sent some particular
Men, either to teach others, or urge them to do their known Duty, let us take
these Considerations.

It is most evident to all those who have took notice of the Actions of
Mankind, conveyed by the most unquestionable Tradition from Generation to
Generation, that now and then in the Ages of this World there have been some
Men teaching and persuading others things, which when duly considered will be
found Truths tending to their Good; and some of these have declared themselves
sent of God, and commanded to teach, and persuade the things they have taught
and persuaded. Now suppose some of them have not had the things they taught in
this Special Manner immediately from God, yet they are Revelations to those to
whom they were before unknown, though not properly Divine Ones, as to the manner
of their Discovery. But yet if the Persons were really sent by God's express
and special Command, to teach Men even what they might have found out
themselves, nevertheless that such a Person was thus sent of God, is a Divine
Revelation, and a high Argument to persuade Compliance with the things taught.
But if they have received the Truths from God in this extraordinary, special,
and particular Manner; and been expressly sent, and commanded to teach, and
enforce them, there is all that can be desired to a Divine Revelation. We have
two things here principally to be satisfied in.

First, Whether the Person teaching Men, was thus particularly taught of God?

Secondly, Whether he was expressly commanded of God to teach, either this his
expressly received Divine Doctrine, or what he otherwise knew?

That the things are of God, we cannot doubt if they appear when declared, with
Evidence and Demonstration, God being the Author and Fountain of all Truths.
That the things are Revelations, we cannot doubt if they are such as were not
knowable, or could not then be known any other way. As for instance; If the
Person tells us, or brings to remembrance, some things past and forgotten, that
were never committed either to written or unwritten Tradition; or if he gives
us the Knowledge of things present, done at a distance, which he could not know
any ordinary way, or such things to come which can be fore-known to none but
God, (who is incomprehensible in Knowledge) and to whom he is pleased to reveal
them.

That the Person was sent of God, we may be persuaded, partly by the things he
declares appearing thus to be Revelations, partly by their being such as were
good, very necessary, and beneficial to be known, or done by the Persons to
whom he declares himself sent: But fully and sufficiently, if some
extraordinary Effect is also produced by means of the Person, such as never is
done, or at least could be done by him without the special and uncommon
Operation of the Divine Power, or the Finger of God; such as we call a Miracle.
When such Effects accompany Persons asserting themselves sent of God to teach
and exhort Men things in themselves, showing no Repugnancy to Truth, there can
be no more rational Doubt of them, or of the Authority, and Divine Mission of
the Persons. God cannot be supposed to alter the common order of things in his
Creatures, in Concurrence to persuade a Lie, or to give his Special Testimony
to any Deceiver. But yet here we had need use our Reason, and have some skill
to judge of, and distinguish a True Miracle from a False one, that we may be
certain of the Matter of Fact: For there have perhaps been more Pretenses to
Miracles, or False and Lying Wonders, than True ones. Now that I may a little
help those who have not so well considered this Matter, I shall lay down a few
more Considerations of the nature of a Miracle, before I come to consider how
these things may be applied particularly to the Book commonly called the Holy
Scripture. A Miracle, negatively, is not a Contradiction in nature, or any
thing that implies a Contradiction, Absurdity, or absolute Impossibility; as
that a thing should be made to be and not to be, so and so, and not so and so
at the same time: That which the Understanding of Man can no ways apprehend,
but as absurd or impossible, can neither be pretended as a Miracle, nor could
it so be, would it ever have the end of a Miracle. As for instance; That a
certain Saint beheaded, should afterward carry his Head in his Mouth for some
miles; or that the Body of Christ should be in diverse places at the same time:
Nor can the Almighty Power of God be any pretense for the Belief of such
Absurdies; for Things or Truths are the Products and Subjects of Divine Power,
and not Contradictions. Again; A Miracle is not a Fallacy or Deception of Men's
Senses, or Understanding; for a Deceit has the nature of a Lie, and is not
likely to come from the God of Truth. Nor is a Miracle a thing done by the
Power or Art of the Man, howsoever great or strange, any Man's Power or Art may
be to others that are weak or ignorant. Nor is a Miracle any more in the Will
of Man, than in his Power or Skill; the Time or Subject for a Miracle is not
determined by Man's vain Will to satisfy Curiosity, or unnecessary Desires,
but is generally wrought upon serious and weighty Occasions; nor is God's Will
so properly said to concur with Man's Will, when Man would work a Miracle, as
Man's Will to concur with God's Will when God pleases, and sees fit to work
one. But a Miracle is an extraordinary Effect, or Alteration in Nature, wrought
by the Will of God, above the Power and Art of Man, at least of him who is the
Instrument of effecting it, in the way it was effected: A thing done by the
Special and Uncommon Operation of the Divine Power. The end of a Miracle is the
Confirmation of some Revelation or Truth as from God, to promote some
considerable Good; no less than to persuade Sinners to repent, or will as God
wills, or to confirm them that so do, in their well-willing. And wherever
there is said to be a Miracle that tends not to this end, it ought to be
suspected, and will be found upon serious Examination to be but a Pretense, and
no real Miracle. But now to come a little nearer to Matters of Fact, that we
may be persuaded that there have indeed been Divine Revelations, and some
Persons sent to declare the Will of God to others, and the Truth of their
Mission, and of the things declared, confirmed by Miracles, we need no more but
seriously read and consider the Books of Moses and the Prophets, and especially
the Writings of the Apostles and Disciples of Jesus Christ. In the Reading and
Consideration of which Books, if these two things appear, I think there is
enough to satisfy any rational Man in this matter.

First, That the things related, as taught, persuaded and done, agree with the
most rational and crittical Account of Divine Revelations and Miracles.

Secondly, That the History it self be undoubtedly true.

Let us consider both these as briefly as we can. In the first place there is
to be considered in the Scripture, the Doctrinal or Instructive Part, which
teaches for a foundation: That there is one Most high Sufficient Being, or
God: And that he is the Author and Continuer, and consequently Sovereign Lord
of all other Beings: That at his Word the Heavens, and the Earth, and all
things in them, were made, and are upheld. That he is Good, Wise, Just, True,
Benign, or Merciful, etc. Besides this Instruction what God is, it teaches us
what we are, viz. Sinful wretched Fallen Creatures, that can have no Good or
Happiness in our selves: It informs us how we should behave our selves toward
God, viz. as Dependent things, and that we should love him, obey him, fear to
do any thing contrary to his Will, trust him, or believe him, etc. and how we
should carry it to one another, viz. to do as we would be done by; that is,
every one to confer as he is capable toward another's Happiness. Having
proposed things to the Understanding. Secondly, It adds the Persuasive Part
to the Will, moving us to behave our selves suitably in the Actings of our
Wills to such Truths known, by setting before us Good or Evil, Profit or
Disprofit, Pleasure or Displeasure, Seemliness or Unseemliness; accompanying,
or consequent on our orderly, or disorderly Behavior. Now these things
proposed and urged in these Books, as the main Scope and Design of them, appear
to be of God, as they come with evidence of Truth and Goodness; such as are
agreeable to the Reason of a considerate Man, and are seen proper and
convenient for the Creatures Will to comply with, things beseeming the
all-perfect Being to teach and command; convenient and profitable for the
Creature to learn and obey. Which if we consider with our selves, and compare
with what has been said in the former part of this Book, will appear to be the
very same Principles and Practice of that we call Natural or Rational Religion,
which is knowable by the Light of Nature to all Mankind. But that these same
things may, and how far they may, be called Revelations, will appear by
considering the Times and Circumstances, and Manners of their Delivery. Thus if
when Men had given up themselves chiefly to the Consideration of sensual
Objects, and bent their Wills to the disorderly Satisfaction of their Bodily
Appetites; neglected the due Consideration of their Author, and the End of
their Being: Began to fancy God too much like themselves: Had low, mean, gross
Conceptions of him, and too high Conceits of Creatures: Confounded the
Properties of God with those of his Works: Gave Divine Honor to Men, or any
thing they fancied excellent or useful: Made Bodily Representations of God; and
as some represented him by one thing, some by another, their various and
disagreeing Images could not be reconciled, so as to be taken all so different,
for Images of one and the same Being; but they began to fancy as many Gods as
their differing Conceits had made Images: So that Divine Nature was mistaken
even as to number, uncertain without end: And even those who by long
Instructions had been brought again to the Belief and Worship of but One God,
had so far mistaken his Will as to fancy their good Behavior to him consisted
in external Ceremonies; supposing that he would be affected with the Slaying of
Beasts, and pleased with a Custom of little Observances; as wearing of odd
fashioned Garments, keeping of certain Days, using diverse Gestures, etc. when
at the same time they neglected Justice, Judgment, Mercy, Truth, Goodness, etc.
grew corrupt and unreasonable in their Actions, even to one another, had
brought themselves into diverse present Miseries, and laid a foundation for
future Unhappiness to themselves after this Life, and to their Posterity; yea
lived as if they believed there was no future Life. If then in such times of
Ignorance and Corruption God sent, or particularly instructed, and sent some
one or more to the rest, expressly to teach the Truth, and command his Will;
here was a Revelation, and a time for the Goodness of God to show it self in
supplying the necessity of blind miserable Sinners; when nothing could be more
profitable for Man, or becoming God, than such gracious Discoveries. But if
these Men also declared some things that could not be otherwise known to them
than by Divine Inspiration, as certain future Events: If there accompanied them
a Supernatural Power, effecting things could no otherwise (at least by them) be
effected, here is enough to be called Divine Revelation, and Miracles. And
there can no more Scruple remain, if we can but be persuaded to believe that
the History of the Bible it self is true, which is the Second thing to be
consisidered. And in order to which, I think it not unnecessary to lay down
some general Considerations about Faith, as following.

Faith is an Assent to a thing as a Truth, on the Word of another, which we our
selves don't know, or see; according to that complete Diffinition thereof, Heb.
11.1. (...), the evidence of things not seen, or known; for Knowledge leaves no
room for Faith, any more than it does for Hope, which is the Desire of what we
only believe will be; Faith being its only Basis, (...), Faith is the
foundation or ground of things hoped for; for where we have no Faith of the
real Futurity of a thing, there Hope has no ground. But Faith if it has its
due Circumstances, it is (...), a Convictive Argument. And though Faith and
Knowledge are so different that we can no longer properly say we believe a
thing, when once we can say we know it, yet Faith (if right) is as near to
Knowledge, as that which is not Knowledge can be, and far from that doubtful
Supposition called Opinion. That which is to be believed, or assented to as a
Truth on another Word, is either, First, an Assertion or Affirmation that such
or such a thing was, is, or will be: Or, Secondly, a Promise when the Person on
whose Word we rely for the real Futurity of the thing, makes us expect it from
him as the Cause. Now that Faith may be as it ought, an Assent indeed to a
Truth, though we don't know it, and not the believing a Lie, these things we
ought to be certain in. First, that the Person that has asserted, or promised
the thing we are to take for a Truth, could know it, or were not liable himself
to be deceived; or can or will be able to do it, it being in his power:
Secondly, that he be Trusty, or one that will not deceive us. As to the
Knowledge and Power of the Person, that we may be sure he could, or might know
the thing, or can or will be able to do it: we must see that the thing is in it
self knowable, or that it may possibly be a Truth; for that which I see absurd,
contradictory, or absolutely impossible to be supposed, I can never well
believe on any one's Word, nor could I do so, would it be of any use to me.
Whatever I am to believe, must at least seem possible to be a Truth; for
nothing else can challenge my Faith, or be (...), a sufficient Argument. So
whatever I am persuaded to do, must at least seem a Good. As Truth alone is the
Object of Knowledge, so should it be of Faith. Nothing can well be believed but
what may come to be known. Secondly, I must see that the thing be not only
knowable and possible in it self, but also knowable or possible to the Person
on whose Word I believe it. Which I may do by considering well the Person, and
his Circumstances. As to the Trust of the Person whose Word I assent to, I may
be satisfied that he would not deceive me; if, First, I see he could propose no
(at least seeming) good end in so doing: Or, Secondly, if I see he could not
suppose it possible to attain his end, if it were to deceive me. For no one
proposes to themselves the doing any thing, but for some (at least seeming)
good end, much less the doing what they see they cannot be able to effect.
Faith without these Circumstances would be groundless, uncertain, and as liable
to be the Belief of a Lie as of a Truth, and to no good purpose at all. But in
giving our Assent to the Word even of Man, if thus cricumstanced, we need fear
no Deception. Now as the crediting Man's Word may be called a Natural Faith, so
an Assent to the Word of God is that which is properly said to be a Divine
Faith. But the Word of Man thus differs from the Word of God; That though diverse
Men may concur in saying one and the same thing, (and ought so to do in some
cases that Man's Word may rationally demand our Belief) and God being but one,
can be but a single Witness; yet God's Word is greater, and surer than Man's:
Because God cannot so much as be supposed to be deceived, being Omniscient; or
be thought unable to perform his Promise, being Almighty; nor can he be
supposed to will to deceive us, who is the self-sufficient Fountain of Good;
nor therefore can he propose the getting of any Good to himself by deceiving
his Creatures, Absolute Perfection being incapable of advantage. Man may
possibly be deceived, knowing but a little, or will to deceive, wanting
Goodness, or propose an advantage to himself being needy; and that by
deceiving, as he may want power to get his end another way. He may suppose
himself able, when he is not; and so not perform his Promise, though he would; or
his Will may change, not knowing always what is best, and so not will to do at
one time, what at another he made us expect from him. Wherefore we cannot
believe, or assent to as true, what Man says, merely because he says it, but
on these diverse requisite Considerations.

There can be but one thing necessary, or pre-requisite, toward our believing
God's Word, and that is, That we be sure that what we credit as God's Word, is
indeed his Word, or that he does indeed say what he is supposed so to do.
Whether This, or That, is truly the Word of God, we may determine by
considering what is before said of Revelation and Miracles; with the Matter,
the Manner, the End, etc. of the thing said.

But now as to the business under Consideration; What has been said may be
easily applied to the Scripture, and here particularly to the Historical Parts
thereof, without any farther help; and as they appear, by thus regularly
considering them, so let them be esteemed. But I shall name for example the
chief of them, and that briefly; in which Books, (as I have before hinted) is
observable a Drift or Design all along against Wickedness and Deceit, a
Recommendation and Encouragement of Goodness, Truth, and all Virtue; which can
hardly be thought so to concur in so many Writers writing at such different
times, could they be thought to agree in a design to deceive Mankind, or to
propose any seeming Good End in so doing. First, The Books of Moses, containing
a Narrative of such things as could not be done without the Knowledge of a
considerable part of Mankind, cannot be supposed to be mere Fictions: The
things which he writes (or whoever writes them) as his own Knowledge, he could
not easily be deceived in, nor can he be thought to have seen any possibility
of deceiving Mankind so grossly, as he must be said to have done if his Writings
be no true History, it being so easy a matter for the then present, or
immediately succeeding Ages, to detect the Fallacy; but they have not so done,
but concurred with him to deliver them down to Posterity. A History of famous
and public Actions for so many years, if no such things were done, could never
be supposed to gain Belief as a True History, and be so generally received, and
delivered down for Truth from Age to Age, as these Books have been. Nor could
the Design he seems to aim at, viz. The instructing the Israelites in the
Knowledge and Service of the One True God, with the promoting of all Virtue and
Duty to Man, run so smoothly along with so apparently wicked and unprofitable a
Design as the deceiving Posterity with a Fiction instead of a true Story. As to
the things done before his time, which he speaks of but briefly in order to his
design; they might possibly be made known to him by Revelation: though, I
confess, I see no ground for such a Belief, or of what use it would be, much
less of any necessity he should so receive them (any more than the things he
saw done) when he might receive them by either Oral, or written Tradition. But
that Moses was sent of God to teach and instruct the Israelites, and whosoever
would learn of them, cannot be discredited if those Miraculous things were
done, which the whole Nation of the Hebrews, and many others, could not be
deceived in: As the Wonders in Egypt; the Passage through the Red Sea; and
especially the giving the Law, viz. the Ten Words, expressly by a Voice from
Mount Sinai; which that numerous People could not easily concur to deliver down
to Posterity, to deceive their Children; witnessing those Laws to be in such a
manner given of God, though they were themselves so inclinable to break them, if
there had been no such Laws so given. Nor are the other Prophets less to be
credited in their Narratives; or whoever writes their Stories, or the Books
under their Names: That such and such Men came in the Name of God delivering
Instructions, Reproofs, Warnings, etc. to the People, could not be a Mistake.
Nor could they impose upon Men in those Miracles they are sometimes said to do;
much less in the Predictions of Future Events, even of particular Persons by
name. Telling the Councels of distant Enemies, and even what should be the
future Actions of some whose Hearts had not yet conceived the Thoughts of them;
giving also the infallible Test to know a False Prophet by, viz. if what he
says comes not to pass. Which Predictions were such as could be made by none
without particular Divine Revelation; which when but delivered were accompanied
with Circumstances, making them at least credible that they might be; but when
fulfilled they were seen beyond dispute to have been Revelations of God. The
most principal, and full of which Old Testament Predictions related to Christ,
and his Ministry, and were found exactly fulfilled in him; and consequently to
be of God. Which Consideration brings me to the New Testament, or the Writings
of the Apostles, and Disciples of Jesus Christ, the Master and Teacher of the
Christian Religion; which is the main thing I would persuade him that already
believes Natural Religion, not to be offended at.

The Doctrinal and Preceptive Part contained in these Books, I Am sure none that
considers it can in reason dislike, it is so rational and natural: And though the
whole Bible teaches in its Precepts principally Natural Religion, or Exact
Morality; yet the Doctrine of Christ as delivered down to us by his Apostles
and Disciples, seems to outshine whatever was taught before in Clearness, and
also to outdo all former Manifestations in the Fullness thereof. What has he
taught, or what has he commanded, but what is clearly evident, and strongly
reasonable to any that without Prejudice will use their Reason, and consider
it? and what can be desired to a most perfect Rule of Life, more than he has
given in his short, yet comprehensive Precepts? As to the Historical Part of
the New Testament, I think I may boldly say, it has in diverse Respects the
advantage of any other History.

As the Notableness of the Matters of Fact: The Number and Character of the
Witnesses: Their sufficient Agreement and Harmony in their Testimony: The Time
and Place of the things done: The Reception of this History and Doctrine, by
succeeding Ages: The Change wrought in the World thereby: The Succession and
Continuation of the Professors of Christianity. All which things cannot be
supposed so to concur in opposition to the Carnal Interest, and sinful
Inclinations of the World, to give credit to a mere Romance, or feigned Story.
He would be as unreasonable that should deny that there was such a Person as
Jesus Christ, and that he taught so and so, and did such and such Miracles,
with the Consequences thereof; as he that should deny that there was such a
Person as Charles the First King of England, and that there was a Civil War
between him and the Parliament. But I leave these things, having just named
them, to the Consideration of thinking Readers; who if they have any desire to
be more fully satisfied in these matters, may consult several learned, and well
known Authors, who have handled this matter largely. But I shall come to
consider as soon as I can, some particular things, at which the Naturalist
seems more justly offended, relating to Jesus Christ's Person or Office; that
so if possible all things may be made clear, that the Deist at length may see
Christianity most rational, and no longer refuse to embrace it. But,

37. Of Jesus Christ, we shall first lay down this Proposition: That the
greatest, most adequate, and suitable Means God has given among Men toward
their Recovery from Disobedience, and the clearest Arguments he has offered
them to persuade them to will as he wills, in order to their Happiness, he has
given in, and by the Man Christ. Which I think will appear by the time we have
a little considered his Work, and his Person. And concerning the Work of
Christ, (which I think most proper to speak of first) I shall lay down this
Proposition.

That the Sum and Substance, End and Design of all Christ has done, does, or
will do in relation to Fallen Man's Recovery, is to convince Man that he has
done Evil in willing contrary to God's Will, and to persuade him to change his
Mind, and will as God wills for the future, to the Manifestation of God's
Perfections, and Man's Happiness. The Ways and Methods Christ took to perform
this Work, if we consider, will appear very rational and suitable to the Nature
of Man, and the End of his Being. First, Man is to be fully informed of the
Truth of things relating to his Disobedience or Obedience, Unhappiness or
Happiness. But Christ has given the fullest Discovery of the Mind and Will of
God, in relation to his Creatures: He has given the most fair Edition, and
Interpretation of God's Laws, rectifying the inveterate Mistakes of Mankind: He
has discovered the false Glosses and Interpretations, sinful Men had put upon
the foregoing Revelations of God's Will; and reconciled Revelation to the
Natural Light in such a manner, that those that heard him were forced to
confess he spoke as never Man spoke before: And we who have but a short account
of what he said, have yet enough to show us that he was as it were the Oracle
of Moral Wisdom: Such an Excellency appears in his comprehensive Account of the
whole Law of God: Such an admirable Method in his Directory of the Order of our
Desires: To be short, such a Pre-eminence in all those Sayings we have as
coming from his own Mouth, that methinks an ordinary Considerer may see a
Wisdom distinguishable from that of all his Servants, though some of them at
least equaled him in the Greatness of Miraculous Works. He has both
represented God far more clearly than he was before represented, what he is,
and will be found to be to his Creatures; and his Creatures, what they ought to
be to him, and one another. And particularly Goodness was never so unvailed,
and made to shine forth before; the Goodness of God what it is, and will be;
and the Goodness of Man what it must, or should be. The Goodness of God was
never before seen to be so much greater than the Sin of Man, as by this
Messenger; who comes declaring God most ready to forgive, and communicate his
Benefits to sinful Men, as he would have done had they never sinned, if they
are but willing to be forgiven, and repent: That God wills not our Unhappiness,
as we are inclinable to will Evil to those that cross our Wills. He has taught
us to come to God as to a Father, expecting infinitely more Goodness, (beyond
our measuring) than we can from our Natural Fathers. And that we ought to
imitate him in Goodness, Love, Mercy, Forgiveness, even in that which some have
counted a Paradox, Loving our Enemies, blessing them that curse us, and doing
Good to those that persecute us, and despitefully use us. The Men of old were
apt to pray against, or curse their Enemies; and Men now are too much of that
Spirit, in whom the Love of God does not prevail; being ready to think it
unreasonable, or impossible to love their Enemies. But that it is both
reasonable, and more easy to love our very Enemies than to hate them, we may
be persuaded by diverse Considerations. If it be an Excellency to be like God,
the most perfect and happy Being, Christ tells us, that he makes his Sun to
shine upon the Good and the Bad, and is kind unto the unthankful, and the Evil;
he counsels us to imitate God: Who though Men be Enemies to him, does nothing to
them but what may be an Argument to make them his Friends. Is Hatred an uneasy
Passion? Let us love all Men, and be at ease. Would we have Friends? Is it
better to have many than few? Operative Love reconciles Enemies, and heaps
Coals of Fire upon their Heads, not to burn them, but to melt them down into
streams of Love. We cannot well love our Enemies, as such, with a Love of
Complacency, but the working Love of Benevolence, if we are good, does as much
as may be to make our Enemies such as God, and we would have them; when Hatred
does but increase, and continue Hatred. The Goodness of God leads us inimical
Sinners to Repentance; and this God-like Behavior in us is the greatest means
we can possibly use, and is often found effectual to turn the Arrows of Enmity
against us, into Beams of Love. This reconciling Message of Heaven, sent by
Jesus Christ to rebellious Mortals, the Enemies of God and one another, is not
without good reason called (...), the Good Speech; or Gospel; teaching Love and
Friendship, as the Soul of all Duty, and Essence of Happiness. This Gospel is
not improperly also called the Better Testament, in comparison with the Old
Dispensation of Carnal and Troublesome Ordinances, which God suffered the
Hebrews, as well as other Nations, for a long time to labor under. This Gospel
Dispensation, if Men would live to the Purity of it, being most easy,
reasonable, and alike suitable to all Men; being but complete, or very little
more than Exact Morality, is that which would rectify all the Disorders of
Mankind that can be amended in this Mortal State.

Secondly, As Christ taught the most plain and reasonable Doctrine, so he gave
the height of Argument to persuade it; such as could be most prevalent on
Rational Creatures to gain their Compliance with the Mind and Will of their
Maker. He has not only convinceingly asserted, and proved himself sent of God,
(a mighty Argument to procure the reception of his Message) by very many
Miracles done by his Means, but manifested the things themselves delivered, to
be God's Message by their Excellency, as most becoming God to dictate, and most
fit for Man to receive. If the highest reason be enough to persuade the Will of
Man, he has given it. I challenge all, the most Zealous Jew, or Reasoning
Deist, to show me one thing that Christ has indeed taught, or his Disciples at
his Command, which cannot be most rationally accounted for, or where he has
imposed upon the Understanding of Man, or obliged him to believe, or profess
any thing that is contradictory, or unintelligible, or commanded him to do any
unreasonable thing, or what is against his real Interest. Let them show me that
Judaism, or Deism, is more reasonable; and he that can, may have great hopes of
making me a Proselyte: till that is done, (which I am confident will never be)
I am resolved to remain a Christian, or a Disciple of him who has given the
most fair Copy of Truth, relating to God, and his Will to Man, and relating to
Men's present and future Condition: wherein I can see no difficulty to any that
fairly reasons, and looks upon Christianity as it is in it self, and not as
corrupted, and misrepresented by the Fancies and Traditions of Men in the
Antichristian Defection.

Moreover, What Christ has most clearly declared in way of Precept, he has
backed and confirmed by his Influencing Example, his Life being most exactly
conformable to his Doctrine in entire Submission and Conformity to the Will of
God, and constant perseverance therein, against the greatest Temptations Earth
and Hell could offer; thereby asserting, by a Home Argument, that the doing the
Will of God is eligible, yea best though we should thereby loose all the good
things of this life we can loose, with Life it self, in the grounded hopes of a
future State free from all the Evils of Temptation, Sin, and Unhappiness. Which
Future State he has so plainly taught and manifested, that by him it may be
well said Life and Immortality was brought to light; the Immortality of the
Soul, and a Future Life of Body and Soul together after a Resurrection, being
Truths left unto him clearly to teach.

38. That Christ might thus become a most fit Means or Mediator between God and
sinful Men, to bring them from Rebellion against God's Will, to Obedience to
the Will of their Maker, it is to be considered what manner of Person Christ
must be. And first it was necessary that he should be a Man, that his
Conversation with Men might be most near, familiar, and unquestionably real: A
Man like unto us in all things, Sin only excepted; than which there cannot be
conceived a more proper Medium between God and Sinners. Nothing can possibly be
supposed between God, and the Creature. There can be no Third, or Middle Being,
that is neither God, nor Creature to be a Mediator; and God cannot be a
Mediator himself, because he is one of the Extremes. Though God is the First
Cause, or Mover of Man to Repentance, he cannot be said to be a Means, or
Instrumental Cause; nor can there be any to use him, or send him, no nor can he
be said to send himself, or any one of his Attributes, or Properties. Nothing
of God can in any proper sense be said to be absent from God, and between God
and Sinners. A King may declare his own Will, but he cannot be said to send
himself on an Embassy. A Sinner could not be a complete Mediator; for Sinners
are the other extreme: Repenting Sinners may indeed be a sort of Mediators
between God and the Impenitent; and have been so, as Moses was and others, but
they are incomplete ones; they were but the Servants sent. If God would give a
complete Mediator, or Ambassador to the World of Sinners, he must give such a
one as his Son Christ was; who though he might, yea must be a Man like us in all
things else; Sin must be excepted. If he were not a Man, truly; truly innocent;
a Second Adam; he could not be an exact and perfect Example, nor a most
unquestionable Witness, nor have showed that Man might have done his Duty. But
he must be capable of being tempted to disobey, or he could not have been an
Example of resisting and obeying: None but he that might possibly disobey,
could yield free Obedience, such as is worthy of God's Acceptance. God himself
who is incapable of being tempted to Sin, or of Disobedience, cannot be said to
obey, nor is there any above him to whom he can be obliged.

If Christ must be innocent, and persisting in Obedience, he must not be of the
common race of Mankind; that is take both his Body and Soul mediately from
sinful Parents, as others do; but must as to his Soul, the Subject of Sin, or
Obedience, be an Immediate Work of God, as the first Man was. Whatever comes
immediately out of the hands of the Creator, cannot be thought to be other than
pure; but out of an unclean thing, comes that which is unclean. That Christ
might be a Second Man in Innocence, he must not be begotten by the sinful Will
of Man, as other Men are; Conceptions of Self Will, and Erring Understanding,
so determined to Evil rather than to Good, that their at first weak
Understanding, or Reason, is not sufficient to counter-ballance the manifold
Temptations by occasions of Evil, within and without, Instructions and Examples
to sin, they meet with very early, from Parents and others, whom they little
suspect such Enemies to them; who use them to those Actions, which though
Ignorance makes innocent, Reason when they come to know what they do, makes
culpable, and use determines to. But Christ besides his pure Original,
doubtless had the special Grace of God keeping him from Temptation so long as
God saw fit, that he might have at least the same advantage of strength of
Reason the First Man had, who was to undergo far greater Temptations. But though
he might not be a Soul derived from Man's corrupt Soul, yet his Body might well
be taken from the Matter of Mankind, without his being thereby sinful, or the
more inclinable to sin. For the Body is not the Subject of Sin, or that which
infects the Soul; it may be an occasion of Temptation to Sin, but Sin entirely
resides in the Mind, being but a disorderly Act of the Will. That a Soul coming
pure out of the hands of God, should become a Sinner by using a Body taken from
a Person that was a Sinner, is unreasonable to be thought, while Matter has
nothing in it but Quantity, Figure, and Motion, which howsoever disposed or
modified, has nothing of the Notion of Sin in it. We might as well suppose a
Man must needs become a Thief, or a Murderer, if he dwell in a House given him
by one that was such. Christ we all acknowledge received the Body, God prepared
him, from the Virgin Mary, whom all suppose a Sinner, except some of the Roman
Church; yet we suppose him not made a Sinner thereby. It was convenient Christ
should receive a Body from Mankind, that he might be a Real Man, and a near
Kinsman, or Brother. A Rational Soul using an Organical Body such as a Man's,
is really a Man, though the Soul do not begin mediately by Generation, as much as
if it did; otherwise the first Rational Creature using an Organical Body, would
not have been a Man the same in kind as others. The First Adam's Soul could
come no way but by Inspiration, and his Body was a more Immediate or Special
Work of God, than the Bodies of others his Offspring; therefore he is called
the Son of God in a nearer respect than they. And that Christ's Soul was
produced by the Immediate Power of God, and his Body by a Special Work of the
Most High, he is the more properly said to be the Second Man, or Adam; God
forming a Seed in a Woman, a Virgin, [that we might be sure he was not a common
Man] when a Woman is naturally, or commonly, a Creature whose Seed is not in
her self originally, but in the Man; or perhaps to speak more properly, that
has no Seed. This Seed of the Woman, informed with this Holy Soul; this One
Exception from the common Order of the Production of Men, is therefore with
good reason called the Son of God, eminently, as distinct from others; who on
any lesser, or more common Accounts are said to be his Children. And the same
reason for Subsistence we have given us in the Gospel, Luke 1.31. The Angel
said unto Mary, thou shall conceive in thy Womb, and bring forth a Son, and
shall call his name Jesus: Ver. 32. He shall be great, and shall be called the
Son of the Most High, and the Lord God shall give him the Throne of David,
(...) his Father. Christ is said to be the Son of Abraham, the Son of David,
only according to the Flesh; because Mary, from whom he received his Body
materially, was of the Offspring of Abraham and David. Ver. 34. And Mary said
unto the Angel, how shall this be, seeing I know not a Man? V. 35. And the
Angel answering said unto her, a Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the
Power of the Highest shall over-shadow thee; therefore also that holy Thing
that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. And to strengthen
the Virgin's Faith, he tells her, ver. 36. Her Cousin Elizabeth who was old,
and accounted barren, had conceived: For, v. 37. with God nothing shall be
unpossible: (...), every word shall not be unpossible, viz. whatever can be
said in reason to be a thing to be done, shall not be unpossible with God. He
brings her from the less to the greater; he that has caused the Old and Barren
to be with Child, a thing above the power of Nature, can do more, even cause
thee a Virgin to conceive without the means of a Man. Thus Christ, that (...),
viz. (...); that holy Soul, Spirit, or Mind, that received his Body from Mary,
and so became the Compositum called a Man, was truly called the Son of the
Most High, as God the Father of all was in a special manner his Efficient
Cause; and the Son of Mary, and her Progenitors, as she was the Material Cause
of what was material in him. And least any should think the Holy Ghost the
Efficient Cause of Christ's Conception, and so rather to be called his Father,
(from whence would arise a great difficulty) from those Expressions, ver. 35.
(...); and Math. 1.18, and 20. (...); and (...); let it be considered that the
word (...), Spirit, is put without the Article, and is rather to be rendered a
Holy Spirit, and of a Holy Spirit, then the Holy Spirit: A Holy Spirit shall
come upon thee, or into thee. Signifying thereby, either that she should have a
Holy Disposition, in order to the over-shadowing Power of the Highest, viz. of
the Father, coming to effect such a Conception, or that she should receive a
Holy Conception in her, or both. So she was found with Child of a Holy Spirit:
That which is conceived in her, is of a Holy Spirit; that is, she has a Holy
Conception in her; was found with Child of a Holy Conception; neither a
Spurious, (as Joseph thought) nor a Common Conception. The Particle (...) does
not denote the Efficient Cause any more here, than it does when spoken of Mary,
Luke 1.35. (...), of thee, in thee, or by thee; and Matthew. 1.16. (...), viz.
(...), of Mary, or in Mary, (...), was born, or conceived Jesus; not that she
was the Cause of the Conception. When we say such a Woman is with Child of a
Boy, we mean her Child is a Man Child, not that a Boy impregnated her. Now what
is there inconceivable, or mystical in all this? I admire that any Man should
make it a difficulty to believe that God, (whom they acknowledge to be the
Creator) as he has made Seeds to grow in Plants, and fall off, and increase in
the Earth to the due size of Plants; as he has caused Seeds to grow in Man,
which ejected into their proper place for Nourishment, the Matrix of the Woman
are informed with a Mind, and grow to perfect, or due sized Animals, fit to be
nourished another way, and so come to be born, and act of themselves, in the
common order of the Creation, could not as well if he pleased, go for once, on
a special occasion, out of his common way in Nature, and work a Miracle in the
First Production of a Humane Seed, or Small Organical Body, in a Woman, and
give it to a Soul of his immediate Producing, without the Will of Man: Or that
this Mind, and Organical Body of God's particular making, should not be thought
to be an Innocent Man, free as Adam, that he might obey God in overcoming the
greatest Temprations. That such a Person so produced was really given amongst
Men, besides the Prophesies of him in the Old Testament; for instance; that the
Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents Head, Genesis 3.15. The Lord thy God
will raise up unto thee, a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy Brethren,
like unto me, unto him shall ye bearken, According to all thou desired'st of
the Lord thy God in Horeb, in the day of the Assembly, saying, Let me not hear
again the Voice of the Lord my God, neither let me see this great Fire any more
that I die not: And the Lord said unto me, they have well spoken, that which
they have spoken. I will raise them up a Prophet from among their Brethren like
unto thee, and will put my Words in his Mouth, and he shall speak unto them all
that I shall command him, etc. Deuteronomy. 18.15, 16, 17, 18, etc. and a Virgin shall
be with Child, and bring forth a Son, etc. Isa. 7.16. See Chap. 11.1, etc. Dan.
9.25, 26. and Genesis 49.10. Which Texts all deserve to be well considered, though I
omit to recite them at length. Besides these Prophesies, I say, and many more
agreeing with his Character, Circumstances, and Time of Manifestation, we have
the sufficient Testimony of his Disciples, not absurd and contradictory, but
such (as we have endeavored to show) might well be conceived to be true.

All which I think, is enough to challenge the Belief of any that will give
themselves leave to consider. Besides the Consideration of Christ's Person, as
an Innocent, Perfectly Obedient Man, thus produced and related; it was
necessary that God should be with him in an extraordinary manner, inspiring him
with Wisdom, enduing him with Authority, inflaming him with Love; Luke 2.40,
47, 42. acting in him (who yet acted freely with God) as it were his Organ,
whereby he made known his Will, and manifested himself most clearly to Sinners,
and was as it were conversing amongst them; working Miracles by him to convince
Men of his special Sonship and Mission; which Christ frequently asserted from
that Argument of the mighty Works of God wrought by him. Which Wonders of
Christ were also necessary to persuade the Truth of his Doctrine as received
from God, especially in that part of it, where he taught the Insufficiency of
the Levitical External Worship, which the Jews were so unapt to believe other
than the Will of God, or ever to be abolished. But though Christ taught that
which to them seemed a new way, they were inexcusable in not believing him,
when God concurred with real Signs and Wonders, which he cannot be thought to
do to persuade Falsehood, so much against his pure Will.

These Miracles wrought by his means, and by his Disciples from his Authority,
were not only testified by his Disciples, but seen and confessed by many the
Opposers of his Doctrine. It was necessary, I say, God should be with him in so
extraordinary a Manner, who was to be the most Extraordinary Ambassador, or
Instrument of God. And that God was so with him, cannot with any reason be
doubted, if his Friends Testimony, and his Enemies Confession of his other
Miracles, be not enough; his Prophesies of so many things exactly fulfilled, in
relation to himself, his Disciples, the City of Jerusalem, etc. methinks are
convincing Arguments that he was the Prophet that God had promised, [a Prophet
being to be known to be sent of God by the things coming to pass.] The Anointed
with whom God was in a most special manner, and never left him, unless so far
as to show that the most Perfect Creature is insufficient in it self, and
cannot be satisfied or pleased in the withdrawing of the Chearing Presence of
God. To let it appear that an Innocent Man may be grieved at the Disobedience
and Misery of Sinners, and not only sympathize with them in their Unhappiness,
but be afflicted by them; not only be greived at their unjust and wicked
Doings, but suffer from them that Sorrow that in the common course of Nature,
is occasioned by what may be done to the Body. And though God left him so far to
the Will of the Wicked, as that they prevailed to put him to Death, [whereby we
may have occasion to believe that Adam was not invulnerable, or naturally
immortal before the Fall, but by the Grace of God in the Gift of the Tree of
Life, and his special Providence, which on his Obedience would have prevented
external Hurts, and Death thereby;] though, I say, God suffered the Wicked to put
him to Death on a false Accusation, as a Malefactor; and he patiently suffered,
to give us an Example that nothing should deter us from Obedience, it was
necessary that God should raise him from the dead. That as he had chose Death
rather than omit his Duty, God should crown his Sufferings with a Resurrection
to Immortality, as a Token that he had regarded his Obedience as perfect, that
he deserved not Death; but Men unjustly laid hands on him, and slew him, and
that their so doing was disapproved of God. Which Resurrection of his, being
the Confirmation of his being the Christ, and of his having done his Work so
far exactly, and that he would in due time finish it wholly, his Disciples
constantly witnessed, as having seen him, and conversed with him Forty days
after his Suffering: and the Jews and Romans having heard it, said he would
rise again after three days, taking strict care to watch the Sepulcher, least
there should be any cheat in the matter; so that there can be no rational doubt
of it. It is very easy to be sure a Man is put to Death, and as easy to know
he is alive, if many Persons see and hear him act as a living Man. On the
account of his Resurrection too, he is called the first begotten Son of God,
Rev. 1.5. 1 Cor. 15.20. Col. 1.18.

And by his Resurrection also was given a Testimony of the Truth of his
Doctrine, especially of the Points of the Resurrection of the Body, and Life
immortal. And having fully instructed his Disciples, and authorized them his
Ministers to prosecute the same end he was sent for, viz. the bringing
rebellious disorderly Sinners to Repentance and Obedience; for the fulfilling
his Promise of the Mission of the Holy Ghost, the Power, by means whereof they
wrought Miracles, it was requisite he should leave this Earth, (which he did in
the sight of many) and go to some Heavenly Mansion, till his Second Personal
Appearance; which Angels at his Ascension informed the Beholders should be in
like manner, and which he had before promised, and wherein he will wholly
finish his Office of Mediator between God and Men; a part of which is his
Ruling or Judging the World, fully determining what is right, and what is wrong,
as God has authorized him. After which he shall give up that his Kingdom to his
God, and Father's immediate Government; to whom he is, and then will more
eminently appear to be Subject, though God has made him the Head, or Chief of the
Creation. But I can but name things where every head would yield a large
Discourse.

This is the Sum and Substance of the Revelation of God's Will by Jesus Christ.
And whosoever believes Christ's Doctrine, and does it, or in his own words; He
that hears his Word, and believes on him that sent him, has everlasting life,
and shall not come into Condemnation; but is passed from Death unto Life, Joh.
5.24. And not every one that suith Lord, Lord, unto him, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the Will of his Father which is in Heaven,
Matthew. 7.21. But whosoever hears the Sayings of Christ, and does them not,
(whatever he may think of Christ, or how great soever an Opinion he professes
of him) has but built upon the Sand, v. 27. It is Obedience that is the end of
all true Doctrine; and whosoever having been convinced of Sin, and changed from
doing his own disorderly Will, does the Will of God, and persevers in so doing,
will be happy; nay, is saved, by what means soever this Change has been
wrought. Where the End is accomplished, it is accomplished. Many have been the
Instruments, and various the Means, that God has used to reduce Sinners; and
some rebellious ones have been changed, to comply with their Maker's Will by
smaller Arguments, some by greater. The Means of Conviction God has given the
World, seems from the beginning to have grown greater and greater, as
Wickedness has increased; but some Sinners have been so perverse that the
greatest Motives God has pleased to give them, have not done; but they have
appeared resolved to abandon God, and to devote themselves to their Sin and
Misery: Yet there have been many righteous Men, who have not seen and heard
what some others have; and yet have indeed been righteous. And they that have
seen and heard the most of the Manifestations of God, have little cause to
censure and condemn them that have seen and heard the least; when these have
sometimes shown as much or more of the End, Goodness, accomplished in them.

39. But whatsoever means God may make effectual toward the Salvation of Men,
or bringing them from Sin to Obedience, it may truly be said they are all saved
the same way; and that is by Christ. Which must not be understood that it is
absolutely necessary that every Man should be instructed in the Will of God,
and receive his Commends from Christ's own Mouth; or from those he has
expressly sent to preach the Gospel. Nor is it to be thought impossible that any
should be saved without Reading, or hearing read the Books we call the Holy
Scriptures. But whosoever is saved, is necessarily some way or other instructed
in the same things Christ has taught, viz his Duty to God and his Neighbor,
and brought to comply therewith; and so to follow Christ in a Life of
Obedience. Christ is the Way, the Truth, and the Life: There is no other Way
Sinners can come to the Father, but what he has shown, viz. Repentance
bringing forth the meet fruits thereof. There are no other Truths necessary to
be known, in order to living that Life of Obedience Christ gave us the highest
Example of, than what he taught. There is no other Man a Master or Teacher,
teaching another Doctrine, in which is Salvation; for God has given him the
chief coruer stone of the Spiritual Building, to which the rest must be
squared; and he has given no other name among Men, under Heaven, in which we
must be saved. There is none a different, or so complete a Rule, Acts 4.11, 12.
The Way, the Truth, and the Life, is the same, that all must go in, believe,
and live. However Men may disagree in Speculations and Opinions; if they know
but enough to subject their Wills in Agreement to this Life of Obedience, which
Christ in the name of God commanded, and himself gave an Example of, they may
meet in Heaven. Those that disagree from this Living Rule, and persevere in
their Dissension, will not see Life, notwithstanding their highest Pretenses to
Faith or Knowledge. And if I am brought to submit to the Will of my Maker by
reading the Bible, or hearing Discourses on it; it does not follow that none
could be informed of the same Truths, and reduced to the same Obedience any
other way. Before the Scripture was written, there were Righteous Men accepted
of God no doubt; and since, the Love of God has appeared larger than the Love
of Christians in recommending and communicating that most useful Book to the
rest of Mankind. For there have been Examples, out of the Pale of the visible
Christian Church, of such a Life as would become a considerable Christian; at
least of such as was proportionable to the measure of Knowledge: And some
things left so excellent in the Writings of some of those we call Heathens,
that Charity methinks would excuse me if I should esteem them Christians
indeed, without the name, or such in Conformity to the Will of God, as
Christians should be. And there have been not a few, who have been no happier
than to be educated in the Worship of the True God, under no better an
Instructor than Moses, or Mahomet, that might have shamed the Nominal Christian
to behold their Virtues. God sent Prophets of old in a special manner to
instruct the Sons of Heber, and doubtless it was their Duty to teach others the
Knowledge and Worship of the True God; and he sent his Son Jesus also, first
unto some of them; but Christ commanded his Disciples to teach all Nations. If
Hebrews and Christians have not done their Duty, it cannot be thought that
therefore the rest of Mankind must needs all perish. But they have not only
been negligent in endeavoring the Information and Reformation of all Mankind,
but have been even Stumbling Blocks; not only by teaching for the Oracles of
God, the unreasonable Traditions of Men, but even by their wicked Lives, and
uncharitable Actions: Yet God has not left himself without a Witness in all
Nations; but his Goodness has been an Argument to persuade to Obedience, some
of those who have seen the invisible things of God, from the Creation of the
World; being understood by the things that are made, even his External Power
and Godhead. The Light of Reason has been universal to all Mankind; and those
who have acted according to that Light, where through the fault of others no
more has been given, doubtless no more will be required. Nor dare we deny but
that God may have sometimes acted graciously by his Spirit, where the Letter of
the Gospel has been wanting. So that many I am persuaded will come from the
East and from the West, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
Kingdom of Heaven, that in the opinion of many Christians are excluded: In
whose Hearts perhaps has been more of the Love of God and Man, than in many of
those Christians so ready to condemn them, who I doubt are more likely to be
themselves shut out. I think it may be well said of the Christian and
Christianity in this matter, as the Apostle speaks of the Jew, and
Circumcision, Romans 2.29. He is not a Christian which is one outwardly; neither
is that Christianity which consists in outward things; but he is a Christian
who is one inwardly; and Christianity, or the Religion that Christ taught, is
that of the Heart in the Spirit; and not in the Letter, whose Praise is not of
Men, but of God. The fruits of which Christian Spirit, are Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance; against such
who are endued with these Virtues, there is no Law, Gal. 5.22. But the
advantage of the visible Christians is much; because unto them are committed
the Oracles of God, and where much is given, much will be required. The bare
believing Christ to be the Messiah, yea the Faith of those who believe most
concerning his Person, will not be found enough, or a Saving Faith; but the
believing his Doctrine so as to do the Will of his Father, is that which will
give a Title to the Promise of Admission into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew.
7.21.

40. To persuade to Repentance, or a turning from a Life of Sin, to a Life of
Obedience to God, we find the chief End and Scope not only of the Gospel, but
of the other parts of the Old and New Testaments; which Books the Divine
Providence has graciously given and preserved, as a means to that End. Many
have undertaken to prove these Books to be the Word of God, but they have not
all gone the right way to do it. Some think they do not enough, unless they can
persuade us that every word in them was given by Immediate Inspiration. But
there is no need of such a Belief, if a considerate Person were capable of
having it. That they were given by the Good Providence of God, none can well
doubt. But some part of them, as the Historical, needed no such thing as
Inspiration: Some part, as the Prophetical, could not come without it. But a
due esteem of the Scripture may be had, and its End well accomplished, taking
it altogether as it is, and as none can in reason deny it to be, viz.
considering the parts of it, as some inspired, some written according to the
Knowledge of Faithful Men, some delivered according to the Wisdom given the
Writers thereof. But the Affirmation that every Word of it is inspired, is not
only no Point of Faith necessary to Salvation, or ever thought so, (as I can
find) by the Primitive Christians; but has diverse Inconveniences following it,
which are Grounds of Objection to Athiests and Deists. As for Instance; There
are some little Difficulties in the Historical Part, which are better
attributed to some Mistake in the Writer or Coppier, than to God: Some few
things in the Old Testament that seem dissonant to the Spirit of the Gospel,
which are better thought to be from the Spirit of the Writer, than from the
Spirit of God, etc. Some reckon by name so many Books of the Old and New
Testaments, and go about to prove them the Word of God first, before they have
well considered what they contain: But I think we should begin there, and see
what we find written in them; for we cannot well assert any thing to be of God,
till we know what it is. To talk of believing this or that to be a Revelation,
or the Word of God, before we know what it speaks, is very inconsiderate. But
when we find things that are apparently good, reasonable, excellent, and
suitable to the Understanding, Nature, and Circumstances of Man; a Design most
profitable to Man, and becoming God, we may well, nay cannot but think God the
Supreme, or First Author, however or by whomsoever they were given. The Truths
would have been the same had they never been written; but as they are written,
the Way of their Delivery, the Matters of Fact, or Historical part, appearing
to have all the Marks of Truth a History can, or at least needs have, cannot in
reason but be believed. Whosoever (for instance) should deny the History of
Jesus Christ, may as well reject all History, or question the Truth of every
thing others declare as Witnesses; which would be very foolish: Nor could such
a one reasonably desire any Man should believe him, in any thing he relates,
though never so probable. Now as God in his good Providence has given us the
Bible; a Book (if considerately read appearing to be) more full of
Instructions, Precepts, and Examples tending to bring Man, who is turned aside,
to the exact way of his Natural Allegiance, or Religion to God, than any other
Book; it cannot but be acknowledged that the Bible is a great and estimable
Gift of God, not to be under-valued as an Ordinary Book, nor yet to be idolized
as the uncorruptible Word of God, but to be duly used to our Benefit. And I
think I may be bold to say in relation to the Contents of this Book, and all
others; whatsoever has not an Instruction in it to inform Man of his Duty to
God and his Neighbor; or cannot yield an Argument to persuade him to be
reconciled thereto, cannot rationally be thought a Dictate of God, but is
better supposed (should there be found any such thing) merely from Man. And, I
think, though we grant that the Bible is not free from all manner of Corruptions,
but that some Mistakes have been therein made, at least by Coppiers; though we
affirm many Faults to have been committed by Translators, so that better
Translations are not only to be desired, but also wanted; yet we cannot
rationally have the less esteem of what is uncontroverted, the Sum and
Substance, End and Design thereof. Nor have we any reason (since we may read
the Book it self) to look upon the Bible as it is most abused and deformed by
Expositors; who, if we were to take it from them, have represented it to us but
as a contradictory or confused Rule.

41. For we find many things taught by them, who take upon them to expound the
Scripture, as Doctrines clearly expressed (as they say) therein, that have not
only no apt Tendency to the Great End, the Love of God and Man; but some of
them naturally tend, or incline to the contrary. Which Consideration brings
me to the last thing I designed to speak to; the last Stumbling block I shall
endeavor to take out of the Deists way, viz. The Consideration of diverse
Doctrines now confidently taught as Orthodox, and main Points of Christian
Faith; which to render Christianity more reasonable, more like it self, I shall
not only readily disown, but endeavor to show that they cannot reasonably be
thought to be Doctrines of the Gospel, necessary to Christianity, or True: That
they cannot be accounted for, or proved Points of a Rational Faith, or truly
deduced from the Bible: But are Mistakes taken up through Prejudice, from
Tradition, and confirmed by mistaken Texts of Scripture. It being an Evil but
common Custom among Men to take up Opinions before they carefully read the
Scripture, or consider the Agreement or Disagreement of things; and then to
labor to make the Scripture prove, and confirm them; endeavoring to bring
Scripture to their unreasonable Opinions, when they should rather have brought
their Opinions from Scripture and Reason; Scripture so understood as to be
reconcilable to it self, and to Right Reason. And as this word reconcilable
brings into my Mind the notion of Reconciliation, which I take to be
misunderstood by many, I shall first begin with that Point, and endeavor to
show the Mistakes about it.

42. It is the fancy of some that Christ has reconciled God to Sinners: Let us
a little consider the matter. Reconciliation is a making Friends of some or
other at variance. When there is Disagreement, Enmity, or Hate in a Person that
did agree, love, and was a Friend, the taking away, or changing these for
Agreement, Friendship and Love, is properly Reconciliation. Now to say that
Christ has reconciled God to us, is as much as to say God was a Friend, and
did love Man, but then became an Enemy, and hated him; and then was made a
Friend, and loved him again. But this can with no good reason be said of God,
because he is unchangeable, and these things imply a Change. Foolish Men are
very apt to look upon God to be such a one as themselves; now willing one
thing, then another; now angry, then pleased; because they find themselves so.
But such things are Imperfections, incompatible with a Self-sufficient Being.
God has properly no Passions must be confessed, though Men do commonly speak of
him as if he had; and he is in Scripture so represented sometimes, after the
manner of Men. But he is the same still, has the same Will, the same Love to
whatever is his own, and cannot have less. He represents himself as he is,
hating Sin, or that unjust and unhappy Action of the Creatures willing contrary
to its Maker's Will: but he never hates the Creature, his own Work, but loves
it. He cannot be supposed to be reconciled to Sin, he never loved, or can love
Injustice: To suppose him so reconciled as to approve, like, or allow Sin in
his Creature, would be to suppose him to will Evil, or contrary to his own
Will. And he is not reconciled to his Creature, because he was never
deconciled, or an Enemy to it. His Goodness and Bounty is over all his Works;
he is always ready to do Good to his Creatures, and make them happy; it is they
that are Enemies to him, and to themselves, and to their own Happiness. A Man
that runs into a Cave, and hides himself from the Light and Warmth of the Sun,
and is persuaded at length to come out, and receive the Benefit of its Heat and
Splendor, may as well say the Sun was angry with him, and his his Face, and
withheld his Beams; but now is reconciled to him, and shines on him again; as
to fancy that the Ever-overflowing-fountain of Good withholds his Streams from
the Works of his hands. He is the most loving Father, that is always ready to
do Good to his Children; but they, Rebellious, will not always receive it.
Therefore we may boldly, nay we must on good Consideration say, that whatever
Christ has done and suffered, does not make God any more willing Sinners
should obey him, or be saved, than he was before. If he could at any time will
Sinners not to obey him, he might be supposed not to will them to be saved; but
to will Sinners not to obey him, is all one as to will his Will to be done, and
not done at the same time, which is a Contradiction. We find foollish Men
commonly representing God as one full of Wrath, Anger, Hatred, to his poor,
silly, Fallen Creatures; severe, furious, and hard to be appeased; but Christ
as one full of Love, Mercy, Pity, Good Will to Sinners; but we must not think
God to have less Love, Goodness, Mercy, etc. than Christ; that would be
unreasonable, when there can be no less than an Infinite Distance between God,
and the most Perfect Creature, in Goodness, Mercy, Kindness, and all
Perfections; yea as much as God is above Man, so much greater must we think is
the Mercy, Goodness, and Love of the Father to Sinners, than that of the Son;
who is but the Image of him that is greater than all: God so loved the World
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life. The Love of God was the Cause of Christ's
both Sonship and Mission, and the Cause must be greater than the Effect. God
could have no external Cause, or Motive to love us, but loves us freely; for
he is Love, which can be said of no Second. No Man has greater Love than
Christ; for he laid down his Life for us even while we were Enemies: but he had
a Motive to Love, greater than from himself, viz. his Duty to obey, and imitate
God his Father. Moreover, if God has commanded all Sinners to repent, believe,
and be saved, he must be supposed to will that they should do so, or he
deceives them; which cannot be admitted: If he wills them to repent and be
saved, he is not their Enemy, but their Friend. What then, you will say, did
Christ come to reconcile? I say, with the Scripture, to reconcile us to God,
who were Enemies to him by wicked Works; to reconcile us to our best Friend and
Father, from whom we had gone astray, and been prodigal Sons; to reconcile us
to our Duty, yea to our own Happiness, which can no way be attained but by Love
and Obedience to God. And when we return to our Father's House, and acknowledge
our Folly and Rebellion, then we shall find it true that God is our best
Friend, and was so before we thought of returning. It was an Opinion in the
Pagan Divinity, that their Gods were sometimes angry, and must be attoned or
reconciled, and entreated to do them no Mischief, or to be favorable to them;
and this they thought was to be done by some thing or other, which they fancied
was more pleasing to the Gods, than that which they were angry at was
displeasing, something or other they liked so much better than doing Good, that
they were thereby over persuaded to do them such Favors they would not
otherwise have done; such a pleasure to them, in their opinion, was the slaying
of a Beast, and the offering it to them, yea the horrid Act of sacrificing Men.
But Christians should have a better Opinion of God, who are taught that he is
Love, that is unchangeable Good will. Who can imagine that the Blood of a Lamb
poured out, or the wasting of a Bullock on an Altar, or the Death, yea the
Murder of an Innocent Man, can be so grateful to the Most High, as to make him
a Friend when he was supposed before to be an angry Enemy? Can this be an
Argument to prevail with him to alter his Mind, and like the Sinner any better?
What Delight or Advantage can we suppose the Death, or Spoiling any Creature,
can be to the Self sufficient God? Tho'd Christ for some Reasons is compared
to, or called a Sacrifice, we can with no good reason retain the vulgar notion
of it, or believe that he by his being murdered, appeased God's Wrath, and made
him change from an angry Enemy, to a pleased, loving Friend, or rendered him
less disliking the Sins of Men, than he was before: No, the Enmity is in Man
against God, not in God against Man; it is Man that is to be changed, not God.
Besides, nothing but a wonderful Prejudice can make us think, that the Murder
of the most innocent Man the World ever had, should be so much more pleasing to
the most Just God, than all other Sins were displeasing; so that That, and
nothing else could pacify him, or make him willing Men that had sinned, should
yet obey him, and be happy. Did we but consider, we should never have hopes to
digest this opinion, so many hard things are in the bowels of it. If God has
commanded all Men not to kill; can we with any sense think that God is at any
time pleased with the breach of that Command? Yea, that the most Innocent must
needs be murdered, that God might be justly pleased with the Guilty, yea his
Murderers? This is to make Wickedness necessary, and God pleased with it, yea
implacable without it: This is to represent God worse than Man: This is to
suppose that some must of necessity sin, and be damned, or else none could
possibly be saved. Ah poor Judas, that never taught'st us such hard things of
God; must thou needs betray thy Innocent Master, and be damned, that we might
be saved, who think so hardly of our Maker? Why not another, that thou might
be saved; or why not we, for others that have a better opinion of God? But God
has without exception forbid all Injustice, and especially the shedding
Innocent Blood; and if Men had believed, and obeyed God as they ought, and
consequently might; if they had received Christ's Doctrine, and followed his
Example, as it was God's Will, and so their Duty, there would have been none to
have slain Christ; but Men would, nay must have been saved without any ones
committing such a nefarious Fact. Yea, if the Husbandmen had yielded the Due
Fruits, at the Approach of the Servants, they would have been far from being so
wicked as to have murdered the Son. Again, if God could have been supposed to
will that Christ should be put to Death; if the Slaying of Christ had been that
without which God would not be pleased, it had been no Sin in those that did
it, but some Bodies Duty to kill him; and so the notion of their being
Murderers or Sinners in that Action, had been destroyed. But God never
commanded any to put him to Death; but the Action of those who did it, is
spoken of in Scripture with the highest Disapprobation. But Christ was to be a
Sacrifice, you will say. I answer, That the business of Sacrifices is not well
considered by many, hor does the Death of Christ agree with the common notion
of a Sacrifice, though he is in some sense called a Sacrifice. Christ is called a
Priest, and an Altar, and a Sacrifice, when one Person cannot possibly be all
these in a proper sense. The Priests slew the Sacrifices; Christ flew not
himself, or any other; nor were those who slew him Priests for that purpose.
The Priests might without Sin slay the Beasts they offered; those that slew
Christ had the absolute Prohibition of God, in the Sixth Commandment. The
Offerings with the Levitical Priesthood, not being to be thought for any Profit
or Pleasure to God Almighty, could have no reason except some prosit to Man
might come thereby; some of them fed the Levites, who had no portion among
their Brethren, a People needing a sufficient number of Teachers of the Moral
and Civil Law, could they have been contented to be unlike the Nations round
about them, satisfied with a Spiritual Worship and Pure Theocracy, without the
more pompous and insignificant Ceremonies; but God knowing the Inclination of
that People, let them have work burthensom enough, to keep them from the
Abominations of the Heathen; had they showed their Obedience in observing no
more than what they were directed in, a burden expensive enough to drain their
Superfluities, and enure them to spare, when they should come more to need the
Beneficence of one another, when they were no longer a Peculiar People. But
whatever might be the Original Reason of Sacrifices, or what apt Tendency there
might at any time be found in them, to bring Man to his Chief End; we do not
find that any of the Inhabitants of the Earth except the Hebrews, nor they till
they came into the Wilderness, had any Institutions or Directions about
Sacrificing Animals; however Mankind, Hebrews and others, came to be so fond of
it for so many Ages. But to leave this, that we may conceive how Christ may be
called a Sacrifice, let us consider what we find in Scripture as the most Plain
Discoveries of God's Mind in relation to Sacrifice, by the Prophets and
Apostles, Psalm. 50.8. I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices, or thy
Burnt-offerings, to have been continually before me. Ver. 9. I will take no
Bullock out of thy House, nor He-goats out of thy Folds. Ver. 10. For every
Beast of the Forest is mine, and the Cattle upon a thousand Hills. Ver. 11. I
know the Fowls of the Mountains, and the wild Beasts of the Field are mine, V.
12. If I were hungry I would not tell thee, for the World is mine, and the
Fullness thereof. V. 13. Will I eat the flesh of Bulls, or drink the blood of
Goats? V. 14. Offer unto God Thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows unto the most High.
V. 15. And call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me. Psalm. 51.16. Thou desiredst not Sacrifice, else would I give
it, thou delightest not in Burnt-offerings. V. 17. The Sacrifices of God are a
broken Spirit, etc. Jer. 7.22. I spoke not unto your Fathers, nor commanded
them in the day that I brought them out of the Land of Egypt, concerning
Burntofferings or Sacrifices. V. 23. But this thing commanded I them saying,
obey my Voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people, etc. 1 Samuel
15.22. To obey is better than sacrifice. Hos. 6.6. God will have mercy, and not
sacrifice. Math. 9.13. If ye had known what this means I will have mercy, and
not sacrifice: Ye would not have condemned the guiltless. Spoken to the Jews
condemning his Disciples, when they being hungry plucked the Ears of Corn, but
might have been said to them rather when they afterward more unjustly
condemned and slew him. Is. 1.11. To what purpose is the multitude of your
sacrifices unto me, says the Lord? I am full of the Burnt-offerings of Rams,
and the fat of fed Beasts, and I delight not in the blood of Bullocks, or of
Lambs, or of He-goats, etc. And at the 16th. Wash ye, make you clean, put away
the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil. Ver. 17. Learn
to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead
for the Widow. Mich. 6.6, 7, 8. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow
my self before the High God? Shall I come before him with Burnt offerings, with
Calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with
ten thousands of rivers of Oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my
Transgression, or the fruit of my Body for the sin of my Soul? He has showed
thee, O Man, what is Good: And what does the Lord require of thee, but to do
justly, and love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God. But the sacrifices of
God, Psalm. 107.22. are sacrifices of Thanksgiving: Psalm. 4.5. Sacrifices of
Righteousness: 1 Pet. 2.5. Spiritual Sacrifices: Ye also as lively stones are
built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
Sacrifices acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ: Sacrifices of praise and doing
good, Heb. 13.15, 16. By him therefore let us offer up the sacrifice of praise
to God continually; that is the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name:
But to do good, and communicate forget not; for with such sacrifices God is
well pleased: Sacrifices of love to God and our Neighbor: Mark 12.33. And to
love him with all the Heart, and with all the Understanding, and all the Soul,
and with all the Strength, and to love his Neighbor as himself, is more than
all whole Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices: Living Sacrifices: Romans 12.1. I
beseech you therefore Brethren by the mercies of God that ye present your
Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy acceptable to God, which is your reasonable
service. And the Author to the Hebrews, chap. 10.5. brings Christ in from Psalm.
40.6, etc. saying to God, A Sacrifice and Offering thou would not, but a
Body have thou prepared me, as the Septuagint reads it; but the Hebrew has it,
(...), my Ears have thou dug, viz. opened to hear thy Commands, not to
Sacrifice certainly; for says he, in Burnt-offerings, and Sacrifices for sin,
thou had no pleasure: Then said I, Lo I come to do thy Will, O God. Above
when he said Sacrifices, and Burnt-offerings for sin thou would not, neither
had pleasure therein, etc. Then said I, Lo I come to do thy Will, O God. He
takes away the first, viz. Sacrifice, that he may establish the second; viz.
doing the Will of God: By the which will we are sanctified, through the
offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all, etc. Ver. 16. This is the
Covenant I will make with them after those days, (speaking, Jer. 31.33. of the
New Covenant) says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their Hearts, and in
their Minds will I write them. Ver. 17. And their Sins and Iniquities will I
remember no more. Ver. 18. Now where remission of these is, there is no more
offering for sin, etc.

From all which places compared, and many more that we might consider, it
appears that Christ is a Sacrifice or Offering acceptable to God, as he does
his Will in prosecuting the end of his Mission, the bringing Sinners to
Repentance, and Obedience to God, against all opposition, even Death it self;
giving up his Body to Death, rather than omit any thing he was to do. And
Sinners have the benefit of this Sacrifice; not as God is appeased, atton'd, or
reconciled to Sin or Sinners by any pleasure that can be added to him by
beholding the Pain, Bloodshed, or Death of an innocent Man; but rather as they
are attoned, or reconciled to God, and their Duty to him, by beholding Christ's
Obedience in doing the Will of his Father, even under the greatest Sufferings
(even to Death) he could meet with from the opposition of Earth and Hell; his
Constancy being a convincing Argument that his Doctrine was good, and his Life
to be imitated; a Persuasive to follow him in Gospel, or exact Moral Obedience,
through whatsoever Persecution for Righteousness sake, leaving all those
external and childish things of the Levitical Priesthood as useless. Wherefore
as a better Covenant God says, He will put his Laws into their Hearts. What
Laws? The Laws of Offerings, and Ceremonies might possibly be put into their
Hearts; no, such Laws as readily come into the Hearts of considering Persons;
such as we have ver. 24. viz. Love and good Works. So that the Obedience of
Christ is the Christian Sacrifice, but not ours, by its pacifying God for us
Sinners; but by our following it as it is an Example, in offering up all we are
and have in love to God, which is our reasonable Duty. Christ may also be said
to be sacrificed for us as he dedicated and offered up his Life in prosecuting
the Good of Sinners, by teaching them, and persuading them to be reconciled to
God. He may also be said to be a Sacrifice to the Wrath and Malice of the
wicked Jews, as they devoted him, and gave him up to Death according to the
Council of Caiaphas, to prevent the Romans coming upon them, on the noise of
his being said to be the King of the Jews; they supposing (as also his
Disciples for some time did) that he meant then to set up an earthly Kingdom,
thinking it was better that one Man should die than that the whole Nation
should perish.

Again, Christ is called a Propitiation; not that he makes God merciful, or
propitious to us, but that he makes us capable to experience God's Mercy and
Kindness; teaching us the way of Repentance and Obedience, wherein God is found
merciful and ready to forgive. The Propitiatory, or Mercy-Seat, from whence
Christ is called a Propitiation, was the Cover of the Ark, or Coffer wherein
were the Ten Words, or Commandments; which did not tipifie Christ as hiding the
Commands or Law from God, or interposing between God and the Commands; but
signified rather that those who will come to the Seat of God's Mercy, will find
the Commands must be kept; and though they have run from, or broke the Commands,
if they will repent, and return to the Commands, there they will find God's
Mercy above, or greater than the Command, or their Sin. So Christ the living
Table, from whose Mouth, and in whose Life the Commandments of God were most
fairly given to Men, comes declaring God merciful, ready to forgive; but gives
us to understand whom he will forgive, and show Mercy to, even the Merciful;
those that forgive, or are ready to be conformable to the Will or Commands of
God, and not the Impenitent.

43. There is another opinion that has prevailed much in the World, which is
this; That Christ by what he did or suffered, or by both, has made perfect or
full Satisfaction to God for the breach of his Laws by Sinners. But this
opinion by a little Consideration, I think will appear to be a groundless,
absurd, and impossible Fancy, and accompanied with diverse evil Tendencies. As
first it is incompatable with, and destroys the notion of Divine Forgiveness:
For wherever a debt is fully paid, it cannot also be truly said to be
forgiven; there is no Forgiveness but where something due is abated; which I
think is evident to all Men. If I owe a Sum of Money, though I am not able, or
never do pay it; yet if I have a Friend that can, and does pay it for me, my
Creditor does not forgive me. The greatest Pretense of an Answer to this
Objection against Christ satisfying, I ever heard, is this. That though Christ
has fully satisfied, or paid the Debt for Sinners, yet God may be said to
forgive, because Christ is a Person that God has found out, given, or prepared
for this purpose. To which I answer; If Christ be entirely the Gift of God, or
has nothing but what he receives from God, he has nothing to pay another's
Debt with; all he has, and is, is lent him of God, and is due on his own
account; so that all his possible Obedience is but just enough to keep himself
from needing Forgiveness. He that owes all he has, cannot spare to pay another
Debts, without rendering himself incapable of paying his own. If Christ has
any thing, or is any thing, which he has not, or is not from God, (which I
think none will say) whereby he might be fancied capable of Works of
Supererogation wherewith to make God amends for the Debts of Sinners, God would
be nevertheless paid their Debts; and so the Sinner not forgiven. As if a
Person owe me Money and cannot pay it, though I find out, and persuade another to
pay the Debt, I have my due, and I have not forgiven it. But let us consider
this point a little more closely, as the matter is in it self, and without
Allusions. The Law of God to his Creatures requires Perfect, Perpetual, and
Personal Obedience; that is, that every Creature, according to its Capacity,
always should will as God wills. The End of the Law of God is Obedience, or
that it never be broken; now the Creature having disobeyed, or willed otherwise
than God wills, nothing can possibly make it true that it has not disobeyed;
consequently there can be no Perfect Satisfaction to the Demands of the Law,
when once it is broken. He that never breaks the Law, is indeed just, and fully
satisfies it; he that has broke it, may possibly come to keep it for the
future; but this Law says, thou shall, and thou shall not, without excepting
at any time what the Creature is capable of; so that future Obedience cannot
satisfy for former Disobedience; because the Obedience of all the Creatures
time is due; and the perfect and perpetual Obedience of every Creature is but
just enough. What is done amiss can never be undone; the Obedience that is
unpaid, can never be paid for the time past, because the time past wherein I
ought to have been obedient, is irrevocable. Now if a Man's own Imperfect,
Partial Obedience, or that which was not always, cannot Satisfy, or be Enough,
or Equivalent for, and with Perfect, Full, and Perpetual Obedience; much less
can the Obedience of one, be the same with his own and another Obedience, and
so satisfy or be enough for the unperformed Duty of another. If I have sinned,
though Christ has obeyed, Christ's Obedience does not make it true that I have
not sinned, it is not as much Obedience as his own and mine too, which the Law
requires; nor makes it that which was, or is due to God, not to have been due,
or now not due. If I have sinned the Law is broke, and nothing can possibly
make it unbroke; and unless it were wholly unbroke, there is not enough done,
or Satisfaction made to the Law. Some sort of Sins as they are against Man, may
indeed be satisfied for to Man, because Man may get or loose, and sometimes
receive an advantage greater than his loss: But the Evil of Sin lies not in
God's getting or loosing by Obedience or Disobedience; for God cannot be
profited. All the Creature has, he has from God; and all God requires him, is
but his Duty, and the least breach of the Law makes it not kept enough. He that
is once guilty of a breach of God's Law, it remains for ever true of him that
he has broke it, and is guilty. All that can possibly be done on the part of
the Sinner, when the Command has been broke, is that it be kept for the future,
and more than is possible in this case cannot be done. Therefore the best that
can be conceived as to what has been done amiss, is that it be forgiven. He
that comes at length to keep God's Law perfectly, may be said then to satisfy
it, not to have satisfied it. Christ we believe did always perfectly satisfy
the Law of God for himself; and as he is the Instrument that brings Men to
Repentance and Obedience, he is said to bring in everlasting Righteousness: So
he is said to justify as he brings Men to be just. But Christ's keeping the
Law, cannot possible be said to be another's keeping it, that don't keep it, or
serve instead of it. It is not enough that one Person fulfill the Law, all
should do so. There can be no obeying by Proxy in this matter; such a Fancy
would be no better than being saved, or going to Heaven only by Proxy. Again,
if future Obedience cannot be Obedience for the time past in Disobedience; and
if one Man's Obedience cannot be another Man's Obedience, much less can the
Suffering, or Unhappiness a Creature meets with in or by Sin, be a Satisfaction
for Sin, or instead of Obedience, or enough without it. The Law of God does not
say it is alike acceptible to the Lawgiver, that you do which you will, obey,
or be miserable in disobeying; but says absolutely, thou shall, and thou shall
not; do so and so. To be unhappy is no Duty or Debt we owe to God; nor is our
Discontent, though we are discontented for ever, equivalent to, or that which God
takes instead of our being pleased, in our Maker's Will. It Is Obedience only he
requires: Happiness and Misery are but the natural Consequences of our being
obedient or disobedient, yea in some sense the same as Obedience and
Disobedience. To forbid Sin is also to forbid Misery; Misery cannot be alike
acceptable to God as Obedience, any more than Sin can. God's Law is never the
less broke by the Creatures being unhappy, or discontent, but rather the more;
because Discontent is grounded chiefly in willing either that which is not
good, or that which is not possible. God can never will the Creatures Misery,
instead of Obedience; for to be unhappy by willing otherwise than God wills, is
but continued Disobedience to God, who wills all Men to repent, believe, and
obey, or else it were not their Duty. And he wills them to be saved from their
Sins, or else he could not will them to obey, which is the same thing. God
cannot absolutely will Unhappiness to the Creature without willing the cause of
it, its Sin; nay what God wills me to do cannot properly be called my Sin, but
my Duty; and none can well believe Duty is the Cause of Misery. Sinners though
damned, and becoming as miserable as possible, do not thereby satisfy the Law
of God, suffering by Sinning, not being Obedience, but doing ones Duty. That a
Murderer, or Thief, is commonly said to have satisfied the Law, when he is put
to Death, is a vulgar Error, especially if it be meant of God's Law, according
to which Humane Laws ought to speak. The cause why God has ordered a Murderer
to be put to Death, is not to satisfy the Law: Which says, Thou shall not
kill; for that could not be said to be kept enough, though the Death of the
Murderer would restore the life he took away; for it was but enough, if he had
never committed Murder so much as in desire. But the Murderer suffers Death
rather because Satisfaction cannot be made; that he may be prevented doing such
an irrepairable Wickedness any more. He that has once by such an Act declared
himself a dangerous Enemy to Mankind, one that regards not his Maker's Law, but
is very likely to be the loss of other Lives better than his, if he be suffered
to live, dies to prevent greater Evil, and to save more precious Lives. For any
other Man's life is worth more than the life of such a Madman as a Murderer,
being likely to be more beneficial to Mankind than such an inimical and
dangerous Person. But in some Sins, as they are committed against Man,
Satisfaction may possibly be made to Man; and I think it unreasonable, as well
as dissonant to the Laws of God, that a Man should be put to Death for an
Injury done to another Man, where Satisfaction may fully be made, as in Theft,
etc. If I am robbed, what is so taken from me may be restored with such
advantage that I may be really no looser, but have that returned that will be
better to me than what was taken away, and countervail for the fear, danger, or
other Damages I may have suffered in beingrobb'd; so that then I cannot truly
count my self a Looser, but rather a Gainer. And by such Satisfaction made, the
Thief will be a sufficient Looser, without loosing life, which is of more value
than all the Goods a Man has. And if all the Goods I have is of less value to
me than my Life, I cannot but grant that all I have is of less value than
another Life. It is certainly best where there is least Evil, and the designs
of all wise Lawgivers is, that there may be as little evil as possible: The
first intent of a Law is, that it should be kept: The second, that if it be
broken, amends may be made if possible, or as far as can be. And the last, that
the Transgressor be prevented, or discouraged from doing so any more. Now in
the case of Theft, if I am robbed my Reason presently tells me, I ought in
Justice to have what was took from me restored, (if it may be) which is better,
and more desirable to me than that the Thief should be destroyed, which no way
makes me amends, unless I could count the devilish pleasure I may take in his
Misery, equivalent to my Goods: But if the Thief be caused to make Restitution,
there is less evil, which if it were made with sufficient interest for what he
robbed, or borrowed against my Will, the Thief would be sufficiently
discouraged by finding Thieving an unprofitable trade, and no way for his
interest. Where the Robber has nothing to restore, he might serve in Prison,
and work it out. By which means such Crimes would be more prevented, as being
made the way to Poverty, and Work, the things such covetous Persons seek to
avoid by stealing from others; when Death it self is to them but as a desperate
cure of the Disease of Want, which some passionate Persons in this, and other
Discontents, will inflict upon themselves.

But to leave this Digression; If the Sinner's own Misery is not a Satisfying
God's Law equal to Obedience, another Misery can much less be a Satisfaction
for him; and least of all can the Sufferings of Christ, an innocent Person,
satisfy the Law of God broken by Sinners. It is true, Christ suffered for
Sinners, as well as by Sinners; that is, he underwent all the Sufferings he met
with in prosecuting their Good, for their sakes; because he would not have
suffered had it not been for them. But tho^ Christ suffered for Sinners and by
Sinners, it cannot therefore be said Sinners have not sinned, or that they have
done enough of the Law. And as Christ's doing righteously, is not the Sinner's
doing so, so Christ's Suffering is not the Sinner's Suffering, could Suffering
be equivalent to, or please God as well as Obedience; much less is Christ's
Suffering the Sinner's doing his Duty. People very confidently fancy, and
assert most absurd things of Christ's Sufferings; That God is so mightily
pleased therewith, that he is not so much displeased with Sin; nay, that he
don't dislike all other Sin so much, as he likes his innocent Son's Undeserved
Suffering from the hands of Sinners. They fancy God loves the Misery of his
poor guilty Creatures so much, that nothing must prevent it; rather than he
will not have the pleasing sight of as great pains as all his fallen Creatures
can possibly suffer, he will have it in the Innocent. They represent God as one
that takes pleasure in the Death of him that dies; in the Death of the
Innocent for the Guilty; as one much more pleased with the Punishment of the
Just, than of the Transgressor. The most blameless Creature that ever was, must
not be abated one dram of Torment they can devise, fancy due, or wish to their
most wicked Enemies. They are not contented Christ should suffer those things
merciless and unjust Sinners could lay upon him by means of his Body, or what
might come by the fear and apprehension thereof; what he might suffer, in his
great Compassion to Sinners and Love to God, on the Consideration of Man's Sin
and Misery, and God's leaving him for a time, who loved him so greatly, without
more than common Assistance under these Sorrows, or what he might possibly bear
from attempts of Satan; but they make God the Active Inflicter of more than all
this, of the greatest Torment, even that of the Damned, on that dear Soul, who
was the greatest Saint; making God like a Tyrant, like themselves or worse:
They tell strange Stories of Christ's bearing the weight of his Father's Wrath,
Burning Wrath: Yea, I have heard an ignorant, but confident Preacher, tell his
inconsiderate Hearers, that Christ was a Sacrifice, and roasted in his Father's
Wrath, and his Agony was Certamen, a Contest or Fight, and that Christ fought
not with Devils, not with Men, but with his Father. But God himself testified
the contrary to these bold Fancies, by a Voice from Heaven, that he was his
beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased; and we cannot suppose that God changed
his Mind, and became displeased with him who never sinned, nor can he be
supposed to contend, fight, or be displeased with his Father's Will, while we
grant him without Sin; which is another Argument that God's Will was not the
cause of his Sufferings; for there is no Suffering but from some sort of
Displeasure with the case we are in; and if Christ were displeased with what
God did, he sinned. But we believe God could not be displeased with Christ,
being without any fault at all, so neither could Christ be displeased with God;
but he might be displeased and uneasy, by means of Sinners. It must be a hard
Heart, and impudent Tongue that can believe, or affirm that God was wrath with
the most Innocent Creature, and tormented him, when God calls him his Beloved
Son. God left him indeed to that Cup of the Sorrows of Death, occasioned by the
Body, inflicted by wicked hands: he left him deeply to be sorry for, and
sympathize with miserable Sinners, and to grieve for the breach of his Father's
Laws; but he never left him without the Knowledge of God's being his God and
Father; he never had the Misery of Despair, Envy, Malice, Wrath, Strong desire
of Impossibilities, Hate of God, etc. the chiefest Ingredients of the Damned's
Misery. Whatever was his fear of that Cup, the painful, and lingering Death of
the Cross, which was likely to be so tedious to one who in all probability had
not been accustomed to Sickness, or Bodily Pains; yet he was not left without
the Heavenly Assistance of an Angel to strengthening him. Whatever was God's
forsaking him, he was sure God was his loving Father, and that that day he
should be in Paradise. If God left him to all the Pain and Anguish, the cruel
Death of Crucifixion, or the Apprehension of it might produce in an Innocent
Man (as he has left many of his Followers to cruel Torments) and did not
interpose and prevent the Cup of Sufferings by some extraordinary means; God
can be thought to be no more but the Permitter of the Wicked so far to afflict
the Righteous, and to work no Miracle to separate Sorrows and Pains, from their
common Conditions in Humane Nature. Christ's Patience under all, praying for
his Enemies, submitting to Death, though he deserved it not, rather than omit his
Duty, may be of great use to us to set before us the greatest Pattern of
Good-behaviour under Sufferings for Righteousness sake, and to forewarn us what
we must expect if we will be his Followers. And whatever was the Cup Christ
spoke of in his Agony, the Author to the Hebrews, chapter 5.7, 8, 9. tells us, that
when he had offered up Prayers and Supplications, with strong Crying and Tears,
unto him that was able to save him from Death, he was heard from his fear,
(which may encourage us;) and though he were a Son he learned Obedience by the
things that he suffered; and being made perfect, he became a cause of eternal
Salvation: To whom? to all them that obey him. So that, if we should suppose
Satisfaction possible to be made, how full soever, this Text tells us we could
not be saved alone on the account of what Christ has done or suffered, because
something else is yet necessary, viz. our Obedience; so Christ's doing and
suffering is not indeed enough for us, and so really no Satisfaction. But that
God does truly forgive Sinners, that I think is so clearly, and often declared
in Scripture, it needs not be farther demonstrated; and Satisfaction cannot
stand with Forgiveness, any more than the Word can be found in Scripture.

44. Having here discoursed somewhat concerning Sufferings, I think it most
proper to subjoin my Thoughts about the Common Opinion relating to the Evil
called Punishment, or the Miseries of the Creature, consequent on Sin: Wherein
I think Men are generally mistaken, while they look upon God as truly and
properly the Inflicter; as the sole Cause, and Efficient of this Misery of the
Sinner and obliged so to be. It is no wonder indeed that those Men should be of
this opinion, who believe God was a Punisher, and that a severe One, of the
Innocent Jesus; they forgetting even the Oath of God, That the Soul that
sins shall die; the Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him, and
the Wickedness of the Wicked shall be upon him; one shall not bear another
Wickedness, as we read at large Ezekiel. 18.

Nor is it strange that any, who do not believe the Goodness of God greater
than they can conceive, or desire, should esteem God the Author of some sort of
Evil. But for my part, I must confess I do not see cause to believe that God is
properly and positively a Punisher, or the cause of Unhappiness in any of his
Creatures, much less bound to be so; or that any Evil can proceed from the
Fountain of all Good, or any thing but what is good from Goodness it self; but
if God give any thing, it must needs be good. I would here be understood to
speak properly; for I know the Scripture, Tropically and Figuratively, after
the manner of Men, speaks often to the contrary. I do not deny, but affirm,
that the wicked that die impenitent, shall be exceeding miserable, and suffer
Exquisite Torments: But I do not believe that those Torments, or Pains, and
Diseases in this life, are inflicted, or caused by God's Immediate Hand, but
are the Work and Procurement of Sinners, according to that Jer. 2.19. Thine own
Wickedness shall correct thee, etc. God can I think be no more the Cause of the
Creatures Misery than of its Sin, otherwise than as he is the Cause of the
Creatures being capable thereof; so that the Creature could neither sin nor
sorrow, if God had not made it a Creature.

Let us endeavor to clear this matter if possible, that I may not be thought
by all Men grossly mistaken, to hold so great a Paradox as that God does not
punish for Sin.

There are two sorts of Evils the Creature is capable of, Sin and Misery, or
rather Sin and Displeasure; which though we call two, are in many Respects the
same.

That God should be the Cause of Sin, few will in words, though many do in
consequence, affirm; and I think I have said enough before to convince them
both. But Displeasure or Misery most Men I meet with, esteem God the Cause of
to the Creature. In the Consideration of Misery, we have,

First, The Want of Good or Pleasure.

Secondly, The Presence of Evil or Displeasure.

First, As to the Want of Pleasure: It is certain God made Intelligent
Creatures capable of Intense, and perpetual Pleasure and Satisfaction; but if
the Creature has it not, it is not God's fault: It was impossible the Creature
should have continual Happiness or Pleasure, as God has it, viz. independently
in it self, or by its own Will as its own, opposed to the Will of God: God
could make it no more than a Creature, and so the Creature must needs be
satisfied by its Creator. But if the Creature turns from God, and sets up a
Will against him, he must needs want Satisfaction, when through
Creature-Impotence he cannot have his Will, God's Will not concurring with his;
and when, through Creature-Folly, he has willed what was not best for him, and
finds it so. So that if the Creature wants any Pleasure or Good, it is because
he has turned from it, or left it, or at least has some other Sinners hindering
it, or taking it from him by their Sin; for even the Innocent (as Christ was)
being Creatures, may suffer by the Sins of others. But the presence of this
Evil of Displeasure, may farther be considered under two Heads. 1st.
Displeasure merely mental. 2dly. Displeasure, or Pain by the occasion of the
Body; both of them in their center, are nothing but discontented or uneasy
Thoughts; a Consideration or Apprehension of something against ones Will. Now
as to the first; If I desire that which is contrary to the Order of the
Creation, unfit to be, and cannot have it, and therefore am foolishly
discontent, angry, fret, rage, etc. it is not God that makes me do so: No, the
disorderly Desire is a Sin, something against God's Will, therefore God don't
will it. To will something against God's Will is a Sin; and to be angry, and
fret and rage because we cannot have our disorderly Will, is a farther
Aggravation of the Sin, a stronger Will against God's Will, therefore God cannot
cause or will it; that were to cause Sin; so that God cannot be supposed the
Cause of the Mental Unhappiness, or Displeasure. God has given Man a very large
desire, but for what; that it should be crossed because he is but a Creature,
and cannot be God? No, but that it may be satisfied in the way it possibly can,
viz. by its Maker, in the compliance with his Will, in the excellent Order of
the Creation; that Man willing what God wills, viz. that which is good, and so
to be doneby God's Power, may be very happy.

But as to those uneasy Thoughts we have, or may have by occasion of the Body,
which go under the name of Pain and Disease, there seems more difficulty to
excuse God's hand from being the Giver. But I think, if we consider, it may
soon appear that God is no more the Cause of all the Conditions, or the Actual
Existence of this Misery, than of that Discontent Sinners have when they have
not their foolish Wills in other things. The Connection of the Body with the
Mind, without which such Sensations are not probably thought to be in the Mind,
is to be ascribed to God as the cause. The manner of this Union of Soul and
Body, is Use; the Mind desires to use the Body, acts upon it, by, and with it,
and receives diverse Ideas, or Thoughts of Body, by occasion of it: God's Will
is indeed the Bond of this Union; he wills that the Mind should desire to use
its Body, gives the Mind power to move it, and to do diverse things in Bodily
Nature by it; and causes that when such and such Conditions are in the Body,
the Mind should have such and such Ideas or Thoughts, pleasing or displeasing:
But, as I said before of Sin, God made Man capable of Sin, not that he might
sin; so God made Man capable of displeasing Thoughts by means of the Body, not
that he might have them as the end of the Capacity, but that he might as much
as possible avoid the least thing that tends to the spoiling or disordering of
the Body, with which he is to act a Part for a time. When there are the
Conditions of Pain or Disease, God in his general Law in Nature wills Pain, or
discontented Thoughts, should follow, and so this Discontent in it self is not
sinful: but God is not the Cause of the Application of the Conditions, but the
Sinner himself, or some other Sinner for him. When there is such and such a
Body abused, and unduly applied to Man's Body, the Mind presently is uneasy,
as at the approach of some Enemy; but this Uneasiness was not the end God
caused in Man such a Sensibility; but that Man might be the more affected with
the pleasing Sensations, he has made him capable of by avoiding at the first
touch all things that tend to remove the Conditions of Pleasure; that he might
sooner be warned so, than he could by Consideration. God made Man exquisitely
sensible that he might be capable of Pleasure even by having a Body, and not be
as it were imprisoned against his Will; and whenever the Conditions of Pleasure
are present, God fails not to cause that Sensation, though under Circumstances
where the Creature acts against his Will: So on the contrary. But Man has a
power given him to use or abuse things; and it is one part of his business in
this World to do all those things that tend to keep his Body most in health and
ease, that he may be the more capable of the chief part of his work, which does
not relate only to this Life, but that which is to come; viz. the rectifing his
Thoughts in order to his greatest, and lasting Happiness. But to bring the
matter near the eye if possible, take this instance. Fire tends to the
Destruction of the Body if too nearly applied, but if keept at a due distance
it occasions a sort of Pleasure tending to the Conservation of the Bodily
frame: God is the Cause I am pleased or displeased, as it is due or undue
application, but he does not unduely apply it; nor has he created it of such a
nature for my Hurt or Displeasure; that would be a Disorder in his Works, but
for my Good, the Conservation of my Body and Pleasure. But when that, or any
other Body is applied to my Hurt, it is I my self, or some other Sinner, that
either ignorantly, carelessly, foolishly, or wickedly abuses it. Now my bare
being uneasy, or displeased at the undue application of things, is not sinful;
my unduely applying them may be very culpable. Christ we believe was innocent,
though he had an uneasy Aversation at the application of things hurtful to his
Body; but he did not apply them, nor did God apply them, or will them applied;
for if he had so done, Christ's being uneasy or displea'd, would not easily be
excused from Sin. So if I drink, or eat to excess, and get a Feavor, Headache,
or Vertigo, God is not properly said to be the Cause of my being so disordered;
but my self, in abusing my Meat and Drink. It is certain that it is the abuse of
Bodily things, and extravagant Passions of the Mind, that procures Sickness and
Pains, and Sinners are the Authors of these Abuses: and yet alas, I hear them
often the Authors of a greater, viz. to say that it is the Hand of God that
does all the mischief in the City. With the greatest Confidence will some Men
affirm the greatest Contradictions and Absurdities, if they can but bring some
mistaken place of Scripture seeming to countenance their opinion; so they will
not fail to prove (as they think) whatsoever they fancy, or please. And there
is no Fancy so extravagant but Men may find some pretense of Scripture for it,
even to contradict Sense and Reason, yea to prove that God is the Author of
Sin, and all the Disorders in the World, they think they have God's own Word
for it. But Men would do well before they affirm God to say a thing, to
consider what the thing said is, and on what occasion, and whose immediate
words, and how it can be understood. It is I think impossible to prove God
says a thing till we hear it, or that he says that which appears to a
considerate Man unreasonable, or contradictory. God's Word cannot be double,
for and against. I believe I cannot have a greater notion of Goodness, than
there is really in God; the Scriptures abound with nothing more than
Declarations of the Goodness of God: But I had rather acknowledge my self a
Fool, or mistaken in Scripture, or be confuted in any thing, than have a less
notion of the Divine Goodness. If I should endeavor to prove a greater notion
of the Goodness of God, than is commonly believed, from Texts of Scripture, I
should be pelted with others; which is the common way of dispute, knock down
Text with Text, knock down Reason with Scripture; but what I have now said, may
help any one to judge how far God may be said to cause Evil. God is indeed said
in Scripture to send, yea to create Evil; but if the matter be nearly scand, it
is no more but he permits it, leaving Men to themselves, and other evil Agents;
or he does Men a Spiritual Good, which indirectly is the occasion of a Bodily
Evil; as Repentance, and Righteousness is the occasion of Persecution. But the
Fountain of Good, Goodness it self cannot properly give any thing but Good: Yet
often have I been grieved to hear the Goodness of God blemished and wronged, as
it is commonly even in Pulpits, when Bills are put up for Prayers for the Sick,
and Troubled in Mind; how confidently will the Preacher hold up his bold Face
to God, and tell him he has afflicted this Man, hid his Face from that Woman;
his Hand is heavy on One, and he is withdrawn from Another? Nay to say God has
visited a Person in the usual can, is as much as to say some Mischief or other
has been with them. Then the Preacher, as a great Man with God, is to persuade
him to change his Mind, and forbear such his troublesome Visits. And as he is in
their opinion the Immediate Cause of such Evils, they would sometimes have him
without any condition, that is miraculously remove them, or if the Parson,
being a Friend to the Doctor or Apothecary, advises them to use means, then God
is to be entreated to bless whatever is used, (I might say abused) as an
Antidote to frustrate, or take away the Effects of his Will, though it be that
which was never created to be a Medicine for the Disease they give it for. And
this is also to desire a Miracle, to work an Effect by that God never made for
a means; as to cause Fire to cool one, and Snow to warm one. But what is the
matter good People with the Man thus prayed for? Why he has got the Gout, or
the Pox, or a Fever, etc. Alas, I Will tell you whence he had it. He has took
too much of the harsh Liquor of a foreign Country, and been too idle, and so
vitiated the Crasis of the Liquors of his Body. Or he has strayed, and been too
busy within the Confines of a strange Woman, that proved too hot a Climate for
him; he has been in some great Passion, or vigorous Persute of some Worldly
thing, and inflamed his Blood; indulged his Appetite, and debauched his Stomach
with more Victuals or Drink than it could digest, and so supplied his Blood
with a vitiated Juice, or he has been guilty of some other Intemperance. Poor
Man, do thou think these are God's Visits? No, they are rather the Devils, or
yet rather thou have visited the Devil. Is this the hand of God? No it is the
hand of thy own Concupiscence: Thine own Wickedness has corrected thee; God is
good, and does good; he is good to all, and his Tender Mercies are over all his
Works, and no good thing will he so much as withhold from them that walk
uprightly. The Council I will give thee is to repent, and do so no more; pray
to God to forgive thee, and to direct thee to a Physician to whom he has given
the Knowledge of those things that are as Natural Means to reduce the Effects
of thy Disorders, as the things thou abusedst were to procure them. But what is
the matter with the poor Woman that complains so of God's leaving, or hiding
his Face from her, whereby she is so much grieved? Sure she loves him mightily,
and wants a Visit. Shall I be as plain with her as the Parson ought to be? Poor
Soul, she is a Sinner she knows full well; and though God has promised to forgive
her if she will repent, yet she cannot believe he will be so good as his Word;
she is loath to repent and try him, except she were sure: She cannot find in her
heart to forgive her poor Debtors; Somebody or other has wronged her, and
she is resolved to have Satisfaction; it is but just: So she thinks God must
have Satisfaction for her Sins, or he cannot be just; and though she has heard a
Sin-sweetning-Story that Christ has made Satisfaction for Sinners, she cannot
believe she is of that number, she is not sure she is one of the small number
predestined: Shall I tell her yet more plainly what is her Disease? She loves
Sin too much, Duty too little; her Heart is not inflamed with Love to God, so
as to influence all her Actions: She has not had him represented to her so
Good, Merciful, Loving, Ready to Forgive all freely, as indeed he is: Besides
that Witness for God the Conscience, that testifies when Man has done well or
ill, is not clear perhaps, and according to the measure of Obedience or
Disobedience, in known Duty, will the Comfort or Discomfort generally be to a
convicted Soul; and faith that there is Forgiveness with God is one Duty,
without which Comfort is seldom securely enjoyed.

Now let us consider, has God left, or afflicted such Persons? No, they have
left God, and hid themselves from him; let them but be persuaded to turn to
God, and believe his Infinite Love and Goodness, and love him with all their
Hearts, and they will quickly find that Perfect Love casts out Fear; their
Troubles will cease with the restifying their Judgments, and changing their
Wills. Now of all the Miseries sinful Creatures are liable to, the Eternal
Torments (as they are called) of the Damned in Hell can, I think, with least
reason be thought to come from the hand of the Best Being, as the Inflicter or
Executioner; when these Miseries may well be thought chiefly to consist in the
Exasperation, and height of those uneasy Thoughts which are the very Acts of
Sin; as Wrath, Envy, Hate, Despair, Desire impossible to be satisfied, etc. Add
unto these their Effects, with whatsoever Devils, and Immortal wicked Men may
be able to inflict upon one another, and the most uncharitable Soul can hardly
desire a greater Hell for his greatest Enemy. But what I have said already of
Displeasure, merely Mental, and that which comes by the means of the Body, may
be easily applied here, if well considered. But yet farther, methinks it is a
very hard Thought to think that God who (as the beloved Disciple tells us) is
Love, should hate, and take Pleasure or Delight in tormenting his poor,
foolish, frail Creatures; or that he should afflict willingly, (or from his
Heart;) or affect with Grief the Children of Men, and that for ever. But he
must be supposed either to do it willingly, and take pleasure in so doing, or
he cannot properly be said to do it; for God cannot with any reason be said to
do any thing against his own Will, or in which he has not pleasure; that cannot
be supposed of a Perfect, or Self sufficient Being; nor can any action of the
Creature be thought to bring God under a necessity of doing any thing he
delights not in; and he swears he has no pleasure in the Death of the Wicked,
Ezekiel. 33.11. chap. 18.32. It is the Sinner that will die, or chooses Death; he
seeks pleasure indeed; but he has it not, because he seeks it where it is not
to be had, viz. in his own foolish disorderly Will, distinct from God's Will
when God cannot give it him that way, it being impossible. The Damned doubtless
are exceeding uneasy; why? they have turned from God the Fountain of Pleasure:
They have lived and died in a course contrary to God's Will, contrary to the
only possible way of Happiness; and God is just in suffering them to have their
own choice, in leaving them after innumerable Arguments to persuade them to
real good, to make the Experiment how happy they can be without being beholden
to him; and it is enough to show that God approves not of their Sin, if he
continue their Being, his Work, under the greatest Misery they can bring
themselves into; and as they are no more sinful than they themselves, and their
fellow Sinners can make them; so if they have no more Misery than what they can
work in themselves, and one another, it will be proportionable to their Sins,
and both may be exceeding great. God cannot be thought to work or cause Despair,
Wrath, Malice, Hate, and Envy, at the greatest Good, Extreme Discontent at his
Will, and the Happiness of others, fierce, furious, unsatisfied Desire, etc. in
his Creatures, he must not be thought to be the Cause or Agent of those sinful
Passions; they are all against his Will, as he has clearly manifested. And we
cannot suppose, that God's Justice requires, that Sinners for a short life of
Rebellion against their Maker in this World, should be bound to rebel against
him for ever; or believe that they can satisfy for some Sins here, with a
Continuance of all Sins they are capable of in a State of Immortality
hereafter. No, there is no necessity of Unhappiness but what the Sinners own
perverse Will brings upon him; his disorderly Passions are let loose, and to
what extremity Passions may be carried out, who knows? These will be Tormenters
if there were no Devils able to vex. And where these evil Passions are in their
extreme, how can it be thought that the Bodies such Anxious Souls would delight
in, can be other than the Occasions of far greater Misery than they were
capable of being in this Life, [wherein some of the Passions disordered have
brought the Bodies to be very uneasy Concomitants] with this Aggravation, that
they have then no more Death to expect to rid them of that uncomfortable
Companion, unless we could suppose that Hell it self has at least this
Happiness to be a Remedy for the Diseases of the Body, and a Safeguard from all
those Evils Sinners could lay upon one another in this life; or that their
Folly could bring God under a necessity to disown his well-wrought Work, their
Being, and to let them fall into nothing. As for the Examples of external
Judgments (as they are called) which we have especially in Scripture, wherein
some may think the immediate Act of God, as inflicting, is always required;
when they were more than Preventions of greater Evils the Persons would have
run into, they may easily be accounted for, by supposing Men sometimes left to
the power of the Devil, the Prince of the power of the Air; who seems eagerly
covetous to enlarge the Dominion of Hell, or to do any kind of Mischief. Of
this we have an Example in Job: Or that God sometimes withdraws his
Providential hand from protecting a People, or a Person that leaves him, and
suffers them to fall into the hands of others that are wicked, their Enemies:
As were the Judgments on Israel, or others by Inimical Nations; in which
Instances we cannot suppose God does inspire the evil Agents with malicious
Desires of Murders, Robberies, Rapes, etc. God may indeed be thought to permit,
yea commissionate a People to stand up against another in just defense, and to
cut off the declared, and dangerous Enemies of Mankind; but such wicked Persons
have brought others under a necessity of preserving themselves, and them that
are better than these wicked ones, or of delivering the Unhappy that are in
their hands. God may likewise leave Persons obnoxious to be surprised by the
Elements; as by Thunder and Lightning, Earthquakes, Inundations, (things not
evil in themselves) Falls of Houses, Infectious Diseases, Casual Fires, by
which wicked Men may suffer, yea the Good be translated from this wretched life
without any special Act of God. But all these things, or I think whatever you
can name of Evils, would be absent were Men but as wise and good as they ought:
Wisdom would foresee and prevent, and Goodness do no ill; the Wise and Good
would not expose themselves or others to the too strong Motions of Bodily
Nature, nor want God's special Preservation, which the Rebellious have
forfeited. Were but the Evil of Sin absent from the World, I do not see that
there would be any other Evil for which Mankind could be thought unhappy, or
could be unthankful for their Being, though all things else were just as they
are, yea were Man to lead his Life on this Earth for ever. Had I but this one
Point to handle, I think I could easily show how, were there not Sin, all the
Defects in Nature would be remedied. To conclude, God has made all things in
an excellent Order, such as is most conducive to Man's Happiness; but if Man
foolishly affect to be his own Rule, and strive to cross the most wise Order of
his Maker, it is no wonder that those things God made for his Good and Service,
are often the Occasions of his Hurt, and too hard for him: God continues the
Natures and Qualities of things; and it is not fit he should alter the
Creation, at the foolish Caprice of every silly Man, that Fire may not burn,
and Water not drown, when Sinners please to have them changed; but though Fire
burn, and Water drown him that foolishly abuses them, yet those noxious Effects
cannot properly be looked on as Punishments inflicted by God, any more than he
that hangs himself can be said to die by the hands of the Executioner. And if
God cannot be said to give Good to his Creatures as obliged so to do, but still
gives of Grace; how can he be thought to be so bound to give Evil, as that he
cannot be said merely to permit the Creature to make it self miserable.

45. Another Opinion that has passed long with Credit in the World, without
any good ground, is the Doctrine of Imputation of Sin and Righteousness. Adam's
Sin, say some, is imputed to his Offspring, and so they become guilty in the
sight of God, and are deprived of original Righteousness. Let us consider the
Plain English of it, and it is this; God reckons Adam's Children guilty of
Adam's Sin: They don't mean the same Sin in kind, but that God charges them as
guilty of their Fathers very Acts of Transgression; which is all one as to say
that Adam's Act of Sin, is his Childrens Act. But this cannot be true; for as
my Father's Action is not my Action, nor my Action my Father's, God cannot be
deceived, and suppose the doing of one Man is the doing of another. Men
commonly say we sinned in Adam; but it is absurd to say a Man sinned before he
had a Being; that which is not can have nothing said of it; nor can it do, till
it is. We were indeed potentially in Adam, but not actually; and where there is
no actual Being, there can be no Action to be guilty of. God himself tells us
by a Prophet, The Father shall not bear the Iniquity of the Son, nor the Son
the Iniquity of the Father; but the Wickedness of the Wicked shall be upon him,
and the Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him; and the contrary
would be unjust. One Man may commit the same Sin another did commit, and in
that sense be guilty of the other Man's Sin, or rather of the same kind of Sin
the other did commit: Or one Man may tempt another to sin, and so be guilty of
the others Sin; but still a Man's Guilt is his own, and not another. It may
with more reason be said that Adam is guilty of our Sins, and we of the Sins of
our Offspring, than that we are guilty of his, or they of ours, because sinful
Parents are the cause of bringing a sinful Off spring into the World, and often
their Instructers in Wickedness. It is certain that one Man may suffer by the
Sins of another; but not for the Sins of another, justly. The Father may waste
his Estate, and so the Children may be brought to Poverty; the Father may teach
his Child to do Evil either by Precept or Example, and so bring him to Misery.
As for the Propagation or Original of Sin, in Adam's Posterity, there are Two
Opinions, either of them much more likely to be true than the Fancy of
Imputation of Sin, or God's taking away original Righteousness; which is no
better than to say my First Father sinned, and God charges me with it, though not
guilty of it, and causes me therefore to want Righteousness, or to become a
Sinner. Taking away ones Righteousness is tempting one to sin. The one of the
two more probable Opinions, is that the Soul, as well as the Body, is
propagated; and a sinful Soul is incapable of begetting a Soul, without sinful
Inclinations; a pure thing being unlikely to come out of an impure. Now least
it should seem that the Soul is supposed propagated without any ground for such
an Opinion, I say both Scripture and Reason do at least favor it: Adam begat a
Son in his own likeness; and Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob. It Is
not said Adam begat a Body, but a Son in his own Likeness; if he had begat only
a Body, he had not begat a Son in his own Likeness. Adam was the Image of God
as he was an Intelligent Being, and a Lord over the inferior Creatures; and if
Adam had not begat an Intelligent, or Thinking Son, he had not indeed begat a
Son in his own Likeness. It is said of the Regenerate they were not begotten of
Bloods, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, which implys that
a Natural Man is so begotten; as to his Body of Bloods, that supplies Matter to
the Seed; and of the Will of the Flesh, that is Carnal Desire, instigating its
Projection; but as to his Soul of the Will of Man, desiring to get his like.
That the Body of a Man proceeds from the Bodies of his Parents, none doubts;
why may not the Soul as well proceed from the Soul of the Father in the Act of
Generation, or of the Mother in Conception? It is by Virtue of the Word of God,
Increase and Multiply, that there is any Generation at all; and why may not the
same Word give a power to the Soul to beget a Soul, as well as to the Body to
beget a Body? The Word is spoken to Man as a Compound of Body and Soul, and
neither part is excepted. Isaac was a complete Man, consisting of Body and
Soul; if Abraham begat only Isaac's Body, he did not truly beget Isaac. But
you will say perhaps, the Body is divisible, and part of it may be separated,
and become another Body; but the Soul does not consist of parts, and so cannot
be thought capable of producing another Soul. I answer; This is no difficulty;
for the Soul to be begotten does not consist of Parts, has no Quantity or Bulk,
and so needs not a Bulky thing to spare a part to make it of: Why may not the
Soul, the Immaterial and more Noble Part of Man, by the Will of God, be as
capable of begetting a Soul, as the Body, the Bulky and more ignoble, is for
the Production of a Body? Why must the Soul be thought capable of less in its
kind, than the Body in its kind? Why may not Cogitation break forth into new
Heads of Cogitation, as well as Body sprout out into new Organical Bodies, though
we may be ignorant of the precise Manner of both? But there is a second Opinion
which possibly may be true whether the Soul be propgated or no; and that is,
That every Son and Daughter of Adam is tempted, and falls as soon as they are
capable of choosing Good or Evil; though not as their first Father with a
forbidden Apple, yet with many other forbidden things; though how soon or
precisely, when they thus fall, is uncertain. That Children are for some time
Innocent, seems to some very probable, not only because the Scripture in diverse
places speaks of them, as not having done Good or Evil, not knowing the right
hand from the left, not knowing to choose the Good, and refuse the Evil; not to
have sinned after the Similitude of Adam 's Transgression, etc. but because it
is not reasonable that Sin should be reckoned where there is no Law, and there
can be no Law where there can be no Knowledge of a Law. Had God not told Adam
himself he should not eat of the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, he could not
have transgressed in so doing. And that all transgress, and become Sinners, is
no wonder; if Adam, a Man in his perfect use of Reason, having but one thing
forbidden, and but one immediate Tempter, was so soon tempted and fell, much
more liable are they to fall who have not such a Capacity of discerning, have
many things forbidden, many Tempters within and without, yea and many Examples
of Transgression the strongest Temptation; and are thereby inured to those
Actions before they can judge of them, which when they are capable of knowing
what they do, become Sins; and though they come to know such Actions are sinful,
Custom is as it were natural, and not presently changed. Moreover, Children are
not only tempted, and taught to sin by Example, but even by Precept, from
Parents, from Nurses, from Servants, from Play-fellows, etc. to be Proud, to
Revenge, to Lie, to Covet, to Steal, etc. so wretched a World is every Mother's
Child brought forth into, that there are none but the Son of the Blessed
Virgin, (who was not only begotten by the special Operation of the Most High,
but was strong in Spirit, and filled with Wisdom by the special Grace of God
from his very Infancy;) I say there are none but he who have not fallen by
diverse Temptations: Yea we are often falling even after Repentance, and have
every day need to renew our Repentance, and come to the Throne of Grace for the
Pardon of our Sins. Now if every Man's Sin is his own, and not another, and no
Man can justly suffer for another Sin, much less can the Sins of Fallen Men be
truly imputed or reckoned to Jesus Christ. As Christ is not really guilty of
the Commission of any Sin, or the Cause of any Man's Sins; so it is impossible
God should think he is, or reckon him guilty. Neither the Will of God, nor of
Christ, can be in such an Untruth and Injustice. Neither God, nor Christ, nor
any but Sinners can charge Sin upon the Innocent, or punish him for it. Though
Christ be said to bear the Sins of the Sinful, it is not the Guilt of them;
because he is not guilty, and God cannot reckon him so; nor the Punishment of
them justly, or from God; but it is either meant he bears them away, that is
saves them from them, by being an Effectual Means of bringing them to
Obedience, or that he with Patience and Compassion suffered under their sinful
Actions and Miseries, bore their Affronts, Injuries, Mockings, Scourgings,
condemning, and crucifying of him, and was grieved at their Unhappiness in so
doing. Neither is Christ's Righteousness, or any ones else, truly imputed or
reckoned to others. God cannot reckon, or think Christ's being obedient, is my
obeying, because it is not so; or reckon any Man obedient till he is so,
because Christ is obedient; If he could he would reckon amiss. I cannot but
admire at many (who reckon themselves special Christians) how they dare affirm
that God reckons us guilty of Adam's Sin, or Christ guilty of ours, and
punishes the one for the other, notwithstanding God has declared the contrary,
saying, The Father shall not bear the Iniquity of the Children, nor the
Children of the Father, and that he will not clear the Guilty, nor condemn the
Innocent. I believe the blind fancy of our Sins being imputed to, and punished
in Christ, and Christ's Righteousness being transferred on us, has been a means
of transferring Righteousness, and consequently Salvation, from many a Soul.

46. Another Fancy common among us, and near of kin to this is, That we are to
be saved by the Merits of Christ, and that he meriteth of God Life and
Salvation for us, etc. The notion of Merit is this: The Person meriting does
something or other more than his Duty, whereby he obliges the Person he merits
of to something or other as due; and the Meritor so deserves, that he cease
to be beholden for what is become by his Action due to him; but it is a Debt
that cannot be withholden without Injustice in the Person he merits of. Now
that it is a groundless Fancy that God should become indebted to Christ or to
us, for any thing Christ has done or suffered, will appear if we consider that
it is impossible for any Creature to merit any thing of God for it self; and if
not for it self, much less for another. It cannot merit for it self because all
that the Creature has, or is, (except Sin) it has from God; and all the Acts of
Obedience it can do, are naturally due to God. God can receive but his own; he
can receive no advantage, or have any thing purchased of him from Beings that
have nothing but what he lent them: Whatever God wills the Creature to do,
becomes presently its bounden Duty; what God does not will, it may not do.
There can be no Works of Supererogation, as Men foolishly fancy, when none can
do more than his Duty. Adam could not have merited though he had not sinned, nor
could have been properly said to have been saved by Works; nor can any Man
since be said to be so saved; for to work Righteousness is that unto which a
Man saved from Sin, is brought; and Perfect Obedience to God is Salvation. So
that to say a Person is saved by Works, is all one as to say he is saved by
Salvation, or by being saved, or that Salvation is the Cause of Salvation. We
read indeed of being justified by Works, which is no more than this; a Man that
does such Works as God wills him to do, is just, or in so doing is become just,
and so accounted; but such a Man has not to glory before God, nor can God be
brought in debt to Man, or reckon the Reward he gives him that works a Debt,
though Men may reckon it so. Man that owes all he has, or can do of good, to his
Maker, who cannot be profited, has nothing to oblige God with, or whereby to
merit of him. Christ himself could not in a proper sense merit of God, for
himself, much less for others; he was made under the Law, and whatever God
willed him to do was his Duty, and he did it, and no more; if he had done what
God did not will, he had done more than was right; and if he did but just so
much, he did but just what he ought. He was obliged to do the Will of God
against all the opposition he met with from Men and Devils; he could not
without Sin omit any part of his Embassy, though the People God first sent him to
were so rude as to evilly entreat him, persecute him, and slay him. If Christ
cannot offer, or bring any thing to God, that he had not from God, or do more
than his Duty, and so merit for himself; much less can he merit for others: For
were it possible he could love, or obey God more than he ought, yet his doing
could never become another doing, or so be reckoned by God. There can be no
lending of Actions, or any thing that will pass for a purchase in Heaven, though
Men may spare, and lend things on Earth. It is God that most highly merits; he
from whom the Creatures have all they have, and are, and can do of good, merits
a return of all, in Love, Thankfulness, and Obedience; but he merits of the
Creatures, not for them; he merits for himself only; for his doing is not the
Creatures doing, and can never be truly so thought. God merits of Christ all he
has or can do, in Obedience to him; consequently Christ cannot merit of him,
having nothing but what he has received from his God and Father. Christ indeed
merits of us, though not for us, Love, Faith, Obedience, etc. God has set him
over us, and made him our Lord and Master; and he has freely done and suffered
the greatest things a Created Friend could for us, when he was no way obliged
by us; and we are in debt to him, so much that we cannot easily be thought to
merit of him. Men may merit of one another, when they may be profited by one
another, and do some things they are not obliged to by one another. Now to
conclude this point; I confess if the Consideration of Christ's Merits, viz.
what he merits of us, or what we are indebted to him, shall prevail with us to
repent, and obey God as he has taught us is our Duty, we may possibly be said
to be saved by Christ's Merits, as an instrumental Cause; but this is not the
common notion of the Merits of Christ, or the bottom on which most Christians
embark, and the greatest Villains sail boldly out into the other World on, even
from the Gallows, if Mr. Ordinary can but teach them to say, like Parrots, that
they hope to be saved by the Merits of Christ: though they have spent all their
time in Wickedness, and would return to the same course, could they escape the
Halter, Christ has been righteous enough for himself and them too, and they
are thought safe if they can but believe; that is, have a strong fancy that God
accepts of Christ's Obedience and Sufferings, instead of theirs. The Papists
are said to believe a Man may Merit of God by his good Works; and we count them
erroneous for their Opinion, never considering that we Protestants believe as
much; though not that you or I can merit of him for our selves; yet that another
Man, which is more strange, can merit for us, and so fall in with them, even in
the foolish opinion of Works of Supererogation.

47. Another Opinion as groundlesly held among us, and near a kin to the
former, is the common Fancy about Redemption, viz. That Christ laid down his
Life as a Randsome or Price paid to God, to purchase Life and Salvation for us.
Let us consider the matter: Redemption is a buying a thing again that is lost,
sold, and enslaved. As for instance, a Captive: In which Action there are these
things to be considered; The Redeemer; The Redeemed; The Price of Redemption;
And the Person to whom the Price is paid. Now as to the Redemption of Sinners,
the Redeemer in the first and highest Sense is God, to wit the Father, who has
given us his Son Christ, the Ransom. Christ in a second Sense is called our
Redeemer; because he freely gave himself to set us free from the Slavery of
Sin. To whom did he give himself a Ransom? Not to the Father; because, First,
He is the Father's own, and so cannot be given as a Price to him. Secondly,
Because it is the Father that gives him. Thirdly, Because it is not God that
holds us in Slavery, or he that is to be hired (by something he values as much
as our Bondage) to let us go free from Sin, and become obedient to him: No, he
commands all to obey him, and not to serve Sin, and does nothing less than hold
us in captivity to Iniquity; he wills our liberty more than we can, yea more
than Christ can; for as the Father is greater, so must his Love necessarily be
greater. Christ is the Price or Instrumental Redeemer; Sinners are the
Redeemed; but who is it holds us captive in Sin, to whom the Price is paid? Not
God as I have said, that would be the greatest Contradiction; not Christ, he is
the Price, and wills our Liberty; not the Devil, (as some have thought) he has
not absolute Power over our Wills: Christ was not given to him, as a Ransom, or
he ever on that account agreed to let us go free: It can be nothing therefore
but our Selves, our own foolish Will, that captivates, binds, holds, and
concludes us in Slavery to Sin. We are Slaves most properly to our own sinful
Wills: The Ransom or Price, is therefore given to us. God has given or sent his
Beloved Son into the World, and he has done and suffered great things for us
to purchase our Love. The Father sent his Son to court our Good Will, and it
cost him his Life, with a great deal of Labor and Pains. We are God's own by
Right, and Christ's by Gift in one sense, as he is ours in another; but we have
enslaved our selves in Sin, and God does not only demand us again as his, but
even hires us to be his again, that we may be willingly his, and serve him
whose Service is Liberty. Christ has given himself to redeem us to God, not
from God, by his own Blood; that is, in persuading us to serve our Natural
Lord, our Maker, he has lost his Life; and we shall be very ungrateful to God
and to Christ, if we don't surrender our selves, when God has done so much to
purchase our Good Will, that in loving him we may be happy. The serving our own
foolish Wills is the greatest Slavery; and we serve not the Devil, but in
Subserviency to our own erring Wills. The serving God is Liberty, the only and
greatest Liberty of a Creature. God has given Christ to do, and left him to
suffer whatever might tend to our Conviction, Repentance, and Happiness in
Obedience. God has given him to teach and instruct us in his Mind and Will;
and if this be not enough, also to give us an Exact Pattern and Example of so
doing, and that against the greatest Opposition and Suffering from Opposers;
and if the Malice and Blindness of any were so great, as not to see a
Conviction in so Clear Doctrine, Fair Example, and Great Love that was seen in
his Life, and lesser Sufferings, [Love of God in sending him, and his Love in
an entire Compliance with God's loving Purpose] his patient persevering in
Good Will to them, under his greatest and last Sufferings he could suffer from
them, may be made the highest and last Argument to make their hard Hearts
relent, be convinced, and and change. Which Argument was farther confirmed by
God's raising him from the dead, and receiving him up to Heaven, thereby
declaring that though they erringly put him to Death as an Evil Doer; yet he
was not so in God's account, but Just and Good, in prosecuting God's Will for
the Good of Men, against, and surmounting the highest Ingratitude. If my
Friend, with admirable Wisdom and Argument, council and direct me how I shall
get out of a sad and deplorable Condition he finds me in, out of a way wherein
I can never be happy, shall I not hear him? Shall I be so unreasonable as to
slight his Council? If he give me a Pattern of himself in doing that wherein he
is, and I may be happy; and farther, if he prosecute my Good, and seek to
reclaim me to the denying of himself, slighting, and foregoing his own
Happiness, as much as he justly can, or as much as may be an Argument to me to
hear him, if he undergo Reproach, Pains, and Sorrow for my Good: Farther, if he
patiently suffer even my unkind and ungrateful Hands to be embrewed in his dear
Blood, while I count him my Enemy, and an Evil Doer, and end all with the
height of Expressions of Good Will, forgiving and desiring God to forgive me;
would not this be enough to soften, or break a Heart of Adamant, that should
once seriously reflect, and consider Christ as such a Friend that has thus
done and suffered, and given the most high and admirable Instance of a
Creatures Love to Creatures, in Subserviency to that greater Love he had to
God, and ought to have, and to manifest in doing the Will of him whose Love
must yet be thought to be greatest, and to transcend all created Love, as much
as an Infinite Being is above the Finite, as much as the Cause of Christ's
Being and Love, is before the Effect.

48. Another Point, in which some Men perhaps as greatly err, is that of
Christ's Intercession; the Manner of which as they suppose, is thus: Christ
represents our Condition and Desires to God, with what he has done and
suffered in our stead, and so procures of God those good things we stand in
need of. But that this may appear to be a Mistake, let it be considered that it
cannot properly be said that Christ represents our Cases to God, because God
can have nothing made known to him, being Omniscient; nor has he any need to
present his Obedience, or mind God of his Sufferings, who can never forget; nor
can we think that Christ has any need to entreat, or any Capacity of procuring
of God what he is not in himself as ready to give. But Christ's Intercession is
rather a procuring, or persuading us to be willing to receive those good things
God is ready, if we are but desirous of them, freely to give us. And this
Christ does in that Power and Authority God has given him, as the Head and
Ruler of the Church, by all means suitable to persuade and reduce the
disorderly Wills of Men; since his Ascension by the Ministry of the Word and
Spirit. That Christ prayed to God when on Earth, was not to make known his
Desires to God, or to move him to fulfill them, who heard him always, even his
most secret Desires, and was as willing any good as he, yea willed it first,
which was the reason Christ willed it; but he prayed for our sakes, to show
what God's Will was, and his compliance therewith; to profess his Conformity to
the Will of his Father, and give us an Example of Worship in acknowledging
God's Omniscience. Nor do we pray when we pray aright, to persuade God to our
Wills; but to profess our Conformity to his, the Condition of our receiving; to
stir up, and provoke one another thereto, and to profess our Desires toward
God, and our Dependency on him. And when we are said to pray to God in the
Name, or for the Sake of Christ, or to come to God by Christ; and when God is
said to hear us for Christ's sake, or do any thing for us for Christ's sake, we
are not to think that the bare saying for Christ's sake is rightly meant, or
that God will grant our Requests rather because of his respect to the Will and
Pleasure of Christ, than from his own Readiness to do us good. We must not
think it is with God as it is with Men, in this Matter, who do things for one
to please another they more respect, which they were not in themselves
inclinable to do; because God can have no greater Argument than from himself,
nor can he be put in mind of any thing he forgets, or is not ready to give us.
But we come to God in and by Christ, or in his Name on his account, or Sake,
when we believe Christ's Message, obey his Precepts, and follow his Example as
the Sent of God, or labor to be obedient to God's Will, the Condition of
Happiness; and in so doing, desire and expect of God what by Christ he has
promised us. So the faithful Israelites of old were used rightly to pray to God
for the sake of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; which was no more but this, that
they came unto him as to such a one he had manifested himself to be in a
special manner to Abraham, Isaac; and Jacob, expecting from him what he had
eminently declared himself to them ready to give, those that are willing to
depend upon him for good. So God's giving, or forgiving for Christ's Sake, is
as much as to say performing his Promise made by Christ to those that by
following him, answer the Conditions thereof. So by being in Christ; having an
Interest in Christ; having the Spirit of Christ; is truly meant being steadfast
in the Faith of Christ's Doctrine, constant in obeying his Precepts, exact in
following his Example; or in other words, being like minded with Christ; or
being born again, or becoming a new Creature; leaving our wicked vain
Conversation, and living a righteous and holy Life as Christ did, and so coming
within the Conditions of the Promises God has made by him.

49. Now after all these Considerations, that I may come to a Conclusion, I
shall lay down this Proposition. That whatever Christ is, or has done, does or
will do as God's Instrument in Man's Salvation, is effectual as it is an
Argument to the Mind of Man, influencing and persuading him to repent, and
leave his Rebellion against God, and to become obedient and conformable to the
Will of his Maker. And whatsoever Men may fancy to be done by Christ for them,
without them, unless it conclude thus in an Effectual Argument to persuade them
to Repentance and Obedience, will be found indeed but Fancy, and vain
Imagination. All the most fine-spun, and subtle Doctrines, all the Mysteries,
and curious Opinions Men make so necessary, are of no moment unless they could
have an evident Tendency to this end. Nor do the external, or ceremonial Parts
of Religion, (which the world of Professors makes so much ado about, and most
urges) signify any thing, but so far as they can be proper Motives to, or
Signs of our Love to God, and our Neighbor. And the Lord's Christ came besides
other ends, also for this; To show useless, and put away as unacceptible to
God, the most refined, and splendid Farrago of External Worship, and Ceremonies
of the Levitical Priesthood; and to substitute as a more Spiritual, and
acceptible, a more rational and profitable Way; Complete Morality, or the
simple Love of God and our Neighbor, with the Natural fruits thereof; leaving
us in the room of that multitude of burdensome Ceremonies (which yet were not
sufficient to satisfy the petulant Humors of Men) but Two (by him enjoined)
Externals, more than Reason it self could dictate.

The one, That being convinced of the Truth of Christ's Doctrine, and resolved
from the Reasonableness of his Commands to obey them, we should by some
Disciple of Christ be once Dipped in Water, thereby aptly to signify that we are
dead and buried to our old Rebellious Life and Conversation, and risen again to
a new Life of Obedience; that we are washed from our Sins, that is truly
persuaded to leave them, and become clean or holy: Whereby also we take upon us
the outward Mark or Badge of Christianity, in a Public Profession of our
Reception of the Doctrine and Commands of so excellent a Master as Jesus, and
own him as the Messiah sent by God to manifest his Will to Mankind. The Fitness
of this Appointment in its whole Significancy, is evident, and the Obligation
thereto lies entirely in the Institution of Christ, he having sufficient
Authority to command it: And I submit to it as a Duty I am bound in Conscience
to, believing that Christ could command nothing but what was according to the
Will of God; and not that I suppose Baptism makes me or any one, a Real
Christian, or Member of Christ, or of his True Church, or a Child of God; or
certainly brings into a Covenant of Grace, as some sweetly persuade themselves:
For the Unregenerate, yea Hypocrites, and Profane Persons, as well as those who
knew nothing of the matter, may have been Baptized against their Wills, or
willingly for some carnal Reason. This Ordinance is to be a Sign, and as it is
a Duty, an Effect of Grace already wrought in the Soul, and is not that which
can confer it; nor can it work any Spiritual Effects unless it be this: That
having solemnly professed my Belief in Christ, the Messiah, and my Obedience to
God's Will by him declared, I have a great Argument to persuade me to continue
steadfast in my Profession, and shall very likely be influenced thereby. But I
dare not affirm that the Ends for which Christ instituted this Ordinance, can
never be attained without it, in some who are persuaded that it is not an
Ordinance; but those who believe it a Duty, can never be excused in the neglect
thereof. The other External Ordinance of Christ is, that we should sometimes
keep a Holy Feast; wherein by the breaking of Bread, and pouring forth of Wine,
we have represented and kept in remembrance our Lord's Death until he come
again; and by Eating and Drinking together as Believers in him, is signified
our Communion and Fellowship in the Benefits of Christ, and so Love to one
another promoted. The Bread and the Wine used in this Feast, cannot be
rationally thought to have any supernatural Virtue, or inherent Holiness; to
differ from other Bread and Wine, or upon any such account to convey any
Spiritual Grace, as many have inconsiderately fancied, or been easily
persuaded; and thence have even worshipped the Elements as a God, or at least as
an Idol. But whatever Spiritual Good may come to the Partakers of this
Appointment, comes to the unfeigned Disciples of Jesus, as it is a Feast they
keep at their Master's Command, in remembrance of his Death for their sakes.
Therefore this Ordinance was never instituted for those that have not (as
abovesaid) professed their Christian Faith, and do not live in the True
Christian Practice; it is a Profession of Christ as our Master, and a Life
contrary to his Doctrine, makes it but a Mocking of him: therefore it ought not
to be communicated with the Wicked, or any but those that at least seem real
Christians: It should be a Holy Feast, (though I confess few Christians solemnize
it like one) and ought not any way to be profaned, as God knows it has been too
too much amongst us, even as much as to be made a Test in State Policy; not
only to distinguish Protestants from Papists, but, as one would think, to debar
from, and render incapable of all Offices, those others, who understanding the
Nature and Ends of this Ordinance, cannot in Conscience any way profane or
abuse it, as if they were Men unfit for business: when the greatest Debauchees,
having once signalized their Wickedness in profaning the holy Table of the
Lord, are Men thought fit for Employments. But such Communicants show
themselves no more really to be of the Comprehensive Church they partake with,
or of any True One, (whatever the Parson may fancy) than the^ Oaths so strictly
imposed to oblige them to be faithful in all Offices, makes them so. For a Man
that makes no Conscience of profaning the Sacred Name of the Most High in his
daily Conversation, or of any other Immorality, cannot be thought to come to
the Table of the Holy Jesus, but for Fashion or for Interest; and he that calls
God to witness a hundred times a day to the grandest Lies, and as often swears
to the Promise he never so much as intends to perform, is a Man very unlikely
to count himself bound by a solemn Oath. And I cannot but admire the profound
Policy of those (if there are any so cunning) who think to oblige Infidels to
Fidelity, by swearing them; as I wonder at the Excess of their Religion, who
will needs bind Men by Oaths in almost all Offices, to things never intended,
or hardly possible to be done. I confess I had thought the Worldly Interest
enough to oblige any Man in worldly things, and the most likely to bind those
who by their Immoralities show themselves Men of no Conscience; and I
acknowledge it was my opinion, that the pinching of the Pocket by squeezing a
Fine, or some Corporal Punishment for the Failure in Performance of an Office,
was more likely to be sensibly felt in this Life by the drowsy Conscienc'd
Sinner, than the Guilt of fashionable unpunished Perjury: But still I think a
good Man the most likely Person to do his reasonable Duty, though not obliged by
an Oath; and a conscientious Man injured, when he cannot be trusted without
invoking the Sacred Name of God in trivial matters.

50. I should have thought of concluding here, but that a monstrous Opinion at
last starts up, viz. the old Pagans Doctrine of Fate, sprung up in
Christianity; which Hydra must be beheaded, or all is in vain. What signifies
all I have said? To what purpose should we labor to be wise, good, or
penitent? If God has not absolutely decreed that we shall go to Heaven, all
that we can do will be in vain. God has absolutely decreed, that a certain
small number shall be saved, and none else possibly can, whatever they do; the
few thus elected, cannot perish; but all the rest God has foreordained to
Destruction, and they cannot possibly be saved, says this Doctrine. But if we
consider a little, this Opinion will appear highly unreasonable, even without
examining those Texts of Scripture that some fancy do favor it; or as the
Custom of Disputers is, opposing others. It is certain that God can never be
supposed to disown himself, or contradict his own Will, and therefore we may
not think that God does not will the Rational Creatures to behave themselves as
such Creatures ought, or as it becomes them; that is freely to acknowledge,
own, love, and obey their Maker: but to say God wills the Damnation of any of
his Creatures, is the same thing as to say he wills they should not behave
themselves as becomes their relation to God, but that they should persist in
setting up their own Wills in opposition to their Creator's: For Damnation, and
persevering Disobedience, is the same thing, or at least inseparable; so that
Damnation cannot be willed, or absolutely decreed, unless Sin be also so
decreed, which would be to make God the Author of Sin, yea to destroy the
notion of Sin: for God's Will is the Rule of Duty; and if it be God's Will I
should sin, and be damned, it is best so to be, yea my Duty; and so there is
neither Sin nor Damnation. But as God's Will cannot be contradictory to his
Will, so his Will and his Word cannot differ. If God has commanded me to love
and obey him, (and none I think is excepted from that Duty) and I suppose he
has determined I shall not love and obey him, or laid me under a necessity of
doing otherwise, this is to affirm God the greatest Deceiver, and Mocker of his
Creatures; but this must not, nay cannot in reason be imagined of Goodness. Nor
can it be thought that God should be so indigent or cruel to the Works of his
hands, poor rail Creatures, as to make or suffer them to be miserable for any
Satisfaction or Pleasure he can have in their Misery; or who can well imagine
that if the Creature throw down its Weapons of Rebellion against its Maker, and
submit, yield under him, and acknowledge him, God will not be ready to forgive,
and make him happy in Obedience? Since Man has sinned, nothing can be better
than his Repentance, and future Obedience; his Rebellion cannot possibly be as
good as Obedience; certainly then God cannot will, or effectually cause that
which is not so good. God has done very great things to persuade all to obey,
and be happy. If Obedience or Disobedience were not free, but necessary, it
would cease to be Obedience or Disobedience. Men have power to act, or suspend
their Action till they are persuaded by Argument to act. If they will not obey
God, and be happy, it is their own fault, not God's; he has given them means of
Information, as well as Arguments to persuade them. God I think is but barely
the Permitter of any sort of Evil, the Creature is the Cause and Worker
thereof; and though God fore-knows that his Creatures will do Evil, he does not
by any Foreknowledge determine that they shall do it, or necessitate them, or
persuade them thereto. God does persuade, and that strongly, to Good no doubt,
but never to the contrary; nor can he be well said to necessitate us to do
Good: for what a Man cannot but do, is no Obedience, nor properly his Action.
God's Decree, and his Foreknowledge, I think, ought to be distinguished; and
his Decree it self also, is to be considered two ways, viz. either as absolute,
or as conditional. That which he has absolutely decreed, is that which he will
certainly effect, and can be nothing but Good. What he has conditionally
decreed, comes to pass but on Supposition of the Conditions, and it is left in
the Creatures liberty to perform, or not perform the Conditions; and even the
things thus decreed must be supposed to be good, things that God will do if the
Creature will perform the Conditions, otherwise not; so that God is properly
said to decree his own Actions thus or thus. The Foreknowledge of God, or what
he is said to foresee, is no more but what the Creature (who always chooses an
appearing Good) will think well or ill, and so do or not do; so that God
decrees his own Actions, but fore-knows the Creatures Actions: And what the
Creature at any time thinks well or ill, depends on its Capacity of Knowledge,
and Circumstances it is then naturally in, or how far it is liable to be
mistaken in it self, or imposed upon by such Agents as will certainly as much
as they can deceive it; and when, and where and how far God will permit, or
interpose by his special Acts of Information, and Persuasion. But that God
should decree absolutely, or will any Evil, is an Opinion so full of
Absurdities, yea and in its tendency so apt to overthrow all Religion, that no
single probability, or other difficulty, can persuade a considerate Man to
believe it; therefore I think I need say no more in this matter.

51. And now after all these Considerations, I cannot but reflect, and consider
with Grief the miserable State of Christianity, and the Professors thereof, (as
well as of the rest of Mankind) of the generality of those that call themselves
the Reformed, and Protestants, as well as of the Papists, between whom I can
see but very little difference, they agree so much still in many the same
Unreasonable Doctrines as the Fundamentals of Religion, as well as consent in
the like wicked Practices, as the Upholders and Effects of those Doctrines. How
much is the World, and many the highest Pretenders to Religion in it,
alienated, and changed from True Religion, and the Scope and Design thereof, in
its Primitive Purity and Plainness? How much more busy and concerned are Men
in contriving and contending for idle and uncertain Speculations and Niceties,
than in doing the plain, undoubted, and necessary Duties of the Gospel, Natural
Religion, or the Practice of Love, Goodness, Mercy, Brotherly Kindness,
Patience, Meekness, Humility, Truth, etc? They seem much more intent, in
considering (according as every ones Fancy and Education leads him) how Men
are, or may be saved, or not saved, than in working out their own, or in
furthering other Men's Salvation. Whilst they place the main business in hitting
the right notion, how Salvation is wrought, (and in this they are also commonly
mistaken) they labor very little in conforming to the easily known Will of
God, according to the Precepts and Pattern he has given us in the Man Christ
Jesus; whose pure holy Life seems hard and uneasy to the Rebellious Will; but
to be saved in the Theory, is looked upon now as more pleasant and desirable.
And how apt are Men now adays to judge and condemn one another, and that
merely on the account of their Differences, even in their idle Speculations, in
which Censures some are so ridged, that they will hardly allow any but
themselves, and a few whose Noses are just of the same length and fashion, to
have smelled out the way of Happiness, or to be fit for Christian Brotherly
Communion with them. But we will not be afraid to affirm, That whosoever truly
loves God, and his Neighbor, shall certainly be saved or happy; nay, is passed
from Death to Life: Whosoever does not, cannot be happy till he does, though he
may have the finest, yea the best System of Divinity in his Head: Though he have
all Faith, even to remove a Mountain of Contradictions, to believe the greatest
Mysteries, Absurdities, or Nonsense imaginable. That one pure, simple Act, and
Habit of Child-like Love to God, is really more influencing to persevering
Obedience, and pleasing to God, than the most Catholic Orthodoxy in the World.
He more truly knows God, even by experience, that loves him, though but a Child,
than the most eloquent and subtle Teacher in the World, that does not love.
But I am afraid, nay I think I need not question it, that the life of Religion
is very much eat out, and weakened by those many unreasonable Doctrines: Whilst
we have it taught either implicitly or expressly, That God is the Author of
Evil. One that made the greatest part of the Creation for that very end, to be
inevitably miserable for ever; and consequently that they must needs be, and
continue Sinners to make them so: That he is one that loves the Miseries of his
Creatures, and takes such pleasure in their Pains, that he will bear with their
Rebellion for ever, rather than not have them unhappy: That he made the most of
them on purpose to show his Power and Sovereignty in their everlasting
Disorders: Yea that that little number that he is said to be dearly hired, and
hardly persuaded to spare, are continually afflicted with one Mischief or
other, from his hand; though they are seeking him, and crying after him
continually, he is not so ready to hear, but often hides himself from them: And
yet, that though this little number is sohardly saved, they are infallibly sure
of Salvation, do, or not do, what they will. Who would not rather be
astonished, and confounded, and rendered inactive, than influenced to love and
obey God by these Doctrines? When farther I am told, that I cannot keep God's
Commandments, but that Christ has keept them for me, (consequently my keeping
them is not so necessary, if supposed possible) and God reckons Christ's
Perfect Righteousness to be mine, and I am perfect in him, though I am not like
minded; all is done for me, without me, if I can but believe, that is fancy so.
Ah, but my Heart misgives me; may one that considers say, I fear that if Christ
has done all for me without me, he will be happy also for me without me, and I
shall go to Heaven but by Proxy. Who will be humbled before God, and thankful
for his free Beneficence and Forgiveness, when we are persuaded that Christ
has purchased it at a full rate of him, by his Doings, yea and Sufferings for
us, and we may demand Happiness of God as our due? But I fear many such
Confidents will be put off with, I know you not. Nay, how do we acknowledge God
just and good, and ready to forgive, when we are persuaded that though he does
not satisfy himself in punishing us for our Sins, yet he will have them
punished somewhere or other? and rather than any where, in the most Innocent
Man Jesus; on whom, they say, he laid all the Punishment or Misery, due for the
Sins of all Men, (and yet nevertheless most of them are damned, and all of them
die) and that he reckoned him guilty of others Sins, though he were not so. O
Justice! how unjustly has the Malice of the Adversary represented the Fountain
of Goodness and Justice? But what shall the Generality of Mankind do? What
Encouragement shall they have to their Duty? How shall they be stirred up to
seek Life, and Happy Immortality? especially the poor Convinced Souls that
cannot get up so high as to read their Names in the Eternal Decree of Life, or
see yet much of the Effects thereof in themselves? When they are told, unless
they are of that little number Christ has made Satisfaction for, (and ten
thousand to one whether they be or no) all their Repentance is in vain, and
their best Works are Sins in the sight of God, though perhaps splendid Ones: When
they are taught that greater Goodness, Justice, Mercy, Truth, etc. in one Man,
is less acceptible to God than much less in another, and so God a Respecter of
Persons. Supposing I cannot persuade my self (as I think all Predestinarians
do) that I am one of the Elect, or do not believe that God has absolutely
decreed either to save or damn any; I am nevertheless convinced of my Sin and
Duty, as the way of Unhappiness or Happiness, and would fain be happy; Shall
not I do my Duty on a Fancy that God has not decreed the Event? or must I
despair in it? the former were but Madness, the latter a miserable Condition.
But I must leave these things to the Thoughts of the Considerate; and to them I
would propose this Question; What has been the reason that no more of Mankind
have embraced Christianity, and where has the fault been? I think surely
Original Goodness has not hindered, nor has the fault been in the Christian
Religion it self, or in the want of the Love of Happiness in Mankind: I believe
you must confess, that the generality of its Professors have discredited
Christianity, and given the World a false Draught, or Picture thereof: Till
which is mended, what hopes can we have of the Conversion to Christianity of
those who have not from their inconsiderate years its Deformed Doctrines,
imposed upon them, and the disagreeing Lives of its Professors recommended to
them? What Expectations can we have of convincing Jews, Turks, and Pagans, when
not only the abovenamed Doctrines, and an hundred more perhaps, have
represented Christianity as full of Contradictions, and Absurdities, and
unsuitable to the Condition and Nature of Man: But we even seem to differ in
our Notions, whether there be One or More Objects of Divine Worship; insomuch,
that if those that have not yet embraced Christianity were to hear our
Discourses, and Forms of Worship, they could not, I believe, but think that a
great part of Christians believe, and worship more Gods than One, and even
enjoin such a Faith and Practice upon pain of Damnation; yea some of them,
having no better Arguments, urge it by the Rack of Persecution; while their
Lives also are as different from Unity in pure Christian Morality: Which now
adays is distinguished from Religion, O Times! and a Moral Man is spoken of
with Contempt, in comparison with the Religious, as a different Person. But I
must confess I look upon nothing as a Doctrine of Christianity, or think can
reasonably be represented as such, or proved so to be by Scripture, which does
not naturally tend to promote Morality, or Influence to those Good Manners
which become our relation to God, and which are convenient, and profitable
toward the true Interest of Mankind. I would that Men would once come to try
Doctrines by their natural Inferences and Tendencies; then I should hope Truth
would more appear. But I must here conclude, though I have been very short on
every Particular I have been discoursing, as unable now to write all I could
wish to say of the Natural, of the True Christian, and of our Laodicean
Religion, promising my Reader an Answer to what he shall rationally object
against whatever has been said in this Discourse; and therewith a fuller
Demonstration of things, if God give me Life and Opportunity, supposing that my
whole Life must be spent in laboring against our common Errors, if the
Appearance of Christ don't bring on their Period sooner.

FINIS.

