REFLECTIONS Upon a Pamphlet, Entitled, John Elliot's saving Grace in all Men.
Proved to be No GRACE: And His INCREATED BEING in All A Great Nothing.
By Edmund Elys, a Servant of Jesus Christ.
I Have not seen John Elliot's Book, but Charity obliges me to believe, That
what he has therein Asserted, is Agreeable to the Sentiments of a great number
of those Men called Quakers, whose Writings I have Read, or with whom I have
had some Personal Conversation: And therefore I cannot doubt, but when he says,
That GRACE is an Increated Being; by Grace he understands the True Light, which
enlighteneth every Man that comes into the World, considered as the Fountain
of all GRACE, viz. of all Holy Inclinations, Dispositions or Operations in the
Souls of Men, which are called by the Blessed Apostle, The Fruit of the Spirit,
Gal. 5. Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,
Meekness, Temperance; These Words of John Elliot's Antagonist, His INCREATED
BEING in All, A Great Nothing, I Abhor, as words written by the Instigation of
the DEVIL: To whose Suggestions also I impute a Multitude of the Conceits that
have been Published by that Person, whom he calls, (30.) Holy and Learned
Flavel. I desire, that the Candid Reader would peruse Clement Lake's Letters to
John Flavel: And a Paper, Entitled, Reflections upon several Passages in a
Book Entitled The Reasonableness of a Personal Reformation; and the Necessity
of Conversion. And so I Dismiss. J. Flavel for the present, and return to this
other, J. E. P. 3. The Eternal Spirit, says he, the third Person of the
Trinity, and that which is in every Man, are not distinct, but Essentially one:
There Is Divinity for you. Ans. Most certainly the Third Person of the Trinity
is not essentially distinct from the True Light, which is in every Man.

P. 4. Those Texts of Scripture, that speak of the Spirits being, or dwelling
in Believers, are not to be understood of an Hypostatical or Personal Union
between the Spirit and them. Answ. Without doubt, these Texts of Scripture are
not to be so understood; for then we should suppose, that the Spirit and
Believers should be but one Person: for Hypostatical Union is the Union of
diverse Natures in one Person.

If the Person of the Spirit, says he, be in every individual Believer, then
every individual Believer is two Persons Answ. We deny this Consequence:
Because the Person of the Spirit is not in a Believer so as to become the
Person of the Believer; but having that Essence, which is Absolutely Infinite,
He is in all Creatures, but in a peculiar manner, in all rational Souls;
convincing all of their sinful Practices and Inclinations, and converting or
turning from Sin all those, that do not persist in their Rebellion against the
Light.

If there be a personal Inhabitation of the Spirit in Believers (says this
Disputer) there is also a Personal Inhabitation of the Father, and of the Son
in them, 1 John 4. 15, 16. Gal. 2. 20. John 17. 23. The latter is absurd;
therefore, also the former. Answ. Most certainly the three Persons, Father, Son
and Holy Ghost (the only true, and Eternal God, Infinite Light, and Infinite
Love) dwells in the Heart of every true Believer.

P. 8. 9. All that are in Christ, are thoroughly and universally renewed:
Whoever they are, that are not thus thoroughly and universally renewed, are not
yet in Christ: And whatever falls short of this, is called by a wrong name, if
it is called Grace. If they that are in Christ, are new Creatures, then Grace
in Believers is no Increated, but a Created Being. Answ. If they that are in
Christ, are New Creatures, then there is in Believers, or those that are in
Christ, the Principle or Fountain of New Life, which is the only Life of
Rational Creatures, as Rational. The Fountain of Life is the TRUE LIGHT, which
is the one infinite, increated Being

P. 10. The humane Nature of Christ, says this Flavelite, is a greater
Excellency, than any thing that is in Believers: The humane Nature of Christ is
no increated Being; therefore, much less any thing that is in Believers. Answ.
Nothing that is in Believers as a Part, Property, or any kind of Quality, is
Increated: But if Christ be the only true God, and God be a Being absolutely
Infinite; it must needs follow, That he is in all Creatures, and in a peculiar
manner, in all Rational Souls; especially in the Souls of Believers, in that he
does not only Convince their Understandings of the Truth, but Convert their
Wills to the Will of God in all things; so that with the Will, or Rational
Appetite, they do not Affect or absolutely Incline to any thing but GOD: They
do not incline to any Finite Object, but only (...), with Reference to God, The
Fountain of all Goodness.

P. 22. Grace may be overpowered by Corruption. Answ. This is a most Pernicious
Error, destructive of the true Notion of the Grace of God, that brings
Salvation, Titus 2. 11. Whenever our Souls are in a Gracious, or Holy Temper,
they act in the Power of the True Light which is Almighty, and can never be
withstood by the Power of Darkness in our Sensitive Faculties, whilst our Will
is sincerely concurrent with it: So that every Act of true Grace, or Holiness,
implies an Aversion from all known Sin, and a Rational Propensity or
Inclination to all that we know to be the Will of God, that we should either do
or suffer. I say, or suffer, for this is a Property of True Grace, that it
makes the Objects of our sensible Aversion to become the Objects of our
Volition, or Rational Inclination, being the Effects of the Divine Will, the
boundless Fountain of all Spiritual or Intellectual Satisfaction.

If this Man, or any other of John Flavel's Admirers, shall think sit to make
any Reply to what I have here written, or to what I have written in Defense, of
R. Barclay, and Joseph No^^* I shall treat him (by the Grace of God) with that
Meekness, which becomes one, who declares to all the World, that these Words of
our blessed Lord, are dearer unto him, than Thousands of Gold and Silver, Luke
9. 2, 3. If any Man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross daily, and follow me.

FINIS.

