REFLECTIONS Upon Several Passages in a Book ENTITLED, The Reasonableness of a
Personal Reformation, And The Necessity of Conversion.

With a LETTER to Mr. JOHN GALPINE, Concerning his Printed Encomium of I. F.

The Speech of Dead Men commonly proves more Effectual, more Profitable, or
more Dangerous, then that of the Living.

Dr. HAKEWIL in the Epistle Dedicatory of his Answer to Dr. Carier. Printed in
the Year, 1692.

TO THE READER.
THOUGH I had much rather this Paper had been Published whilst that Person, whose
Wicked Errors it Refutes, was Living, yet since it can be Testified by diverse
Honest men that it was written whilst He was Living; And since it is to Me so
Evident that the Book I mention, tho it carries such a show of Godliness, is
full of Deadly Poison to the Souls of Men, I think it my Duty to Give out to
the World an Antidote Against it. I earnestly beseech the Reader to Consider
that it cannot be long before He and I shall Appear before the Iudgment-Seat of
CHRIST to give Account of our Censures of all that we Hear, or Read.

REFLECTIONS, etc.
THE Reasonableness of Personal Reformation, etc.

P. 4. We little know how far Unsanctified Reason may be prevailed upon to quit
its Throne, and resign its Scepter into the hands of Lust, and Appetite. I. F.

Unsanctified Reason is Always Subject to some Lust, or Inordinate Appetite.

P. 5. Appeals to Reason may produce Reformation in some men sooner than
Appeals to the Scriptures, or Principles of Faith. I. F.

This is Contrary to the Common Sense of All True Christians, and the Express
word of JESUS CHRIST, who says, Without Me Ye Can Do nothing, And (by the Mouth
of his Holy Apostle) Without Faith it is Impossible to Please God, And
certainly it is the same thing to produce Reformation in any man, and to
Persuade him Effectually to do those things, which are Pleasing unto GOD, which
cannot be Done Without Faith.

P. 9. It (Reason) stands ready to offer its service to thee to Save thee from,
or to receive thee out of those Mischiefs thou have, or may run thy self
into, if thou will but hear, and obey its advice. I. F.

It Is evident He speaks of Reason in Contradistinction to Religion, for thus He
begins this Section: The Persons whose Reformation I particularly design by
this method, being men that exercise more Reason, than Religion I. F.

Now it can be no other than a most Detestable Heresy to Assert that Reason any
farther then as it is Regulated by the Principles of Faith, can ever Save a man
from those Mischiefs, which he would run himself into.

P. 20. Notwithstanding the present Captivity of Reason under usurping, and
domineering Lusts, so long as it has a permanent and fixed Root, and Principle
in their Nature it is possible it may recover its Throne, and Empire over them
again. I. F.

Unsanctified Reason may turn its Subjection from one Lust to another, but can
never have a True Victory over any one Lust, but by Subjecting it self to the
Principles of Faith, that is to say, by ceasing to be Unsanctified, and
Partaking of the True Light, which is the Power of God unto Salvation.

P. 21. Reason would only regulate, and legitimate your Delights, and Religion
Sanctify them. I. F.

It Is very Injurious to the Souls of men Professing Christianity to possess
them with a conceit that they may Lawfully, or According to the Will of God Act
by Two Distinct Principles under the Notion of Reason, and Religion; For
Christianity Obliges All men, Whatsoever they Do in Word, or Deed, to Do All to
the Glory of God, which is the Principal Points of Right Reason.

P. 99. What is the matter when all is sifted and examined? why the matter is
this, some will be more serious, strict, and conscientious than others think
fit, or necessary for them to be. I. F.

This is a most Devilish False Insinuation: And we the True Sons of the Church
of England APPEAL to Our Blessed LORD, the True Head of the Holy Catholic
Church, to Judge between Us, and this most Impudent Schismatic, and his
Companions: We Aver Before God, Angels and Men, that their Schism has been the
Cause of many Abominations, particularly, That it has been an Encouragement to
the Anti-Trinitarians to Publish their BLASPHEMIES. What BLASPHEMIES their
Neglect of the LORDS PRAYER has Occasioned is also Manifest to the World.

P. 130. Such as you are, whose whole Lives have been polluted with Profaness,
and All Impiety. -- You cannot think as others do, that you need no Repentance,
or Reformation. In this respect therefore you lie nearer to the Door of Hope,
and Mercy than other Sinners do. I. F.

By other Sinners he must needs mean those that have not been so Great Sinners:
And whether the Greater or Lesser Sinners, that is to say, whether those that
are More, or those that are Less Averse from True Godliness, are Nearest to the
Kingdom of God, let any man Judge who is neither Brutishly Stupid, nor
Diabolically Impudent.

P. 139. This is the change I am here pressing him to. -- P. 140. It is not in
any Man's power to convert himself -- Yet he Can Do, and Forbear to Do many
things, the Doing, or Forbearing of which has a true, tho remote tendency to
his Conversion; and not Doing, or Forbearing of them, his Destruction is of
himself. I. F.

His Destruction is not of himself Because he Forbears to Act (or Do any thing
in his own Natural Power, or Without the Divine Assistance) but Because he
Rejects the Divine Assistance, which by the Father of Mercies is Graciously
Offered unto him. It Is Evident by J.F's saying, This is the change I am
pressing him to, Compared with these words, He Can do, or Forbear to do many
things, etc. That he Encourages men to Act toward their Salvation in Their own
Natural Strength, Whereas Our Preaching is this, That we Can do Nothing, but
Sin Without the Help of JESUS CHRIST; but it is Always Possible for those that
Trust in him to Abstain by his Assistance from All Known Sin. Now whether this
Way of Preaching, or I. F's Way, be the True Preaching of the Gospel, I leave
to the Judgment of Any man of Common Honesty, that has Read the Holy Scriptures.

P. 140. Nor do I know any reason why you cannot compose your selves, when
engaged in God's Public, or Private Worship, to a close, and serious
attendance to those Duties. I. F.

Indeed he might have said, I know no reason, why Any man when he makes
Confession of the Christian Faith, and says the Lords Prayer, should not Do it
Sincerely, which if he Do, he is Converted: But to Suppose (as it is Evident he
does) that the Persons to whom he speaks, continue Unconverted, and yet to say
to them, Nor do I know any reason, why you Cannot, etc. is Intolerable
Ignorance in one that Pretends to be a Minister of the Gospel: For the Reason,
which he says he Knows not, is as Evident, as it is, that Our SAVIOR had said,
Without Me ^^fe Can Do Nothing. Agreeable to that ^aying of Our Blessed LORD,
and the whole Tenor of the Gospel, are these words in the CATECHISM of the
church of England, after the Explica^^on of Our Duty toward God, and ^ur Duty
toward our Neighbor:

My good Child, know this that ^hou art Not able to do these things of Thy
self, nor to walk in the Commandments of thy God, and to serve him, without his
special Grace which ^hou must learn at All times to call for ^^y diligent
Prayer. Let me hear therefore if thou can say the Lords ^rayer -- What
desire thou of God in this Prayer?

Answ. I desire my Lord God, our Heavenly Father, who is the Giver of All
Goodness, to send his Grace unto me, and to all People, that we may worship
him, serve him, and obey him, as we ought to do.

I do not find in all his Book one word Against those Heretics, who in so many
Books lately Published (and to heighten the Abomination, upon Pretense of Pure
Religion) Blaspheme the Godhead of our Blessed SAVIOR and of the HOLY GHOST;
And yet most certainly These Men, as much as any other sort of Sinners (if not
much more) Provoke the Wrath of GOD Against this Sinful Nation. Since I.F. and
his Companions make such Boasts of HOLINESS, as if they were the only Persons
that Contend for the Promoting of it in the World, this I Affirm, and Challenge
any Nonconformist to say any thing against it, if h^ will not Submit to my
Assertion: Tha^ the Holiness or Sanctity of Man in th^^ Life is no Other thing,
but that Ki^^ of Belief of THE ARTICLES O^ THE CHRISTIAN FAITH, B^ which the
HOLY GHOST works in his Heart those Holy Desires which are Expressed in the
LORDS PRAYER. Now let any man of Common Sense Judge whether these Persons are
the chief Promoters of Holiness, who call the Ecclesiastical Injunctions for
the Use of the CREED, and the LORDS PRAYER in Religious Assemblies, Toys, and
Trifles. Against All the False Censures, and Contumelious Speeches, and
Backbitings of this sort of Men I constantly APPEAL to Our Blessed LORD, Saying
from the bottom of my Heart, COME LORD JESUS

TO Mr. JOHN GALPINE, Concerning His Printed Encomium Of J. F.
YOUR undertaking to Adorn the Memory of such a PESTILENT Schismatic, puts me
in mind of what I wrote about Ten Years since, concerning a Person that had a
Fancy to show the like Kindness to the Memory of T. HOBBS. My words were these:
To Adorn the Memory of T. H. what is it but to Provide that the Corpse of one
that Dyed of the Plague may lie in State, that People coming to Behold it may
contract the Infection?

You say that I. F. was well acquainted with the Mysteries of the Gospel, and
in special with that admirable Mystery of Man's Redemption by Jesus Christ. How
well he was acquainted with the Mystery of the Gospel we shall take Liberty to
Judge, who have Observed the Satanical Falsehood of a great part of the
Doctrine he has delivered in his Writings, particularly in the Book which he
Impudently Entitles, The Fountain of Life Opened: In the 182 page of that Book
he has these very words: There are not a whole World, no not half, but the far
less part of the World Redeemed with the Blood of Christ. If he that Believed
this was well acquainted with the Mystery of the Gospel, of that admirable
Mystery of Man's Redemption by Jesus Christ, then certainly the Blessed Apostle
was very Erroneous, who Says Expressly, HE is the Propitiation for our Sins, and
not for ours only, but also for the Sins of the WHOLE WORLD. Since it is the
Practice of so many of those that Deny the Truth of the Gospel, as I. F. did,
to Accuse us, as if we did derogate from the Doctrine of the Necessity of the
Divine Assistance to Do any thing in order to our Salvation, who Acknowledge
that we have Learnt to Believe in God the Son, who has Redeemed us, and ALL
MANKIND. I shall show you that J. F. showed himself to be Guilty of this
Pernicious Error in his Answer to the 20 th Question in the Sea-man's
Catechism. But I have no Strength of my own to come to Christ by, and is it not
absurd to urge me upon impossibilities in order to my Salvation?

This is indeed a Question of the Greatest Importance to the Souls of Men. The
Answer that is given to it by all True Christians is this, That though of Our
selves, or in Our own Natural Strength we are not Able to Do any thing
Acceptable to God, we May Do All things Through CHRIST Enabling us: And CHRIST
Offers the Assistance of His Holy Spirit to All those, who upon the Hearing of
the Gospel are Sensible of Their own Impotency to Come to CHRIST, or to Walk in
the Ways of God. The Answer which I. F. gives to this Question is Contrary to
the Sense of All True Christians: for He wd Persuade a man to Act in order to
his Salvation in His own Natural Strength. You are more absurd, says He, in
pleading, and pretending your Impotency against your Duty. To which I Reply,
that No man shall ever be Able to Perform any Duty, that he owes unto God,
'till he shall be Convinced that Of Himself, or in His own Natural Strength, he
can Do Nothing, but SIN. For you think, says He, you have a Power to come to
Christ, else how do you quiet your Consciences with promises, and resolves of
Conversion hereafter? Answ. They Follow the Father of Lies who Quiet their
Consciences with any thing, but a Sincere Resolution by the Help of CHRIST to
Abstain from All Known Sin, and to Perform All Known Duty both toward God, and
toward Man. Nothing can be more Absurd than for one, who Professes himself to
be a Preacher of the Gospel to Dissuade men from Believing that of themselves,
or Without the Divine Assistance they are altogether Unable to Perform any
Duty, to Do any thing Acceptable unto God. You say, He did what lay in him to
live Peacebly with all Men. Let them Judge whether you speak the Truth, who
Consider the Malicious Reproaches he casts on the Church of England in the last
Book he Published, and in his Book Entitled Husbandry Spiritualized, and in the
Sermon, you have Published, Entitled The Character of an Evangelical Pastor.
Husb. Spirit. p. 94. This Book was Printed in the Year of Our Lord 1669, in
which thus He Rails at the Church of England. Tho there be Preaching, Prayer,
and other Ordinances left (at least the names, and shadows of them) yet the
presence of God is not with them. There is no marrow in the bone, no milk in
the breast, and so, as to Soul-subsistence, it is all one, as if there were no
such things. In the Sermon you have Published, your Evangelical Pastor (that had
FOUR WIVES) Harps upon the same string. It Is manifest that the Minister he
inveighs against are the English Clergy in that he Marks them by the Character
of those that Live upon the Profits, And in that he gave the Whole Church of
England the same Character, in such plain terms, in the Year 1669. There is no
marrow in the bone, no milk in the breast, etc. Is not this the same with what
he now tells us, viz. They Preach, they Pray because they must do so, but none
are the better for their Prayers, or Preaching. They seem to labor an hour, or
two in a week; but their labors turn to no account. Nor can be expected to
turn to any good account, whilst they are neither animated by Faithfulness, nor
guided by Prudence. Agricola writing De Amantibus Subterraneis, tells us of a
certain kind of Spirits that converse in Minerals, and much infest those that
work in them. They seem to busy themselves according to the custom of Workmen.
They will digg and cleanse, melt and sever the Metals, Yet when they are gone,
the Workmen do not find that there is any thing done. I Challenge You, and All
your Brethren to Say any thing Like Truth Against what I Say in Defense of the
Church of England, viz. That it is most Evident that those Men are Guilty of
Abominable Iniquity, who Endeavor to Seduce any People from the Communion of
this Church, in which the Fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion are so
clearly, and fully Expressed, and those most Important Expressions so frequently
Repeated, that Persons of the lowest Intellectuals, who do not Rebel against
the Light, in frequenting our Religious Assemblies, may more easily attain to
the Knowledge of all things that are Necessary to their Salvation, than by
Hearing, or Reading the best Sermons that have been, or shall be Preached by any
of the Non-Conformists, to the End of the World: Which Assertion is as Evident,
as it is, That any Illiterate Persons, may more easily Meditate on Truths
plainly Expressed, and frequently Suggested to their Remembrance, than Collect
the same Truths out of diverse large Discourses, if they were therein Implied:
So that it can hardly be imagined, how any Man can be in any thing more
Serviceable to the Destroyer of Souls, than by Teaching People to Despise our
Catechism, and Common Prayer. As to Your most SLANDEROUS Insinuation, that We,
who have Warned the Country against the Wicked Errors, that have been Published
by I. F. do not heartily desire the Prosperity of the Church of Christ, and of
the Souls of Men, we APPEAL to the Judge of All Men, Considering that within a
very short Time we must Appear Before His Judgment Seat: And we all Concur
with Dr. MAVRICE in the Ardency of that Devotion, which He Expresses in his
Book Entitled, A Defense of Diocesan Episcopacy, page 443. Lord! How long shall
mean Delusions be permitted to have so powerful and prevailing influence? How
long shall the Woolf possess the Sheep against their Shepherds, and break into
the Folds under the disguise of Sheeps-Cloathing? How long shall the deluded
have eyes, and not see; and the Souls, for which Christ Died, be under the
Power of Deceivers? How long will it be e're the Hypocrite be disrobed, and the
People see through the disguise of those, who abuse them? Surely there will
come a time, when God will hear the Prayers, and Expostulations of his
Servants: When the faithful Shepherd shall gather together those that are
scattered, and bring back those that are gone astray: When he shall carry them
on his shoulders rejoicing, and triumphing in the disappointment of the beasts
of prey: But who shall live, when this comes to pass? Blessed surely shall
their Eyes be, who shall enjoy the sight, a joyful and pleasant thing beyond
expression it will be, to see Brethren dwell together in Unity.

I Pray God to Bless You, and to Turn You from your Iniquities: And to Bring
into the Way of Truth al^ those, that Err, and are Deceived by You.

Your Servant, and the Servant of All Men for Christ's Sake, E.E

POSTSCRIPT.
YOU say that all that have seriously perused Mr. Flavel's Books must needs
suffrage with you that He was a Man of a sound and solid Judgment. I have
perused diverse of his Books with this Serious Consideration, That I must give
Account to Almighty God what Censure I pass on them. Amongst many Remarkable
Passages I have taken particular notice of this in his Husbandry Spiritualized,
p. 187. When Fruits are shaken down from their Trees, then the Husbandman
separates them; the far greatest part for the Pound, and some few he reserves
for an Hoard, which are brought to his Table, and eaten with pleasure. This
excellently shadows forth that great separation, which Christ will make in the
end of the World, when some shall be cast into the Wine Press of the Almighty's
wrath, and others preserved for glory.

Those fruits which are preserved on the tree, or in the hoard, are
comparatively but an handful to those that are broken in the pound. Alas it is
scarce One of a Thousand, and such a small remnant of Elected Souls has God
reserved for Glory.

Can you in good earnest conceive it was Judiciously done of this Famous Man
thus to Compare the Wrath of God against the Damned, and his Mercy to those
that are Saved, to the Pounding, and Hoarding of Apples. To any man that so
Blasphemes the Divine Philanthropy, as to say that God has Absolutely
Reprobated All Mankind, except such a small Number, as One of a Thousand, I
shall give no other Answer but this, The LORD Rebuke Thee.

FINIS.

