A VINDICATION OF THE Honor of KING CHARLES I. AGAINST The Prodigious
Calumnies of the REGICIDE, LUDLOW, Published in what He calls A Letter from
Major General LUDLOW, To Sir E. S.

-- Certare Malis urgentibus, Host putabam Devicto Maius, nec tam Fugisse
Cavendo Adversa Egregium, quam Perdomuisse Ferendo. SIL. ITAL. Lib. 6

Printed in the Year, 1691.

A Vindication, etc.
IT would be a very great Extravagancy for any Man to Attempt the Justification
of All the Actions of the most Innocent of the Sons of Adam, that ever Sat
upon a Throne, there being such Innumerable Temptations to Error, arising from
the Various Interests, Opinions, and Natural Inclinations of Persons with whom
He is to Consult in Private, or in Public; and such Variety of Enormities in
the Lives of the Multitude He is to Govern; and so Many of the Laws of the best
Constituted Kingdom being liable to such Various Constructions even in the
Judgment of well-meaning People, and so apt to be Wrested by the Subtle Devices
of Ingenious Lawyers, led by their Ambition, Avarice, or Desire of Revenge,
etc. It is very easy to conceive how the most Just Prince in the World may be
Exposed to the Obloquy of the Populace by the Attempts of such Lawyers,
especially having fallen into some Real Errors, through the Common Infirmity of
all Mankind either Harkening to Erroneous Counsels, or taking some Unusual
measures in Opposition to the Strange, Unexpected and Astonishing Proceedings
of Seditious and Unreasonable Men. Sometimes the Appearance of Obligations
arising from the Principles of Christian Severity, sometimes of Christian
Lenity and Compassion may easily impose upon the Judgment of the Best of
Princes in opposition to what is Really more Fit, and Just. If a Prince take
but such a Liberty in respect of the Letter of the Law, which Every Subject
takes to himself, He Is presently Exclaimed against by the Seditious: as if a
King in his Royal Capacity might not now, and then borrow a point of the Law,
as the Phrase is, as well as his Subjects almost Every Day. When Kings seem to
Neglect even the Equity of the Law, they ought not certainly to be Opposed in
any other way, but what the Law Approves. I grant that King CHARLES the First
had not Deserved the Character that has been Given Him by many Excellent
Preachers in their Sermons on the Thirtieth of January (which LUDLOW most
Impudently, and Traitorously calls The General Madding-Day) if He had Protected
Bishop MOUNTAGUE in such Practices as the Rebels lay to his Charge: viz. That
he impiously, and profanely scoffd at Preaching, Lectures, Bibles, and all show
of Religion, etc. That his Scope, and End in his Books was to Encourage Popery,
etc. Letter p. 9. This Wonderful Learned Man in his Appeal to CAESAR (mentioned
by Ludlow in this same page) has these very words p. 48. which if the Reader
shall Consider he will most certainly acknowledge that what Ludlow and his
Brethren would make the World believe, concerning this Excellent Person, is so
gross a LIE, that it could hardly proceed but from the Mouths of the most
Impudent Traitors, and Regicides. I was bred a Member, says He, of the Church
of England; brought up a Member of the Church of England; therein, by the
means, and Ministry of that Church, I received that Earnest of my Salvation,
when by Baptism I was inserted into CHRIST. In the Union and Communion of that
Church I have lived not Divided with Papist, nor Separated with Puritan.
Through the assistance of the Grace of God's Spirit, which is never wanting
unto any that seek Him, I hope to live and dye in the Faith, and Confession of
that Church; than which I know none, nor can any be named in all points more
conformable unto purest Antiquity in the best times: which I trust to make good
against any, and all those Brethren in evil, Papists, and Puritans, whosoever:
who looking, and running two several ways, do like SAMPSON's Foxes join
together in the Tail. If there be any writing, preaching, saying, or thought of
mine, any thing Delivered or Published against the Discipline, or Doctrine of
THIS Church, I am sorry for it, I revoke it, recant it, disclaim it.

What a kind of Papist A.B. LAUD was let any Man Judge who has read his
Admirable Book Against FISHER. What will not this sort of Men Say, who would
make us Believe that These Two most Eminent Champions of the Church of England,
were Papists? What Mischief will they not undertake to Do, who after Forty
years, which the Divine Goodness has given them, to Lead them to Repentance,
retaining their old Hardness and Impenitent Hearts, Boast themselves in the
MURDER of Their KING! Will the ENGLISH Nobility, and Gentry Endure These
things! Shall one of the most Infamous Criminals that ever were in the World
thus trample upon the CROWN OF ENGLAND! Letter p. 17. Having thus showed you,
says He, that the King, which I Abdicated, etc. I shall say no more in this
Paper but only to Vindicate the Memory of this Admirable Exemplar of all True
Piety from the Malicious Aspersion of this Monstrous Criminal in what He calls
a Postscript. Though King CHARLES the First hated nothing more than to Govern
by Precedent yet he would not Pray without it; and none of the Liturgies
suiting his Fancy, he had recourse to a Romance, as you may here see.

Does this Firstborn of Impudence conceit that we have never read a Book
Entitled (...)? Dares any man that has read that Book Deny but that the King
had a Clear Speculation of All the Methods of Christian Devotion? I Challenge
All the Adversaries of our Liturgy to produce one Argument to Disprove any
thing this Blessed Prince has written Upon the Ordinance against the
Common Prayer Book. I cannot give an Account how this Prayer came to be
published with the King's Works; but it is a sign that those who found it written
with the King's own Hand were not much conversant in Sr. Philip Sidney's
ARCADIA, though it be a Book not unworthy the perusal of the Greatest Monarch;
but there being in it a Mixture of some Indecent Imaginations with Many Noble,
and Generous Representations of True Honor and Virtue, it is pity some part of
it had not been Expunged. But why should the King Affect such Expressions, as
had been Addressed to an Heathen Deity, as Ludlow tells us! Let any man Judge
what a Blessed Reformer this Fellow would be of our Church and State, who Knows
so little of the Nature of the True God, as to Despise these Expressions of
Devotion, wheresoever he finds them. O All-seeing Light and Eternal Life of All
things, to whom nothing is so great that it may resist, or so small that it is
contemned: look upon my misery with thine eye of mercy, and let thine infinite
power vouchsafe to limit out some proportion of deliverance unto me, as to thee
shall seem most convenient. Let not injury, O Lord, triumph over me etc. I
grant there may be exceptions made against that Expression, Eternal Life of all
things etc. but it can never be Applied to an Heathen Deity: And by Ludlow's
own Confession the King did not use it, but these words in the place of it, O
Eternal God. But why would the King have such Regard to words in a Romance?
Answ. Because He was no Phanatick, but a Sincere Judicious Christian, who will
be Affected with Divine Sense Expressed in the Words of any Person whatsoever,
wheresoever he Finds them. Every True Christian in Time of Adversity pours out
his Soul before the LORD in the Sense that is Expressed in these words of the
Prayer abovementioned: O Lord, I yield unto thy will, and joyfully embrace
what sorrow thou will have me suffer. The whole Prayer being so suitable to the
Condition of that Gracious Prince in his greatest Sufferings, it is impossible
but he should be pleased with the words being so plainly Expressive of such a
Temper of Mind, which 'twas both His Duty and Privilege to retain under all
the pressures of the heaviest of his Sufferings. That the Book of Psalms, the
Lord's Prayer, and all the Devotional part of the Holy-Scriptures were the
principal Instruments of this Princes Devotion, is a Truth so Evident that it
cannot be Denied without discovering the Impudence of a DEVIL, or REGICIDE.

I shall beseech the Virtuous Reader that he would be pleased to peruse these
Three Papers, by which I have endeavored to lay the Ax to the Root of that
Hypocrisy, by which multitudes of well-meaning People have been Deceived, and
by which Such Men, as the Author of this Letter, have carried on their Designs
to subvert the Foundations of all Our Ecclesiastical Constitutions.

The First I published of these Three Papers is Entitled, Animadversions Upon
some Passages in a Book Entitled, The True Nature of a Gospel Church, And Its
Government.

2. An Earnest Call To those Non-Conformists Who really Believe the Doctrine of
The Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, To come into the Communion of the
Church of England; That By their Constant Regular Confession of the Christian
Faith they may Confound the Devices of those GAINSAYERS, whom By their
Separation they have so much Encouraged.

3. Reflections on Certain Passages In Dr. OWENS Book, Entitled, A Discourse
of the Work of the Holy Ghost in Prayer.

As to my Succinct way of Controversial Writing I have four things to say for
my self. First, that Truth lies in a Narrow Compass ((...)). 2. That all the
Truth I assert in Opposition to the Sophisters of this Age, is Set forth
already in a multitude of large Volumes like GOLD Beat to an Ayerie Thinness.
3. That it is therefore more Difficult for any Sophister to make a Show of
Refuting me, because it is so Easy for the Reader to Remember the very Words,
in which I Express my Irrefragable Assertions. 4. Since I use so Few Words, all
the World may see I have no Design either to Circumvent my Reader, or to have
any Evasion, if I should be Assaulted with all the Force that my Adversaries
can raise against me. I Trust in the Father of Lights so to Assist me by His
Holy Spirit that my Life may never be so Dear to Me, as a Steadfast Resolution
To bear Witness to the Truth.

FINIS

