SOME OPINIONS OF MR HOBBS

Considered in a Second DIALOGUE BETWEEN Philautus and Timothy.

By the same Author.

LONDON,

Printed by J. Macock for Walter Kettilby, at the Sign of the Bishops-head in
St Paul's Churchyard. 1673.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, GILBERT By Divine Providence Lord
Archbishop OF CANTERBURY, Primate of all ENGLAND and Metropolitan: and one of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please your Grace,
SEeing your Grace has already withstood the displeasure of such a threatening
Philosopher and Politician as Mr. Hobbs, and not publicly disowned, or
renounced the protection of my former Dialogue; I have ventured to anger our
Adversary once more, by pr^suming to offer this second to your Graces
acceptance and pardon. Which presumption, although the continuance of your
Graces favors toward me might almost excuse, yet it is the great insolence
and great extravagance of Mr. Hobbs's attempts, that makes me still seek out
for protection from so great and eminent a Patron; who by his unaffected
affability to all men, and his studious encouragement of the best, by his
unwearied care for promoting true Religion, as well as securing the just
Authority of his Prince, is alone able to live down many Leviathans. And if
there be any way to bring that haughty-conceited-Philosopher to a tolerable
good nature, and to tie him up to moderate profaneness, it must be done by
such as your Grace, defending and approving those that write against him: for
as it is well known to your Grace, that he will allow no man to speak truth but
himself; so will he scarce ad^it of any man to be truly great, unless he is of
his mind and opinions: and that makes him so angry with your Grace, because you
are such an unanswerable Argument against all that he has writ. And nothing
does so nearly concern him, and almost convert him; as to see the name of a
person, so conspicuous for Religion and Power, stand before a Book that does
oppose his Doctrine. And for this reason I have once more taken the boldness to
make this second Address to your Grace.

If upon this review of Mr. Hobbs, I had found that he had given his Readers
sense and argument answerable to the mischi^f and wickedness of his opinions; I
should then have endeavored to have now appeared to your Grace in another
Style and Dress. For I am not so utterly given over to toying, nor so conceited
of this way of writing, nor so indifferent about a good life and Religion, nor
so careless of offending sober men, nor so bent and resolved always to presume
upon your Grace after this kind, but that I think it possible, that upon a just
account and a good subject, for a need, I could make two or three grave
Period^, as well as Mr. Hobbs has made thousands* about those things which are
either impudently false, (...) notoriously f^ivolous

But I must confess, that of all Triflers it is the set, the grave, the
Philosophical, and Mathematical Trifler, to which I have the greatest
averseness: whom when I meet very gravely making out all men to be Rational
beasts both in Nature and Conversation; and every man when he pleases a
Rational Rebel: and upon any fright or pinch, a Rational Atheist and
Antichristian; and all this performed with all demureness, solemnity, quotation
of Scripture, appeals to Conscience and ChurchHistory; I must humbly beg your
Graces pardon, if then I have endeavored to smile a little, and to get as much
out of his road, and wa^ of writing as possible.

I might offer to your Graces consideration several things, in Apology for my
self. If what I have done be at all pardonable, I am sure your Grace need not
be reminded of what I might plead or pretend: but if otherwise, for me to argue
the Case with your Grace, would but heighten the presumption of,

My Lord, Your Graces in all Duty and Service most devoted J. E.
May 20. 1673.
THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
Dear Reader,
THE Author wanting wit, confidence, and friends to commend himself and this
following Dialogue to the World, at that ^ast and prodigious rate, after which
Mr. Hobbs (and such as he hired) is sufficiently known to have extolled himself
and all his Writings; rather than such a man, and such endeavors, should
utterly perish for want of a few good words, I was resolved to say somewhat,
not only for my own gain, but also for my own profit. It is to be confessed,
that there has been already so very much said (in Prefaces) of the bottomless
deserts and inestimable Writings of our Author's Adversary, that it will be a
very difficult Talk for me, who am no ways concerned, no ways corrupted nor
prepared, no Chaplain, no Butler, (...) ^d, no Nephew, no R^, no Friend nor
Acquaintance of the Author, ever to overtake those extravagant praises that Mr.
Hobbs has shower'd down upon himself. But however, Reader, I prithee, do so
much as hold my Hat and Gloves; and thou shall see, what such an unprejudiced
and unconcerned person can do for a poor, modest, shiftless, friendless,
despairing, dying Author.

There was, thou know'^t, a great Greek man, who was thrice asked what was most
necessary to make an Orator: and it is known well enough, what his threefold
answer was. Even so should thou ask me three thousand times over what is the
most-best Book that ever was, or will be printed, buy this, and thou have fully
answered thy self and my design. The Book, it is to be acknowledged, is but a
Book; and that is the least and worst thing that can be said of it. But why do I
call it a Book: what am I mad? for in reality it is all Books: for it does not
only faithfully relate what has been already done, but it foretells all that
shall be done. Do thou want, Reader, a just, true, and impartial History of
the whole World; from the very beginning, to the very minute that thou buyest
this Book? trouble not thy self, here it is. It begins ten thousand years before
the oldest Praeadamite, and holds good and firm ten thousand years after the
World shall end. Do thou want a true, ^ound, substantial, Orthodox Body of
Divinity? hold it still fast; for thou have got it. This very Book was at the
first four General Councils, and in all the Persecutions. Have thou a mind to a
complete body of the Law, Civil Law, Canon Law, Common Law, etc? The twelve
Tables were stolen out of this Book last week, when 'twas printing: I met with
the Rogue at Pye*Corner, but he out-ran me: and so were Lycurgus's Laws, and
Justinian's Institutes: as for Littleton, Cook, etc. it is plain they had all
hence: and as London Bridge stands upon several Wool-packs; so Westminster Hall
it self, and all its proceedings, stand upon four of these Books. Do thou
want Galen, Hippocrates, Paracelsus, Helmont, etc? want them still; for in
effect thou have them all. For here is that which cures all diseases; and
teaches a most certain way how to make a complete Gentleman, at one baking.
Do thou want a Book to measure the height of Stars, survey Ground, make a
Dial, etc? Look page 79. lin. 12. it tells thee exactly what is a Clock either
by day or by night; next line thou have full Moon and new, high Tide at London
Bridge, and all the Bridges in the World. Turn down the fourth leaf of this
Book when thou go to bed; and 'twill go off just at that hour, and waken you
as well as any Alarm. Immediately after which follows a complete and most
wonderful Table of Consequences; which, if read one way, tells you all the
Fairs and Markets; the other way all the Battles that ever have been, or shall be
fought; with the number of the slain, etc. And besides, it doubles Cubes and
Squares, Circles (better than Mr. Hobbs) only with an Oyster shell and a pair
of Tobacco Tongs. And now, Reader, tell me, art thou so void of conscience,
reason, and all sense of thy own benefit, as not to carry home this Book?

Besides, read but five pages of it Spring and Fall, and for that year thou art
certainly secured from all Fevers, Agues, Coughs, Catarrhs, etc. Chomp three
or four lines of it in a morning; it scours and clarifies the Teeth; it settles
and confirms the Jaws; and brings a brisk and florid color into the Cheeks.
The very sight of the Book does so scar all Cramps, Bone-aches, running Gouts,
and the like, that they will not come within a stones cast of your house.

Art thou, Reader, a single man? be no longer so, but alter thy condition, and
take this Book along with thee. Have thou a Wife and Children, and are they
dear to thee? here is a Book for that dear Wife, and for those dear Children.
For it does not only sing, dance, play on the Lute, speak French, ride the
great Horse, etc. but it performs all Family duties. It runs for a Midwife, it
rocks the Cradle, combs the Child's head, sweeps the House, milks the Cows,
turns the Hogs out of the Corn, whets Knives, lays the Cloth, grinds Corn,
beats Hemp, winds up the Jack, brews, bakes, washes, and pays off Servants
their Wages exactly at Quarter day; and all this it does at the same time, and
yet is never out of breath. Besides, if thou have a mind to borrow eight or ten
thousand pounds; never look c^t for a surety, but take this Book along with
thee; it will go further and for more than half the Bankers.

It were endless, Reader, to tell thee all the uses and excellencies of this
Treatise: which though it be a full Answer to all ill-natured, seditious,
heretioal, blasphemous Books that ever were written; yet, after a most peculiar
manner, it does so horridly rout some silly-phantastical opinions of Mr. Hobbs,
that he will be ashamed ever so much as to own any one opinion again. Mr. Hobbs
happened into a fancy that every thought was necessary: i. e. not one thought,
Reader, that thou ever had since thou came into the World, that thou
could any more have avoided thinking, than that thy hair is black, or the Sky
blue. Now, to that says my Author most wonderfully and judiciously; that if
such a thing should ever come to pass, that is to say, that if ever any man at
any time should chance to have but one thought crowded upon him, he would
presently have a most huge Oak grow out of his Neck, and his left Leg would be
turned into a Phoenix* This he proves at large. Again says Mr. Hobbs, that
every action that a man does is perfectly unavoidable: to that says our Author,
very heartily and ingenuously: that if any one man should be forced willingly,
to do any one action; the Moon would presently tumble into that man's mouth. In
the next place, says Mr. Hobbs, there is nothing in the World but matter. Ay,
says our Author, nothing but matter! then has not any man, in his life, ever
tasted of a Pudding. This, Reader, is plain demonstration. Then for
Philosophical Language, Mathematics, and Divinity; he brings him to such
absurdities, as you never heard of, nor are to be imagined. Only thus far I Will
tell you, that if Mr. Hobbs has squared the Circle, then both Mars and Venus,
and the seven Stars will be every one of them most certainly in the Counter,
the next Friday after you buy this Book.

Never was any Book more magnified beyond the Seas, than this has been. Go into
France, Spain, Italy, or any other part of Europe, no other discourse but of
the Dutch War, and this second Dialogue. If the French King and Brandenburgh
have agreed, without doubt, 'twas done by this second Dialogue: and if he ever
beat the Dutch, 'twill be just after the same manner, as Tim has slain the
Leviathan. For it is already translated into Latin, Greek, French, Spanish, and
the Universal Language. Al^uding to this Dialogue, says Tully; Omnes ex omni
aetate libri, si unum in locum conferuntur cum Servio Sulpitio Timotheo non
sunt conferendi. And says Pindar (doubtless of this Book) (...). It Is needless
to tell you what Zenophon, Josephus, Varro, and the Talmud say of it. I know,
Reader, it is a little uncivil and unbecoming for one of my Profession to seem
so learned. But how could I help it? for I did only carry the first sheet of
this second Dialogue to the Press, and when I returned, my Wife and Family
could not understand one word I said.

What if Mr. Hobbs were familiar with Gassendus, Mersennus, and Monsieur
Sorbier; whenas our Author went to School with Archimedes, and Julius Caesar
was his Bedfellow? And what if Mr. Hobbs initiated his present Majesty in the
Mathematics; this Author, at the same time, disciplined six young Kings, four
Emperors: and the first Pope that ever was infallible was then his Usher?

But now, Reader, I take leave; but only I am to let you know, (not to deceiv^
you) that I am very doubtful, whether the Book be worth reading. But if you
understand me aright, it is the more valuable for that. For such is the virtue
of this Book, that the mere buying of it will do all those feats
abovementioned. And therefore lay down your money: and so farewell.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
Reader,
IT is not the design of this following Dialogue, neither was it of the former,
to make sport for idle people: (though if I have written all those Books, that
I am appointed to own, thou may justly suspect that I never did, nor do
intend any other thing;) but to preserve thee from being laughed at, by all who
can distingnish sense from words. For though I cannot think how I should any
ways be useful or serviceable to the Public; yet (I thank God) I have not
spent my time so very ill, as only to collect a few Tales and Proverbs to make
others merry. Nor was it my design either to please the Churchmen, whose
Office, Power, and Bible Mr. Hobbs cunningly has disposed of; nor to oblige
the Lords and Commons; who may all stay at home, if the Prince take his advice:
but it was, if possible, to cure a Company of easy, giddy, smallpated
Gentlemen; who swagger that Mr. Hobbs has said more for a bad life, and
against any other life after this, than ever was pleaded by Philosopher or
Divine to the contrary. Now to effect this Cure, (at least amongst some of
them) is ten times more difficult than to answer all Mr. Hobbs's Works.

For in the first place, there be a sort of people who were sturdy, resolved
Practicants in Hobbianism; and would most certainly have been so, had there
never been any such man as Mr. Hobbs in the World. But when they heard that ill
Nature, Debauchery, and Irreligion was Mathematics and Demonstration: and that
he who reported this, was a very grave, studious, contemplative, and observing
Gentleman; and yet writ as viciously and profanely, as their own vanity and
lusts could tempt them to practice: then had these Gentlemen found out a
Philosopher exactly sor their purpose, and the Philosopher had sound out as
right Gentlemen for his. And these are the sure, the firm, and constant
Pit-friends; that clap, shout, and swear all that comes from Malmesbury. And to
speak so plainly, as I might be understood, the Devil and the Philosopher have
got these people so fast, that I have little hopes of retrieving them.

The next shole that came into Mr. Hobbs, are a sort of small, soft, little,
pretty, fine Gentlemen: who having some little wit, some little modesty, some
little remain of Conscience and Country Religion, could not tear and Hector it,
as the former; but quickly learnt to chirp and giggle, when the other clapped and
shouted: and those were Mr. Hobbs's Gallery-friends; who at first were coy and
squeamish, and for a while stood aloof off, and made some little doubt, whether
a Taylor's Bill was truly and legally satisfied, when he or his Bailiffs were
sufficiently beaten; but by degrees they came in, and in their kind proved very
serviceable. And such as these Mr. Hobbs caught by his fame of being a
Mathematician, by filling his Books with Schemes, by frequent using the word
Demonstration, and calling all kind of vice and irreligion, humane Nature, and
obedience to the Civil Magistrate; and the like.

There be ore sort still behind: and they are the solemn, the judi^ious,
Don-admirers, and ^ox* friends of Mr. Hobbs: who being men of gravity and
reputation, don't only d^fie the name of Sot ^r Villain, but are unwilling to
venture upon the more ingenious one of Hobbist: and will scarce simper in
favor or allowance of the Philosopher; but can make shift to nod and nod
again; and think that no man but Mr. Hobbs has gone to the Fundamentals of
Government or humane Nature.

Now, Reader, what I shall do or say to these men, I know not. As for the great
Shouters and Clappers, who are resolved upon their course of life, you will easily
judge, that I can expect to do but little upon them: they being so resolved,
not for Mr. Hobbs's sake, but only out of true and unfeigned love, to
debauchery and wickedness. But yet one thing I would beg of them, that if they
be thus determined and fixed; that they would even stick to the old true new
English name of Knave and Ungodly; rather than (^or the renown of being of a
Philosophical Sect) to the new one of an Hobbist. For upon my word there is not
the least credit and ingenuity in it, more than the other: but if they be for
variety, and that dull, blunt profaneness will not down with them, but they must
have it a little so modeled and new phras'd, that upon occasion they may plead
for it, and justify it; let them not go to Mr. Hobbs for devices (but, when
they have occasion, devise some of their own:) for his are so weak, so
notoriously idle, that they are more scandalous and disparaging, than right
down Roguery without any pretense or artifice.

But as for the Gallery-Gentlemen, most of whom, I suppose, infected by general
fame, I have for their sakes, (because I thought them not much at leisure) read
over most of Mr. Hobbs's Writings. And what I learnt thou shall hear. By his
Logic I profited wonderfully: for it was there (and I must ever acknowledge
it) that I first was instructed, to call Logic Computation: and there I learnt
how to add and substract Logically: also how to make use of Triangles, Circles,
Parabola's, and other Mathematical instances; instead of homo, lapis or canis:
and that is, upon my word, all that I found there. Then I went to his natural
Philosophy; and there I found the word Phantasm, as thick as ever it could
stand; and that space, time, and every thing else was a Phantasm, but not any
one thing tolerably explained, but what was taken out of Carts, though he
denies it. But indeed in those very things, wherein he says he differs from
him, he most exactly agrees with him; (as de corp. Chapter 29.) and knows it not.
There is, I must confess, a good lusty heap of Mathematics, about the middle
of his natural ^hilosophy: but Dr. W. has taken such care about them, that I
believe they will do thee but little good.

I might tell thee also, Reader, of his Humane Nature; which carries a very
good Title, and is called the Fundamental Elements of Policy: which Title has
nothing at all to do with the Book, nor the Book scarce with any thing at all
else: his Liberty and Necessity is a little, very feat Book: but there is
nothing but a new Definition of Liberty to make it agree with Necessity; and he
might even as well have made one Definition for Fire and Water. Of his Books de
Cive and Leviathan, I need say nothing: because most of this, and the former
Dialogues concerns them. And lastly, as to his Mathematics, I leave them to be
judged by others. But only, Reader, let me tell thee thus much, that if in that
Science thou preferrest one doting, conceited Fellow, not only before all the
Mathematicians of our own Nation; but also all in Europe (which thou must do,
if thou admirest his Mathematics*) then I do look upon thee to have arrived to
the height of the Hobbian Spirit; and thou may even continue in it. So that
what is in it, Reader, thou have left now to admire in thy Master. It Is a most
plain Case, that he is neither Logician, nor Philosopher, nor Moralist, nor
Politician: and upon the credit of others, I Will presume him no Mathematician.
Yes, I Will tell thee what he is good for, and truly that is just all viz without
doubt, he is a very good English Grammarian; (and those that are skilled in
Latin, say he must not pretend higher:) and knowing exactly the difference
between do and does, which and who, would have made a most absolute, unlimited,
irresistible Sovereign of a Country-School; and upon Play days* we'll allow him
t^ translate: he has done Thucidydes well.

As to the last sort of Gentlemen, the grave and s^ill Admirers: who think no
man's Style, Method* and Politics, like Mr. Hobbs's: I shall only desire them
to su^er me to tell them where those Politics lie, viz. he went and read, and
considered the Laws and Sta^utes of our Realm: and then went on, and suppos^d
that in every place (if there be any Prince at all) he must be absolute and
unlimited: whom he mounted so high at last, as that he should not be only
sufficiently above all men; but above God himself, and all Religion: (and
having given him such a full brimmer of Power and Authority; to be sure he had
raised him above our Form of Government:) and this his Prince you take for a
rare Prince, and these his Politics for rare Politics. Whereas it is plain,
in his Commonwealth, there is nothing at all new; but only saucy impudent
reflections upon the Laws, Constitutions, and Government of our Realm. And
don't mistake your selves, he is every whit as much against the Civil Power, as
Ecclesiastical. And suppose that you are willing to excuse him; yet His Majesty
likes such money, as is given him by the Parliament; and such Laws as they
advise him to make; and thinks himself Prince enough, and is contented with his
place; though, according to the strict Rules of Sovereignty, and Mr. Hobbs's
definition of a Monarch, he cannot make Bibles, nor turn God out of the World.
As for the rest of his Politics, they are such as are known to every Dragoon:
and when he writ them, as he pretended, for the immortal Peace of his Country;
he might even as well have put out a Regular System to tea^h people how to
charge a Gun, or cleanse the Streets.

It is possible, Reader, that thou may now expect I should give thee some
account of the following Dialogue: but I have no mind to it, only whereas some
in a Book against Mr. Hobbs might look for close and serious arguing; thou art
to understand that I was always ready for it, but never could find an
opportunity. For when I had pulled a*pieces Mr. Hobbs's Phrases, and changed
his affected words into such as were familiar; I always found, that to confute
him thoroughly, was only to understand him aright. And if, by the instances I
have given, others are convinced thereof, I have my design.

A SECOND Dialogue BETWEEN Philautus and Timothy.
Phi. HOW, Tim, not hanged your self yet?


Tim. In my opinion, Bristol is a very pr^tty Town.


Phi. Surely thou were at cross purposes last night: what has Bristol to do
with hanging?


Tim. The most that can be, Sir. And I wonder, of all men, that you should no^
perceive it. It Is a train, Sir; and as plain beaten road, as from St. Albans ^o
Barnet, or from St. Andrew to Tumult.


Phi. Wh^, is there such a Town, any where upon the road, as Tumult?


Tim. A very ^amous one, in the fourth Chapter of your Humane Nature: and
according to the account you ^here give of it, it is nothing near an hours
riding from St. Andrew thither. For, the mind being mounted at St. Andrew,
starts thence and runs to St. Peter, because in the same Gospel, their names
are read together. Having got to St. Peter, it makes forthwith for stone, for
the same reason; from stone it goes to foundation, because they are seen
together; and then from foundation it switches away presently to Church, and
from Church to people, and from people to Tumult.


Phi. All this is very natural and Coherent, the passage being smooth and
easy: but how shall we get from Hanging to Bristol? I doubt that is a kind of
a cross road, Tim; is it not?


Tim. I must confess, there is one place a little hard to hit: but from Bristol
to Hanging, it is impossible to miss. For, the mind getting up at Bristol, away
presently it rides for Flintshire, from Flintshire it goes to Hamshire, and so
to Hempshire, Ropeshire, Pippin.


Phi. Pippin? whereabouts are we now? what have we to do with Pippin?


Tim. This Pippin, Sir, was he, to whom Alderman Cooper the great Turkey
Merchant was so nearly related.


Phi. How do mean? what, did this Cooper marry one of Pippins Daughters?


Tim. No, Sir: he was of the whole blood upon my word: for he was only Son of
Mr. Hooper, who came from a Greekish kind of Man, one Hoper, and he from
Dioper, and he again from Diaper; and then it runs alone, to Pippin. Alas!
Thought is very swift, and set but the mind once agog, and how it whews it away.


Phi. I shall not come to you to learn how swi^t Thoughts are: nor yet how that
they are all necessary.


Tim. No: if you do, you will loose your journey, for I know no such thing.


Phi. What don't you know? don't you know, that there is a necessary coherence
and order, a fatal and irresistible occasion, a drift, a clue and Chain of all
thoughts?


Tim. Not, in the least; not I.


Phi. Then thou know nothing belonging to the Brain; nor did thou ever
take into consideration my principle of motion.


Tim. I have tasted, Sir, of a Calves head and Bacon; and I was in the great
wind: and yet I humbly conceive, that though a Man's legs be tied never so fast;
and his mouth stitched up never so close, he may, notwithstanding that, pay it
away with thinking, if he be but in the right queu. When the Purse is empty,
and the Pha^sie low, then indeed the mind usually is very modest and
governable; and goes only to leapFrog, and skips perhaps from Cooper to Pippin,
or from St. Andrew to Tumult. But let the man's belly and pockets be but once
refreshed, and then presently he is Cock-a-hoop, then he takes Hedge and Ditch,
Church and Steeple; and struts and straddles like the great Colossus at Rhodes.
Now, methinks, I am just in the very middle of Smyrna: Now I am at As in
praesenti: Now I am for a Dish of Cucumbers and Mustard: and, after all this,
nothing will satisfy me but Adam and Eve, and the North Wind. Hey day! how I
can range sometimes, and make the whole World to spring, and flutter before me.


Phi. This now, I perceive, is intended for frolic, and fancy: but, that
thou may see, Tim, that thou have no hopes of ever having the credit of being
distracted; I shall show thee, that in this great flight that thou have made,
and these great jumps, that thou have taken, there is nothing else but mere
train and drift: and thou have as absolutely crept on from hint to hint, and
motive to motive, as ever Child did, that leaned upon its Mothers
Apron-strings. And in the first place as for Smyrna, I take it for granted that
it was an unavoidable thought.


Tim. Do you so? then you must take it all alone: for you are not likely to
have my Company.


Phi. Why, has not the word Smyrna by some means or other been formerly
impuls'd upon you? Surely you will not say that you just now made it.


Tim. No truly, I did not make it: but, if you have occasion for them, I can
make you a thousand words presently, that neither you, nor I ever heard of
before.


Phi. What, neither in part nor whole? I hope you will make them of some syllables
you have heard of, or at least of some Letters.


Tim. Ps^aw! pshaw! that is a mere fancy o^ yours: we will make them of a Turkey
Tammy, or a Calamanco. Make words of Letters! they are dull and old fashioned
words that ar^ made so. Give me a word, that has neither beginning nor ending,
Vowel, nor Consonant, that is neither to be spoken, heard, nor understood.


Phi. Come, come: for all your fooling, you had some one considerable reason or
other why you named Smyrna.


Tim. Some one, Sir! I had a dozen at least.


Phi. Then no man can say but you had reasons enough.


Tim. But I had as many, Sir, full out for Aleppo.


Phi. Perhaps so, but then they were not altogether so big.


Tim. Yes but they were, and bigger too. There was the tenth reason, that was
as big as the great Turnep King James gave the Scotchman. O Aleppo! how
infinitely am I taken with Aleppo!


Phi. That Is true, you may be much taken with the place now, but you cared
little for it before.


Tim. O Sir, for many years together I have been so horribly inflamed with the
thoughts of it, that if you do not a little divert me, and let me know how I
got from Smyrna to As in praesenti, I shall immediately swoon.


Phi. Although thy ignorance show thy education to have been but very small:
yet I suppose thou might travel so far into the Grammar, as to be acquainted
with As in praesenti.


Tim. Yes, Sir, I know As in praesenti very well: but I don't remember that
ever I met As in praesenti riding behind Smyrna to Market.


Phi. That may be, simpleton! but you met, in the beginning of Propria quae
maribus, with the Island called Cyprus: and every body knows that Cyprus is no
such huge way from Smyrna.


Tim. It Is very right I profess -- ceu Creta Britannia Cyprus. O, what a
happiness it is, to have had the opportunity of prying into the little
intrigues, and starting holes of the mind! and to be well acquainted with all
the little Lanes and bypath of thinking! But I pray, Sir, how came Cucumbers
and Mustard into such an intimacy with As in praesenti?


Phi. 'Lack a day! they are old Camerades. For the very last side but one in
Quae Genus, (which you know is next to As in praesenti) there you learnt
Scelerata sinapis, and cucumis cucumer.


Tim. I durst swear upon Lilly, it is just so. And that this same thought of
Mustard and Cucumbers came only from the sediments and relicts of an old twang
I got at School. But how, Sir, came the Cucumbers to outrun the Mustard; for
they are otherwise placed in the Grammar?


Phi. That is because some time or other you have seen Mutton and Cucumbers to
be succeeded by Beef and Mustard.


Tim. Yes, Sir, that I have once, or so: but I don't remember that ever I saw
Adam and Eve and the North Wind succeeded after any such manner. How shall we
train in these, Sir?


Phi. O most easily. For Adam and Eve were the occasion of all thoughts: for
from them were descended all thinking Creatures. But besides, it is possible
that at some time or other (for no man can remem^er every thing that has
happened in his whole life) you might meet a Woman crying Cucumbers; and
thereupon looking up, you spied the sig^ of Adam and Eve.


Tim. But it is five to one, Sir, whether the North Wind was written upon the
sign.


Phi. That Is true: but it is not so many to one, but that the Wind might then be
in the North, Tim. And if so, there is sufficient ^son for them to lig together
in the Brain, and afterward to spring forth. Alas! Tim, the^e is not one of a
thousand that is able to discern how strangely things are chained together. It
being a plain cas^ that people generally spend their time in gazing and staring
at the whole lump of second causes; and never mind the delicate wreathings and
twistings of motion.


Tim. Indeed, Sir, I am afraid that people are somewhat careless: in my mind
they ought to be chidden.


Phi. Chidden? they ought to be kicked out of the World for duncery. I tell
thee, Tim, I was, I remember, one day (in the late troublesome times) at a
place where we sell into discourse of the Civil War. In the midst of which up
starts one (as seemingly attentive as any of the rest) and asks, what was the
value of a Roman penny. The old fops and boys, that crowded close to see and
admire me, and to get some reputation from being in my Company; thought the man
utterly distracted, or (as Theolog^es use to say upon such occasions) inspired.
But to me, who knew how to drive a thought to the spring head, the coherence
and train of the question was as manifest as could be. For the thought of the
War introducing the thought of the Scots selling the King, and the thought of
that, the thought of Judas betraying of Christ; and he being sold for thirty
pence, I need not say any more.


Tim. Not a word, Sir, and 'twas well for the poor Gentleman, Philautus, that
you were so nigh at hand; or else, by chance, he might have gone to Bedlam, for
want of a Trainer. But suppose, Sir, instead of the Roman penny, he had asked
what was the reason that Ginger is spelt with a G, and Jeopardy with an J. Must
he needs have gone for it: could not you have dropped down a little soder, and
relief upon such an unfortunate extravagancy?


Phi. What Is that to you Goodman-two-shoes: am I bound to acquaint you with all
that I can do?


Tim. Nay, I hope no offense, Sir: for I am confident you that have such
excellent skill at putting a thought off the squat, could have easily don't:
for the phantasm of War introducing the phantasm of powder, this powder
presently breaks forth into bullets: again those bullets pig and bring forth
hail shot: and in the twincling of an eye, hail*shot begets Pepper: and that
Pepper that cannot beget Ginger, ought to be flung into the streets.


Phi. But hold Tim; who*shall help us to the phantasm of Jeopardy? do keep a
Journey-man to do that for thee? I prithee why not Ginger and Justice, or
Ginger and Jeremiah, as well as Ginger and Jeopardy?


Tim. Nay softly there, Philautus; you would fain draw me into a Land-story.
The business of Ginger and Jeopardy is as famous as the *three blew beans in ^
blew bladder.


Phi. Then you may keep your story to your self: I am sure it cannot any ways
weaken my opinion, let it be what it will: for as I said before, so say I
again, that it is perfectly impossible for any man in the World, either to
devise a new thought, or so much as to choose the order of any old one.


Tim. I have now in my mind, Philautus, a spick and span new thought, so fine
and so pretty --


Phi. What, that no body ever thought of before? I pr^thee let us hear it.


Tim. No, but you shall not: for you cannot hear it, unless I speak; and if I
speak, I shall go nigh to open my mouth: and then you will presently say, that
some body have opened their mouths just so before now; either in whole, or in
part; and so I shall be choused out of the novelty of my thought. No, no, Sir:
I must beg your pardon as to that: but if you have any other kind of reason to
bestow upon me, why a man may not think over his old thoughts in what order he
pleases, besides such as King Pippin, Tumult and the Roman penny, I shall count
my self very much beholding to you.


Phi. What an impertinent thing is this to look about for reason, in a case
that need not at all to be reasoned? does not what men practice and daily
experience teach thee, how naturally the mind flies from one thing to another:
even as a Hawk flies after a Patridge? and have not I in the thirty third page
of my Humane nature plainly shown thee, that when the thought of honorable is
by some occasion or other sprung in a man, how the mind presently takes Wing,
and flies to the thought of being wise, which is the next means thereunto: and
from thence to the thought of study, which is the next means to wisdom: and
have not I besides there told thee, that the necessity of this order depends
upon this great truth, that he that has a conception of an end and has an
appetite thereunto; the next conception he has, is a conception of the next
means to that end.


Tim. A most vast and stately truth indeed! and therefore certainly that
Gentleman's brains lay very odly, who, being sent for to a dying friend, bad his
man to saddle him presently the Chess-board, and give the Warmingpan half a
peck of Oats.


Phi. This is a mere flam of your own devising: there never was any man in the
World in his Wits, who thought after this extravagant rate.


Tim. This way you will be too hard for me indeed. For if I take a little pains to
make a new thought, you presently cry out ware A^phabet! and when I appeal to
History and matter of Record, then my men prove all mad.


Phi. I say you and your men are every one of you mad; if you look upon this
way of thinking to be common or natural.


Tim. I know, as well as you, that it is not altogether modish: and therefore if
at any time the thought of hunger stirs within me, and struggles so hard as to
pull in Victuals; I don't call for a Flail or the Snuffers to cut my meat; but
for to other instrument: and if I have occasion to be trimmed, I seldom send for
the Brick-layer, because I have more frequently observed the fall of beards to
succeed the performances of another sort of Operators.


Phi. And therefore you plainly see that people eat, live, talk, and do all
merely by train of thoughts. And as the water follows a man's finger upon a
dry and level Table: so every conception is guided and necessarily drawn in, by
something that went before.


Tim. I grant you, Philautus, that Victuals draws out the knife out of the
sheath, as naturally as the finger, etc. but it will not fetch in the flail out
of the Barn altogether so well*


Phi. Yes, if there be a Pudding upon the Table.


Tim. But it shall not be Pudding-day: we will have nothing but a Haunch of Venison.
I durst not say Beef. For that would have taken fire presently; and ran like a
great Gun backward. Flail, Corn, Pudding, Beef.


Phi. Why, Venison is flesh as well as Beef.


Tim. There you are cunning to some purpose: for if I had only said, that we
had a small device, or a thingam for Dinner; you would easily have brought in
your Flail. For all substances are Cosen-Germans.


Phi. So they are: for the whole World is only a vast, vast Family: and though
by reason of the multitude of relations, we don't presently perceive how the
Kindred comes in: Yet there always is and must be some necessary alliance.


Tim. That same must be I like mainly well: because 'twill indifferently serve
for any elevation of the Pole. For, suppose a Gentleman comes into his Inn, and
finding his stomach mawkish, desires only a boiled Cushion and Apple-sawce for
his Supper; and my Landlord calls for ^ippin or Tumult to speak in the Globe;
and neither of them will answer: it is no matter for that, for if they will not
somebody else must: every thought coming from imagination, and imagination from
sense, and sense from motion, and therefore it must be so, so or so.


Phi. It seems by this, Tim, as if 'twere thy opinion that all thoughts were
merely casual or indifferent.


Tim. You must ghess again, Sir: for though I believe no thought to be
necessary; yet it is plain that there is not one of a hundred of which, for the
most part, there is not some occasion offered. For Children at School are very
well aware of your train of thoughts; (only they don't know the phrase)
counting it not modest nor civil to tell a Passenger a story of eo and queo,
when he gives them occasion to tell him the hour of the day.


Phi. I prithee, Tim, don't trouble me with a^y of thy Childrens stories: but
if thou have a mind to understand wherein the whole cheat of this same freedom
of thinking consists, it is in short thus. There are, thou know, several
senses belonging to a man; which senses seldom lie long fallow; but are
constantly busied and knocked upon by this outward World: so that these
knockings saved all together, and treasured up in the brain, in twenty years
time, suppose, will amount to a vast bank of motion: hence now it comes about,
that a man may easily be deceived, and oft-times seem to think Voluntier, when
as he only filtches out of the common stock.


Tim. This same seeming only to think freely does not at all please me: for a
man, notwithstanding that, is still as very a Jimcrack as a Farthing-whistle;
only he is a little more copious. And an ability to think of ten thousand
thousand several things, if stinted to a certain order, is nothing else but a
wilder kind of necessity. And thereupon it was that the late Philosopher who
took great pains in making Bruits to be mere Engines; was never so idle or mad,
as to make man to be such a kind of tool.


Phi. He might even have gone on with the work, for any thing I see to the
contrary.


Tim. No, Sir: he knew how to spend his time better. For he perceived that
though an engine might possibly be contrived not only to walk up and down, but
also to pronounce several words very distinctly, and to call knave if touched
in one place, and in another to be your humble servant: nay, suppose you bestow
upon it such breeding, as it becomes able at last to recite word for word every
Verse in Virgil: yet take this same engine and stroke it, and cokes it, and
promise it a Violet*Comfit, tell it the Emperor is to dine with you that day,
and therefore it must needs do some extraordinary feat; for all this you cannot
get this sullen thing to say so much; as Patulae tu Tityre.


Phi. Perhaps so: but what is the reason, Tim?


Tim. I know none but only this; that make what you will of mere matter; and
put in never so many Wheels and Pullies: and instruct it in all the Language^
of Europe, and *twill still be but a chip of the old block, and 'twill go but
just the rounds, and never take forth of its own accord, nor skip up your lap,
and kiss you, when you had tuned it to say the first Ode of Horace.


Phi. I grant you that Man has very much the advantage of all other Creatures;
because he alone is capable of speech, and thereby of comparing and reasoning.


Tim. Now, don't I believe one word of all this.


Phi. What, Tim, do deny by whole sale?


Tim. In the first place I do say that it is not speech, or the uttering of
words that does at all make a man; but the understanding those words he utters,
and the applying the same aptly. For suppose you go to your Cage, and ask your
Pie, how do you do this Morning? and the Pie answers, how do YOU do this
Morning? now if you can but teach the Pie to lay the accent strong enough upon
that same YOU which she pronounces, it is then plain reparty, and the Pie shall
presently put in for a place at Court. And as speech alone will never amount to
reasoning; so by your good leave, Philautus, there may be reasoning without
speech: that is, there may be demonstrative inferring or concluding without the
use of words. For I don't imagine reasoning to consist in gaping or hollowing,
but in perceiving the necessity of the effect from its causes; which deaf and
dumb people by many instances certainly do, as well as the lowdest disputant in
the Schools. But of these things, Philautus, you and I may have further
occasion to discourse, before we part. And therefore if you have ever another
Roman penny about you, I pray let us have it.


Phi. No, Tim, I know what to do with my money and notions better, than to
fling them away upon such an ungrateful wretch as thou art. This same train or
necessity of all humane thoughts is a great secret, and too deep, I perceive,
for thy apprehension. Perhaps thou may have better luck at understanding the
necessity of all humane actions: and therefore if thou have a mind to it; we will
have a small brush about Freewill: for my part I have not much to say: being
most of it comprised in that little despicable piece of mine, called Liberty
and Necessity. It Is a very small thing, Tim, and one of thy confidence and
prowess may eat it up at a mouth-ful.


Tim. Yes, Sir, it is very small: but somebody has put such a dreadful Preface
to it, as would go nigh to give a Giant his Breakfast. Reader, says that same
somebody, take this little Book of Liberty and Necessity: pull off thy glove,
and take it I say into thy right hand, and let not the smallness thereof, make
it seem contemptible to thee, for it is every bit Diamond and Oaks heart, for
(besides a new passage into the East Indies, and the bowels of the number of
the Apocalyptical Beast) there is work enough for many thousand Sermons and
Exercises: and there is that which is much better than the Catechisms and
Confessions of a thousand Assemblies: and that which will cast an eternal
blemish upon all the cornered Caps of the Priests and Jesuits, and upon all the
black and white Caps of the Ministers. I know not, Reader, what profession,
persuasion, opinion, or Church thou art of: but be of what thou will, if thou
intendest to be saved, buy and study this little Book. In comparison of which,
all the Sermons, Teachings, Preachings, Meetings, Disputations, Conferences and
Printed Books are good for nothing, but only to divert the duller sort of
Citizens. Perhaps, thou may have a mind to be prying into the great mysteries
of Predestination, Election, Freewill, Grace, Merits, Reprobation, etc. if so,
take my advice for once, and never go to any Black-Court again; for generally
they are a Company of ignorant Tinkers, that pretend to mending and sodering of
men's Consciences, and for the most part they make more holes than they find:
but go thou me to this little, little Book of Liberty and Necessity; (not
written by a dull Tinkering Theologue, but by a severe student of the
Mathematics) and there thou shall find more evidence and conviction, and more
means of humane salvation, than in all the Volumes and Libraries, and all the
Controversial Labors, and Polemical Treatises that were ever Printed. Now,
Sir, is not this very thundering and dismaying? Do you think any body will
venture, when you scare people thus.


Phi. Who scare people? You cannot say that I writ that Preface, can you?


Tim. No: But when I find therein that same rattling story (which was before in
your Preface de Cive) of Ixion's clasping a Cloud instead of Juno, and of the
Centaures and Hermaphrodite opinions that were produced by that unnatural
coition; and compare therewith your being so notoriously given to print over
and over such elegant flourishes: and when I consider besides, how chargeable
'twould be to procure one to ^eign such commendations, as you, upon all
occasions, so easily and naturally trundle in upon your self, I cannot but say,
that I am somewhat afraid, that --


Phi. Afraid? of what I prithee? thou know well enough there was a
Metaphysical Bishop that ventured to meddle; and I don't question but thou art
as foolhardy as any Bishop, Primate, or Metropolitan of them all.


Tim. But you remember, Sir, what a woeful example you made of the poor Bishop;
(as you tell us in the last page of your Animadversions) and of all fish that
fly, there is none I hate like an Example. In my opinion, Philautus, you did
him a little too hard, considering he was a Bishop.


Phi. How could I help it, Tim? do think I can endure to be eternally
tormented with nothing but Tohu's and Bohu's and Jargons? The Bishop and I meet
at Paris: we discourse very calmly concerning Freewill: upon this he writes a
very angry Book, viz. Vindication of true Liberty, etc. and upon that (as he
desired) I writ that parlous little thing, Liberty and Necessity. But withal
(now mark how tender I was of his credit) in no less than four several places,
I requested, that it might by no means be Printed, that the World might never
see what a pitiful weak Creature they had for a Church Governor. But
afterward this little Book being infinitely desired, and by stealth made
public; notwithstanding all these cautions, and this my great regard to his
reputation, he was so inconsiderate as to go and make a reply. In which, Tim,
(to be short and plain) he has discovered so little of breeding, reasoning, or
elocution, that I am often times forced to let him know that his Lordship writes
like a Beast, nay worse than a Beast, nay both as to sense and cleanliness: and
for his language that it is Jargon, Tohu, Bohu, the very same with that of the
Kingdom of darkness.


Tim. 'Twas a most unhappy thing, that so great a Churchman should run himself
into such danger: and at once offend such a formidable Monster of Wit, and
Philosophy.


Phi. Offend? I tell thee, Tim, I am of as gentle and sparing a nature (let
people talk but tolerable nonsense) as any man alive: but to be perpetually
snarl'd at and cursed -- One he falls to scribbling against me with his
Ghebrical gibberish, called Symbolls, Gambolls, or Antichrist in short hand;
and in his Elenchus would make people believe that he has confuted me, by
writing so as no body understands him. Then comes another little Dog called
Vindex Academiarum, and without being set on, he barks and exclaims against me
as an Enemy to the Universities; and knows no more than a Puppy, either what an
Enemy is, or what an University is. Then comes the railing and wondering Bishop
with his Tohu, Bohu and Jargon; and he calls me Rebel, Atheist and Blasphemer,
because I will not comply with him in his fopperies of Accidents of Cheese in
Bread, Freewill, Free-subject, and the like. Upon this, Tim, perceiving that
folly and spite were both like to be endless: and that of all men that baited
me, the Clergy were the great Ringleaders and disturbers, what did me I, (for
my future ease and quiet) but picked out this same provoking Bishop, as a good
lusty Sacrifice of their own flock: and so made of him an example for all the
rest: which, if I be not much mistaken, I have done to some purpose.


Tim. To tell the Bishop (as you do) that his distinction of compounded sense
and divided sense was nonsense, was a very proper and pinching reflection:
there being no sort of sense so very scandalous as nonsense: but to let go the
very same instruments of revenge upon every slight cavil, and frivolous
occasion; and in times too, when Liberty of will, as well as Episcopacy and
Loyalty were equally persecuted; was not done like a man that pretends to such
variety of wit, and had the honor to initiate his present Majesty in the
Mathematics.


Phi. Thou talkest, Tim, as if the Bishop had left thee a Legacy to defend his
fooleries. I wonder, what kind of things thou countest slight and frivolous. If
a man should tell me ^ long story of a round quadrangle, or of a Kingdom
standing upon two heads, and I desire him out of all love to speak softly; for
my part, I believe thy wit to be such, that thou would look upon this to be
mere carping and cavelling.


Tim. No; by no means, Sir: you talk now of businesses indeed. But suppose,
Philautus, the Bishop in his Epistle to the Reader, taking notice of your
Principles being destructive both to Religion and Government, concludes all
with, God bless us. May not a Bishop (because the supreme Rascals had got away
his estate) reserve so much of his sacred function, as to say, God bless us,
without being accused of buffoonly abusing the name of God to calumny?


Phi. But he brings it in, Tim, as if he intended it as a spel, or a charm
against my doctrine.


Tim. Perhaps so: for there are a great many think it pernicious, besides the
Bishop.


Phi. It may be some few particular men.


Tim. Do you know what you have said? what a barbarous expression is this, for
one that has done so well upon Thucidides, and the Peak! is t^is you that
pretend to such exactness of Language and have so little as to come in with
your particular men? Is this you that have confounded thousands of Catechisms
and thousands of Confessions, and routed white Caps, black Caps, cornered Caps,
Priests, Jesuits, and Ministers, and talk of your particular men? is this you
--


Phi. For shame, Tim, rave no more, for thou look black in the mouth
already. I prithee what fault can thou fi^d with particular men, Tim. Wherein
does the iniquity of that expression lie?


Tim. I know no more hurt in it than you did, when you made use of it in the
last page but one of your Animadversions: (as you may do a hundred times more
for ought I know) but the poor Bishop did but speak of some particular men that
slighted all ancient Authors: and 'twas as very Jargon, as if he had taken his
Text out of St. Paul to the Deuteronomians; particular men! this word
particular men (say you) is put in here, in my opinion with little Judgment:
especially by a man that pretends to be learned. That now is a very girding
aggravation. Does the Bishop think that he himself is, or that there is any
Universal man? that is vexation driven. It may be he means a private man. Does
he then think there is any man not private besides him that is endued with
Sovereign Power? rarely fetched up again! there is not one man of a thousand
that is fit to be trusted with an absurdity: that knows how to give the rising
blow, and to urge and press to the quick. I wonder for my part that Episcopacy
was not ashamed of coming into Ireland again, so long as there was a particular
man to be found there. But that which pleases me much better than all this,
Philautus, is; that the Bishop a while after happening to make use of the word
General, the Tables presently turn, and he is even as very Ja^gon for that, as
he was before for particular. General! it is Jargon, say you: for every thing
that is, is singular and individual, and there is nothing in the whole World
that is general, but the signification of words and other signs. So that,
Philautus, if you resolve to deal with us at this severe rate, and neither let
us have particular men as a constant going stock, nor an Universal man for a
Breeder, we must even fling up at quarter day; and there is an end of the World.


Phi. What an idle stir thou make about two or three rotten words! what is all
this, I prithee, to the Matter in hand.


Tim. Matter in hand! what, do you look upon Freewill to be a matter in hand,
when as Liberty is immaterial: or a discourse of Freewill (which consist only
of words) to be a matter in hand? O, that I were but at leisure to take my full
swing at this same luscious bit of nonsense; this same matter in hand!


Phi. Whereabouts are we got now, trow we?


Tim. We are now just got to the 288th. page of your Animadversions. Where the
Bishop did but speak of a perfect definition being made of the essential
causes, viz. matter and form (which is as common as Logica est ars) and you
hooted at him, for as very an example, as if he had gone nine miles to suck a
Bull. What (say you) would the Bishop have matter come into a definition, that
is made only of words: and into a definition of Liberty too, that is
immaterial? We had best c^ll for a skillet for his Lordship, that he may set on
his definition, and boil it. Is it not a strange thing that a dignifyed
Churchman should be so ignorant, as not to know that Matter is body, and that
Body is corporeal substance, and subject to dimension, such as are the
Elements, and things compounded of the Elements? this is, Philautus, damnable
and upbraiding Rhetorique: for though Matter, Body, corporeal substance,
dimension, elements and things made of elements, seem to be the same sort of
torment, yet it grates all the way like a saw upon a man's leg.


Phi. I know it does; and I intended it should. For to illustrate nonsense,
after this easy and familiar manner, is sometimes the most stinging
improvement that can be made of it.


Tim. I pray, Sir, when the Bishop says that a man has the determination of
himself, and dominion over his own actions: how do you manage that absurdity?


Phi. It need not be managed at all Tim; for without any help the man makes an
absolute fool of himself; and at one dash flings away all his Freewill, as
utterly as ever rotten egg was ^lung against the Wall: for over wh^tsoever
things there is dominion, those things are not free.


Tim. This is a plain case, that he lost his parts and Bishopric together: for
Free dominion is as much as to say free imprisonment, free subjection, or free
sl^very: and therefore I very much wondered at your Moderation, when (in the
beginning of your Animadversions) you said that Arminianism was only in part
the cause of the late troubles. Whereas it is very plain, that the War never had
been begun, had it not been for the Freewillers. For a subject being nothing
else but a person who has given up his will to the will of his Prince: he that
presumes to call in his own will again, and to challenge a dominion and command
over his actions (as all Freewillers do) what does he do but in effect,
renounce all allegiance; and like a Rebel, sets up his own will against that of
the supreme. Nay farther, whereas some people (not understanding words) do
imagine that the Doctrine of Necessity makes the Government of God Tyrannical;
these are so very silly as not to perceive that they which maintain the
contrary give way to the same absurdity in a much higher degree. For he that
holds that man has a power and dominion over his own actions, makes every man
to be a King: from whence it plainly follows (King and Tyrant being all one)
that according to him, God is more a Tyrant, being King of Kings. I profess, I
did not think there had been any thing nigh so much treason and blasphemy in
maintaining this same Liberty of Will as now I perceive there is.


Phi. Thou perceive! thou perceivest nothing at all: not so much as the first
grounds of the dispute between us. For if thou did, thou would know, that
no man in the World is more for true Liberty, and for man's being a free Agent
than I am. Nay (which possibly such a Fool as thou art may stare at) I hold
true Liberty more than the very Bishop himself, who seems so eagerly to
scramble and fight for it. For (as I have it p. 77.) whereas the Bishop either
craftily, or (be it spoken with all due respect) ignorantly pu^ things so
together as to scandalize me and make people believe I am altogether against
Liberty, because I hold necessity: let him and his Ecclesiastics know, that I
hold as much that there is true Liberty as he does and more: for I hold it, as
from Necessity; and that there must of Necessity be Liberty: but he (like a
beast) holds it not from Necessity, and so makes it possible there may be none.
And that is the reason why I called my Book, Liberty and Necessity. For I am so
far from denying Liberty, that I hold Necessity besides.


Tim. He does so: never minding that sober advice of the Poet, about severities
clogg, upon the three Children that were drowned; unty 'em and you undo 'em.
Now say I, Philautus, give me again my Actus primus, and Actus se^undus, my
terminus a quo, and terminus ad quem, my quidditas, quodditas, entitas, and all
the r^st of my little, barbarous, Metaphysical implements; rather than such
childish, ridiculous, non-sensical querks and subtilties, dressed up unto
eloquent style, with soft and Roman expressions. You had best now complain to
his Majesty that the boys laugh at you, when you chastise them for their
particul^r men, their free dominion, and their boiled definitions: and that
they grow saucy and headstrong, and will not believe but that plain right-down,
untrim'd Liberty, without any Necessity at all, is near upon as good, as your
kind of Liberty laced with a vengeance.


Phi. Nay, if you be good at that, Tim, for a need, I can rail, (...) well as
you


Tim I pray, Sir, hold your hand: for (...) last page of your six Lesson^ you
have given the ^gregious Prof^ssours (as ^ou call them) such a (...) as would
go nigh to (...) the (...) it self. Go your ways, say you, you uncivil (...),
inhu^ ane Divines, Dedoctors of morality, unasinous Colleagues, egregious pair
of Issachar, most wretch'd Vindices and Indices Academiarum.


Phi. I said all that; (...) they deserved it. And I am heartily sorry, Tim,
that I have it not about me, for thee too. For, thou art a most rude and
ungentile scribler, a most unmannerly, and scurrilous libeller, a most
ignorant, pragmatical, and malicious despiser of age, gravity, observation, and
every thing else that is becoming and venerable: a very Boy, Toy, flie-flap,
shittle-cock, nut-crack, that ought not to speak to one that has read a good
Book, or seen a wise man: the very sediment, fag-end, stump, and snuff of
mankind; that snears and blinks at stars of reason: and that shirk'd only into
humane race, to vex old men, and stum sober company: and therefore ^ do defy
thee, and abhor thee, and spit on thy face, and say, that that Liberty of
humane actions, which I do allow of, is true Liberty.


Tim. And spit, and rail till you be hoarse again, I do say that, according to
your principles, a Mustard-quern, or Wheel-barrow, has every whit as much
liberty, choice, etc. as the most uncontrollable Governor now upon earth.


Phi. Why so? don't I frequently say that man is a free Agent, that he
deliberates, chooses, consents, etc.


Tim. Yes, that you do forty times over.


Phi. How much freedom then would thou have? I grant that he ^ay do, whatever
he will; and I ^hink that is Forest big enough for any one Creature to range in.


Tim. But I pray, Sir, how far is that same will that he has, in his own power?


Phi. That now is as absurdly and ignorantly spoken, as ever was any thing
either b^ the Bishop or St. Austin: for, they hoth talk of having the will in
their own power, not at all considering, that the will is the very power it
self.


Tim That was very carelessly d^ne of them i^deed: for, as you say, the will
being the power, to talk of having power over the will, is all one as to have
power over power: whence will follow penetration of powers: and so we shall
have two Kings of Brenford current at the same time. And therefore being
convinced, Philautus, that I was in the wrong, I (...) only to know what is it,
that a man has the power to will?


Phi. Because that ^ow is tol^rable well, (if it be rightly taken) ^ do tell
thee, that he has power to will whatever he pleases, phansies, or has a mind
to: and I know not what thou can desire more, unless thou would have the
Calf with the white face.


Tim. But I pray, Sir, how comes he by that mind? does that mind come always
upon him necessarily; so that it was impossible for him not to have had that
mind: or does he himself choose that mind?


Phil. Choose that mind! what strange words you put together again: what, would
you have a man to choose his own choice, and to will his own will? it is worse
by half than lying with his own mother.


Tim. A great deal worse, Sir, for man is an excellent Creature; for man has a
liberty to do: and besides that, he has liberty to do whatever he will: (O
brave man!) and he can will whatever he has a mind to: but all on a sudden he
plomps, for he has a mind to nothing. And so, you know, it happened, Philantus,
in that famous case of the House that Jack built. For though it was always
granted that there was a man that killed the Cat, that eat the Mouse, that
lived in the House -- yet, at the upshot of the business, Jack always steps in,
and swops away all the credit.


Phi. All this ridiculous prattle is, because thou never had a just and true
notion of Liberty. For, Liberty, say I, is absence of all the impediments to
action that are not --


Tim. This now is specially good, and one of your old tricks. For you take a
man and stake him down upon the middle of New Market heath, and then give him a
definition of Liberty, and tell him that he may now run away faster, than if he
were loose; for now he runs upon necessity, but if he were loose, he could only
run away upon his Legs.


Phi. It Is impossible ever to stop a Fools mouth, that will not hear out a
definition.


Tim. I am resolved not to hear it, make your complaint where you will. For put
you a man into a Dungeon, as deep as you can th^ust him; and let me (...) ^ut
the ordering of a few words, and if I don't presently defi^e him steeple
height, I Will undertake to supply his place. And therefore, still say I, give me
my Wheel-barrow for a free Agent. For this can do whatever it will: and it can
will whatever it has a mind to; and it has a mind to whatever the man that
crowds behind has a mind to, who has a mind to whatever the Heavens and
Elements crowd upon him. So that, let the necessity be a thousand removes of,
yet for all that, certainly at last we fetch about to the House that Jack
built. And so we must do. For, as was said before concerning thoughts; that the
greatest variety imaginable can never arise to freedom of thinking; so neither
can the justling and crowding back of the immediate necessary causes ever
amount to Liberty of doing. For, let the plot lie as deep as the Center of the
earth, and let there be never so many turnings, and whirlings, and windings;
yet the case is ^xactly the same, as if all had been laid but just at
threshold-door. And therefore, why should we play the Children any longer, and
talk of willing, and choosing, and I know not what, and mean nothing thereby?


Phi. I tell thee, Tim, there is a kind of great business which I do mean by
that Liberty, which I count consistent with Necessity: but if thou resolvest
not to like it, then, say I, thou must even be content, to take up with
necessity all alone. Perhaps thou have got a new set of Vertuosoarguments, and
some double-bottomobjections against me; if thou have, produce, Child; and thou
shall see how I Will slice thee down.


Tim. What I have, Sir, I shall keep to my self: unless in your answers to
common reasons and experience, formerly alleged by others, you had discovered
somewhat besides querks, quibbles, and ignorance.


Phi. Now to see the Coxcombness of such a pragmatical fellow! for, though all
that I have written, have been performed wi^h strange kind of force and
p^cuity; yet never was any thing so clearly laid down, nor so solidly defended,
as I h^ve done the necessity of all events. For in the first place (as a (...)
foundation) I do assert, that the (...) such thing or cause of any thing, as
luck, ^nce, or fortune: but that they are all mere words, more or less made use
of, according to the degrees of men's ignorance or understanding. Now, Tim, away
to thy detecting office; and show me where the querk or quibble of this notion
lies.


Tim. There Is none at all in it, Sir: it is a huge, stout, well-grown truth: and
whereas you crowd it almost into every Book you have written, as if 'twere a
discovery of your own; 'twas so anciently and currantly believed, that one of
the very Poets could tell us above a thousand years ago -- Nos facimus fortuna
deam, etc. and besides it is nothing at all to the purpose: for though (making
use of a common phrase) I may say such a friend may chance to come to my House
to morrow; yet my being ignorant which of the two will come to pass, does not
at all hinder his own choosing, whether he will come or stay at home.


Phi. But that, Tim, namely, whether of himself he can choose to come or stay
at home, is the very controversy betwixt us; and against it I have two
familiar Cases to propound; one concerning the weather, the other concerning
dice: each of which will most effectually prove (if ever I proved any thing at
all) the necessity of all kind of events whatever, humane or not humane. And
therefore the first thing I would know of thee is this: whether it is necessary
that to morrow it shall rain, or not rain: what think thou?


Tim. I believe it is.


Phi. It Is! it is what?


Tim. It Is most absolutely and undoubtedly necessary that to morrow it shall
rain, or not rain.


Phi. But that is not my meaning, Tim: but, it being necessary that to morrow it
shall rain or not rain, that, which I would know, is whether this very one, or
that very one is absolutely necessary.


Tim. I care not much if (for a little while) I believe that also. For I always
love to believe, as much as ever my skin will hold.


Phi. Then farewell all contingencies and Freewill.


Tim. As for contingencies, let the Poet and the Bees look to them: but as for
my Freewill, I will not take ten groats for it yet. For the instance you give is no
trial at all of Freewill. For I believe 'twill necessarily rain, or necessarily
not rain to morrow (as that the sun will rise or not rise) because the weather
is not within a man's power; but falls out necessarily according to the course
of the World: not for your silly reason, because it is a true disjunctive
proposition: and therefore the whole being necessarily true, the parts or one
of them should be so too: for do but try it, Philautus, in any other
proposition, where the necessity of events may not be concerned (that there may
be no sculking advantage in the word necessity) and you shall see it is so
querkishly and ignorantly said, that a very fresh-man but of a months standing,
would have been ashamed to have been guilty of such a gross error. For
jnstance; Every number is odd or even, is a proposition so very good and
laudable, that the Pope himself has not a better in all his budget: that is, if
you serve it up all whole together: but take the same, and chop it into two
Messes, viz. Every number is odd, ev^ry number is even: and it makes two such
deadly rappers as would choke old Nick himself. So again, to say that every man
in the world is in London, or out of London, has no hurt at all in it. But pull
this in pieces, and it may so fall out, that there may be most deadly crowding
for the Wall.


Phi. But these cases, that you have put Tim, being general; you only mean that
some numbers are odd, and some even: and some men are in Town, and some are out.


Tim. And if you suppose in particular that to morrow my Lord Mayor goes abroad
or stays at home: you only mean that sometimes he is pleased to go abroad and
sometime he is pleased to stay at home. For though that same Omnis be a person
of wonderful dispatch and presence, yet 'twould make the greatest individual
Magistrates head in the world, to gigge again, to have so much business upon
his hand, as to be fore'd all the day long to be abroad at home.


Phi. I know he can be but in one place: but wherever that be, it is upon
necessity.


Tim. Why so?


Phi. Because every proposition is true or false.


Tim. That Is right: if therefore every proposition in the world were true, or
every proposition were false (which, Philautus, is your way of Computation)
then I grant you, that he must needs go, that the Devil drives. But because
there is Fieldroom enough, and that some propositions are true, and some false;
therefore I am resolved to enjoy my humor, and neither to go, nor drive,
unless I have a mind to it. For in short, Philautus, that same old famous story
of Socrates's necessarily disputing to morrow, or not, because every
proposition is now true or false, has no more in it but just this; that it is
true to day, that one of the two shall be true or come to pass to morrow; or
it is true or false to day, that this or that particularly shall be true or come
to pass to morrow: and sweat and shuffle as long as you will, you can never
advance that querk any higher. And therefore to make an end of this same story
of Socrates and the weather; seeing, Philautus, these same English men are most
of them a Company of clownish and disingenuous dunces; the Ecclesiastics
having no breeding, the Philosophers having not tasted of motion, and the
Mathematicians being much o'rerun with the scab of ignorance, pride, and
symbols; the best way will be to draw up your opinion concerning a disjunctive
proposition (you may do it in half a sheet) and send it beyond Sea: where (as
you very friendlily inform your self in your late lux Mathematica, etc.) you
are much read, understood, and admired: and if amongst all your acquaintance,
you can get so much but as one subscription to your Paper, by any body that
knows what belongs to Logic (to which you appeal in this very Case) then shall
it rain or not rain; and Socrates shall dispute or not dispute, whenever
Philautus pleases.


Phi. What do tell me of Logic? do think that I that began to reason, the
very first day I went into breeches, will be bound up to your paltry, pimping,
pedantick rules of Logic? don't I know that Logic is the Mother of all Lies,
and the Nurse of your damned, confounded Metaphysical jargons?


Tim. Now do I shortly expect a Book contra Fastum Dialecticorum: now am I
confident that Logic will be the Devil and all, as Mathematics was, after the
Doctor had bafl'd, and confuted you.


Phi. I bafl'd, I confuted? I never was, nor will be, as long as I live.


Tim. No, no, Sir: you shall not be confuted: it does not at all become one of
your age to be confuted: it is uncivil, Sir, it is not done at all like a
Gentleman to confute you: You shall have a protection from his Majesty not to
be confuted.


Phi. You lie in your very throat. I never went about any such thing.


Tim. Perhaps so: but however having now done with the business of the weather;
let us now if you please, Sir, have one throw at Liberty and Necessity; that we
may see, whether the Dice will run on my side, or yours.


Phi. Done: I would know then, suppose, I take a die, and throwing it upon the
Table, there comes up such or such a cast: whether there was not an absolute
necessity of that particular cast.


Tim. Most absolute.


Phi. Then have you perfectly gam'd away your Freewill.


Tim. Yes: just as much as it was rained away before. For supposing (as you do)
that a die have (as they call them) so many chances, and such a chance to lie
uppermost when it is thrown, and to be thrown with such or such a force, and
upon a table of such or such a smoothness, then say I there will as necessarily
come forth such or such a cast, as if there had been never another cast upon
the die but that which came forth.


Phi. Then there is necessity enough.


Tim. Enough: but nothing to your purpose.


Phi. That Is strange.


Tim. Not at all: because all the several circumstances required to such a
cast, notwithstanding all that you have supposed, are wholly still in my own
power; that is, I may choose which side I Will lay foremost, upon what I Will make
the throw, and if need be I can have a spring with so many notches, that shall
let go the die, and give it as many turns, as I please.


Phi. You choose! you please! it is a very hard matter, I see, to beat people out
of the common track of nonsense. And therefore though there is nothing more
seemingly casual, or more proper to be insisted on, than the weather and dice;
yet, because to give particular instances would be endless, I shall rather
choose to put all out of doubt, and settle the whole business by one general
argument.


Tim. That will be well indeed. For I love at my very heart those same general
arguments; because they pretend to kill the old one in the Nest. How is it I
pray, Sir?


Phi. It Is thus: there is, say I, a necessity or necessary cause of all events;
because every event has a sufficient cause. For an event is that which is come
to pass: and nothing can come to pass unless somewhat produce it: and produced
it cannot be, but by that which is able or sufficient to produce it: that is to
say, but by the meeting together of all that is necessary to produce it.


Tim. And what then?


Phi. Then every thing that is produced, is necessarily produced.


Tim. Why so?


Phi. Because all is met together that was necessary.


Tim. Therefore they necessarily met together: did they? O your Servant, Sir!
because Fire, Water, and Oatmeal are requisite (that is all the meaning of
necessary here) for the making of Water-gruell: therefore I must of necessity
fall upon the operation at four of the Clock; and it is impossible for me to
forbear, or employ my self otherwise at that time.


Phi. So it is impossible.


Tim. To do what: to stab and kill a man, and then to unstab and unkill him
again? that is all, Philautus: for seeing in our Country there is no halfing or
quartering of effects: therefore (say you) all effects are necessary: that is,
you suppose the thing done, or (which is all one) to be in such circumstances,
that it is impossible but that it should be done; and then you conclude 'twas
necessary that it should be done. Whereas the question is not whether when any
thing is produced, such and such things are necessarily required to its
production; but whether it be now necessary, that all those necessaries or
requisites shall certainly club together at such a time to produce it.


Phi. I say they must, and that upon the account of sufficient causes.


Tim. And, I say, they need not, and that upon the account of the Westwind: and
I am sure tha^ my account is as good as yours: for I am for sufficient causes
as much as you.


Phi. What, and hold freewill?


Tim. O most easily, Sir: for ofttimes the will alone is the sufficient cause.


Phi. Of what! of the will!


Tim No, that is Jargon: but of the action.


Phi. But, I enquire, what is the cause of the will.


Tim. So you may, but in many instances I can tell none.


Phi. I prithee, let me hear one of those instances; and thou shall see, if I
don't presently Ferret out a sufficient cause.


Tim. Suppose then there be laid before you, three Apples: I would know,
whether you can pick one of them.


Phi. Yes surely: what hinders?


Tim. You can as soon pick a Star out of the Firmament: for these Apples shall
be exactly of the same size, the same complexion, and the same distance from
the eye; and thereupon they shall strike and tempt all alike: so that, unless
you will allow the will it self to cast in the last feather, and to determine the
scales, you can only platonically admire, for there is no falling to, as the
case stands.


Phi. But you don't consider, Tim, how the World being in a constant toss and
hurry; there is chopping and changing every moment: so that one or other of your
sufficient causes over-topping the rest, will strike you as dead --


Tim. Theresore I Will have my three equally sufficient apples to be nailed fast
down; and there shall be a very stout supporter for the chin, that the head may
no ways wag; and the eyes shall be so spoken to, that they shall not dare to
roll in the least.


Phi. But may there not be for all this, that which they call, I know not what,
which getting in at a corner of the eye, may give a private stab, and so
determine the choice?


Tim. There may so: sor perhaps one of the Apples may have some pretty mole or
dimple, or some such wounding feature or other. And therefore I think we had
best take three pease, or three grains of Mustard seed. Surely there cannot be
any great difference of Cupids in such a case. Or if we ben't yet armourproof;
what think you, Philautu^, of even or odd? there is, you know, just as many of
the one as the other: and as for the words themselves they seem to smirk and flame
and charm much at one. And yet it is very evident from History, that there has
been many a shilling won and lost at that game: which, according to you, is
utterly impossible; and as mere a tale as Religion.


Phi. How so?


Tim. Because no body could ever play at it. For if the mind never determines
it self, but is always (as you would have it) necessarily overborn by hopes and
fears: the hopes and fears of even and odd being for ever equal, if at any time
even (suppose) puts in for a man's will, presently in steps odd, and looks you
full of the face, with its why not I as well? so that the alternate appetite (as
you call it) being perpetual, a man's mind can never possibly be seized on, but
must go titter totter, swing swang, to the Worlds end.


Phi. Don't you trouble your self about that, Tim: for it is very plain that a
man may choose one number before another; but, still say I, the reason is not
merely because he will choose it (for that is nonsense) but because by choosing
it, he hopes --


Tim. Hopes! to do what?


Phi. To win.


Tim. I tell you, he shall not hope any such thing.


Phi. Why, Tim, must a man ask you leave to hope?


Tim. I don't stand much upon it, Sir: but you will not let him hope: for, in the
ninth Chapter of your Humane nature, you put in this imbargo upon hope: viz.
that it does then only take place, when the causes that make us expect the
thing hoped for, are greater than those that make us expect the contrary. Now
he that, in the business of even or odd, can spy out such bouncing causes on
one side, more than the other, shall presently quit the Chanel, and be permitted
to hope.


Phi. But may there not be many other sufficient causes besides hope, fe^r, and
such like passions, that may possibly move and determine the will?


Tim. Questionless there may be several: for suppose, the gamester chops at
even: one sufficient cause of that choice may be, that, by so doing, it is an
even case but that he wins: and certainly he is a very foul Gamester that
desires any more than to win. In the next place, it is to be considered, that
possibly the Gentlem^n that so chooses, may be of a smooth and even temper: and
what influence bodily temper (for there is no other) has upon all humane
affairs, whether by Sea or by La^d, I need not explain. Besides, it must not be
omitted, that the choice which is propounded is not odd or even, but even or
odd: so that even getting the start of odd, claps in physically upon the
fancy, before odd can possibly get up. To all which (if need were) may be
further added, that perhaps the Gentleman Elector by some means or other may
have been prejudiced against odd: either by having an odd Father, an odd
Mother, or an odd kind of Wife; and many such an odd thing may have happened,
that may have quite disoblidg'd him, and indisposed him to odd. And as there
may be many other sufficient causes that may thus jog and incline the will to
even: so without doubt one that married but a small relation of Tullies, for a
very little fee, could do as much for odd.


Phi. But why do we spend so much time about such trifles and inconsiderable
things as these: whereas, we are inquiring what it is that directs a man in the
grand affairs of his life.


Tim. As much trifles and inconsiderable as they seem to be, give me leave to
tell you, Philautus, that these same trifles and inconsiderables do utterly
destroy not only all your Doctrine of Necessity, but all that nothing that you
have said against immaterial substances. For, if any one man since the world
began, has but lifted up his finger merely because he would do so: that is to
say, when all outward causes and considerations did equally solicit him to
move it downwards, (were there no other) it is a demonstration to me, that there
is somewhat in the world besides matter; and that man is of that kind.


Phi. I prithee don't tear me a pieces now, with those contradictions of
immaterial substances: but let me advise thee not to be cheated with such
phrases, as thou did just now mention. viz. because he would do so, forsooth:
for we oft-times hear people say, they will do such a thing; I, that they will:
as if the will were the only determining cause: whereas there is abominable
Pride, Vainglory, and perverseness in that expression. For example, you tell a
man, suppose, that he shall not fling his Hat into the fire; no that he shall not.
Say you so, says he? I Will see you hanged, before I Will be nosed by such a
scoundrel, and with that slap goes the Hat into the middle of the fire.


Tim. And truly he is right enough served, that gives a Gentleman such saucy
language. But what shall we think of him, Philautus, who, without any such
provocation at all, upon the twenty third of April takes his silk-doublet, and
cutting it into thirty nine pieces, steeps it in Rhenish Wine till the first of
September; and then seals it up in a Tamarisk-box, with this superscription;
Ego and tu sumus in tuto: and lays it under his pillow the night before Full
Moon.


Phi. For my part, I keep to my old opinion: that every thing has a beginning:
and that nothing can come to pass alone.


Tim. Most certainly nothing can: and therefore, doubtless the sufficient cause
of this whole business lie couched in the Rule of three. For, as the twenty
third of April is to a silk Doublet cut into thirty nine pieces: so are those
thirty nine pieces steeped in Rhenish Wine till the first of September, to the
Tamarisk Box, with the foresaid superscription, laid under the pillow the night
before Full Moon.


Phi. I must confess, that the necessary and sufficient cause of some actions,
(especially of those which are called indifferent) lie oft-times very deep: but
of all actions, I am from hence sure, there is always one at the bottom; because
in all common actions, and concerns of life, it lies so very plain.


Tim. I grant you that the probability of many events lies very plain: but not
the necessity of any one, that I know of. That is to say in other words, that
man being a rational Creature, for the most part is pleased (not constrained)
to do that which is most reasonable: so if a Merchant, suppose, is promised an
old debt of five thousand pounds, for crossing the street: it is highly
probable, that such news as this, will make the spirits to sally a little
toward the Legs. But what if he stays at home only to suck his middle finger?


Phi. The cunning of that may be, Tim, to make such Fools as thee believe, that
man has dominion over his actions. But there is no such thing at all: for he
stays at home only to cross and contradict those that deny Freewill. That is in
short, he loves and prefers his opinion (than which nothing you know is dearer)
before five thousand pounds.


Tim. But how came he, Sir, to dote so much upon his middle finger: does the
Doctrine of Freewill make the middle finger grow fatter than all the rest?


Phi. That need not be: for, in it self you know, it is the longest and most
sufficient.


Tim. And so, in good truth, must the little one have been; if he had spent his
Meditations upon that. Again, Philautus, suppose a man be caught in a good
lusty rain: there is such probability of some events, that I count it more than
two to one, that he will choose to borrow a Cloak, rather than a Curry-comb or
shooinghorn.


Phi. If he does ask for any such thing; a very sufficient cause of that may
be, to make people laugh.


Tim. Indeed he cannot help it, if they do laugh: but he may do it, merely
because he will do it.


Phi. But I have told you over and over that that is utterly impossible.


Tim. And I can say it as often, that it is not. Seeing, by many instances above
given, it is plain that a man may and does often determine himself, where all
imaginable grounds of necessity are equally poys'd: I count that I may safely
conclude that, whenever he pleases, he may make use of the same power in all
other cases whatever. For the same principle which impowers a man for to do any
one thing upon no extrinsecal account at all; impowers him to sorbear the doing
of any other thing whatever, though he has a thousand reasons to do it. Against
all which, you have no other sense, but only to pop in that lamentable engine
of your sufficient cause. The sum of which is only this, that whatever is
already done, cannot be undone: and whatever is not yet done, is not done as yet.


Phi. That great notion of a sufficient cause (whereby I absolutely demonstrate
the necessity of all events) which you so saucily disdain, has stunned all the
great Divines and Philosophers of Europe. Whereas all those inconveniences and
absurdities which they charge upon my Doctrine, of themselves vanish in a
moment; they being chiefly grounded (as most errors are) upon nothing else but
want of understanding of the true signification of words. It would be very
tedious, Tim, to repeat many of their objections, they are so intolerably
silly: and therefore I shall only give you a very short specimen of their
folly. In the first place they will tell you, that if there be a necessity of all
humane actions, to what purpose do we praise and commend one action; and blame
and discommend another. Ignorant Souls! that should not understand, that to
praise or commend a thing, is only to say a thing is good: good I say for me,
or for some body else, or for the State and Commonwealth. And in like manner to
blame and discommend a thing, is no more than to say that it is bad and
inconvenient. For instance, what more common, Tim, than for people, in cold
weather, to say there is a very good fire: an excellent good fire: a special
good fire: a most stately Princely fire (words big enough for the greatest
exploits of the mightiest Hero) and yet, I suppose, very few think that the
fire burns out of choice and discretion: and that it lies listening and gaping
for commendations, and burns accordingly. On the contrary, what is it we mean
when we express our dislike and disgust? Be true now, and tell me, Tim; is
there any thing more frequent than to say, that such an Horse is blind or
foundered: that he starts, halts, or stumbles: that he is a very Jade: a rotten,
molten, confounded Jade; (words that do most passionately express blame and
displeasure) and yet again we don't suppose that the Horse ever requested the
Blacksmith to drive a nail up to the hilts into his foot: or desired the Groom
to thrust out one of his Eyes with the Pitch-fork, or to ride him so hard, as
to melt or founder him? and therefore, in the forty first page of my
Animadversions, I tell thee (had thou the wit to observe it) that, whereas
people make such a great bustle about their sins; and are oft-times vexed and
cannot sleep in their beds for their sins; sin is nothing else but halting or
stumbling in the ways of Gods Commandments.


Tim. And do you think that this is all that is meant by peoples breaking Gods
Commandments; that one is stabbed with the Pitchfork of stupidity and ignorance;
and another pricked and lamed by the Blacksmith of sensuality and drunkenness:
so that there must needs be great halting and stumbling among them?


Phi. What, Tim, do you make sport and a mock of such a serious thing as sin?


Tim. It Is you and such as you, Philautus (whose very opinions make a mock of
sin) that are the sportmakers: not those, who out of a sincere design to
undeceive the World, are forced sometimes to condescend to very mean, and
almost unpardonable expressions.


Phi. I don't cheat or deceive any body: for it is plain from common Custom, and
the consent of the best Authors, that praise and dispraise do equally belong to
those things, that are never so far from all pretenses of Freewill, as well as
to men.


Tim. But then, Philautus, I would have people a little careful how, and upon
what, they bestow their commendations and reproofs. For though sometimes indeed
they turn to very good account; yet at other times they have their
inconveniences. He therefore that overnight commended a diamond at such a
rate, that by Morning it was grown from a Cherrystone to a Pippin, (besides a
little young diamond it had foled, running by its side) must be granted to have
spent his breath, and praises with very good discretion and profit. Neither was
the famous Miller of little Hingham much out of the way: who, when the wind did
not blow to his mind, would so frown, and chide, and rattle over his Mill, that
one would wonder to see, how pouring the meal came down, upon the reproof. But,
for all that, I shall always pity poor Sir Frederick.


Phi. For what I prithee?


Tim. Why, Sir, he having in Christmas time (as most Gentlemen use to have)
one of those same stately and Princely fires beforementioned: the neighbors
that sat about it, fell into such lavish praises, and extravagant admiration of
the fire, that it grew so conceited, as to burn down the House. Therefore, if
it must be so, that to praise or dispraise a thing is only to say that it is
good or bad: yet however let people hence learn, that good words, as well as
bad, are to be used with discretion. But truly, Philautus, (to deal plainly
with you) as plausible as the conceit seems to be, for my part, I much suspect
whether it be true. For though we may praise a stone, tree or Horse, a man's
foot or forehead, with the very same words and phrases, and in as good a style
as the best of humane actions: yet I cannot but think that those commendations
which are usually bestowed upon that account, which we call desert, to be not
only much larger, but quite of another kind from those which we give upon all
other occasions whatever. And though I don't at all doubt, but that such an one
as Pliny, could have done very much upon the considerable legs and renowned
cod-piece of Henry the Eighth; yet I am confident, he would have done much
better upon the peaceable and pious reign of Q. Elizabeth. But to make an end
of this, Philautus, we do often indeed commend the sun for shining, and the
Heavens for affording rain, and the like: but, at our end of the Town, (what
you do I know not) we think hereby we praise God himself; who not out of his
necessary, but free pleasure at first created, and still disposes of all these
things: and has made man like himself. So that still nothing is praised merely
because it is good or beneficial, but because it was contrived and brought about
by that which need not have done it.


Phi. But don't you hear people very ordinarily blame and find fault with bad
winds and bad weather, as well as commend good: and complain of many things
that could not be helped?


Tim. Yes: and I don't much wonder at it: for, such Fools as those, shall curse
and bid the Devil take them ten thousand times over, for such things, as they
could have helped: and that is their gentile way of repentance. And therefore
let us have no more concerning praise and dispraise; but let us see if they
have any thing else to say against you.


Phi. They have nothing at all to say: but they think they have got somewhat by
the end; when they tell you, that if there be a necessity of all humane
actions; then many laws would be unjust, because the breach of them could not
be avoided.


Tim. This sounds, Philautus, as if it had somewhat in it.


Phi. That it does: and that is all. For whereas they talk of an unjust law,
they had as good talk of a piece of iron burning cold. For, every Law is either
divine or humane. As for divine Laws, the irresistible power of God alone
justifies all them.


Tim. Truly such a famous Broker for power (as you are known to be) may easily
make that out. For, having in your Animadversions, turned all the Attributes of
God (as you use to do all things else) into power; making divine goodness,
divine mercy, and divine justice to be nothing but power: you might securely
say that divine power alone justifies all actions. That is, divine power alone
together with all the rest, especially divine justice, justifies all actions.
And now, I pray, a little concerning humane Laws.


Phi. Concerning them I do say also, that it is impossible that any one of them
should be unjust. For, a humane Law is that which every subject has given his
consent to: namely, by giving up his will to the will of the supreme: and no
man can be unjust to himself. And therefore a Prince cannot put upon his
subjects any unjust Law.


Tim. Suppose, he should put out a Law, that all that are born blind, shall
have their fingers and toes cut off. There Is abundance of power in this same
Law: but, in my mind, very little justice.


Phi. Why, all the fingers and toes of the Nation are the supremes. And you
have given up your consent as well to his pleasure, as his power.


Tim. Never in my life to such pleasure as this.


Phi. You have given your consent to all things, that he should do, be they
what they will.


Tim. No but I have not. For if he has a mind to go a finger* hawking, or so; I
desire to stay at home, and keep the Hogs out of the Pease. Because, long
before I had bargained with him, I had preingaged my self to the Law of nature
and reason (to which he, for all his greatness, is as much a subject as ^)
never to use, or give my consent to such inhumane recreations. But, if I
mistake not, Philautus, you and I had some little talk about these matters,
when we met last at the Isle of Pines. And therefore be pleased to consider a
little those same punishments that are inflicted upon men, for what they could
not avoid. It seems a little severe, Philautus, to hang a man for stealing,
suppose; when as he could not possibly help it: and to damn him for not
repenting, when he could, as little help that also.


Phi. As for damnation (if you mean your eternal damnation) I shall tell you a
fine story about that by and by --


Tim. A fine one indeed!


Phi. But, as for peoples being punished for what they could not avoid; the
case, in short, stands thus: viz. When we say that such a one could not avoid
the breaking of such a Law, we mean no more by it, but that he had a necessary
will to break it. Now this same nec^ssary will contains two parts, Necessity
and Will: (be sure that you attend well, for it clears all) now therefore say
I, when any man is punished for willing or doing of that which he could not
avoid, he is not punished for the necessity, or because he could not avoid it
--


Tim. I hope not: (for if he were, all the Dogs of the Town ought to be set
upon the Executioner.)


Phi. But he is punished for doing it, or willing it.


Tim. What Is that, because he could avoid it?


Phi. No, no: but because he consented, and had a mind to*t.


Tim. He consented! he had a mind to it! he scorns your words, Phila^tus; for
he, nor any man else (according to you) had ever of themselves a mind to any
thing in this whole World. But those same necessary second causes oft-times
flock about me, suppose, and have a mind to me: and when they take me only by
the elbow, and clownishly drag me to the Jail, then am I said (because Liberty
the same time pulls homeward) to go against my mind, and against my consent:
but, when they take me gentilely by the brain and spirits (which have always
the whole body at their beck) and slily push me on to steal, or the like, then,
forsooth, a^ ^ s^id to consent. Whereas I can as lit^ avoid ^his consenting, as
going to (...) ^ail. Only, here is all the differenc^, that ^e considerations of
(...) ^ecessarily affect the brain, b^ing ^ot ^uch visible and big things a^
the Constables with their staves: therefore they say that I consented, and
'twas of my doing.


Phi. So 'twas of your doing. For in stealing, don't you put forth your hand,
and take somewhat against Law?


Tim. That Is a good one indeed! I walk suppose to the Window; and there lies a
Gold-watch: and this gives me a deadly flap over the face. I being of a
sanguine complexion, and not used to pass by such affronts; I give it as good
as it sent, and flap that over the face again: but at last it does so dazzle me,
and puts me so out of all countenance; that I cannot endure it in my sight any
longer: and so, according to the laws of motion, it goes mechanically into my
Pocket. And then poor Pill-Garlick must go to Pot; for having eyes, hands, and
a pocket: whereas I Will be sworn, I no more conspired, nor consented (...) this,
than a Mouse-trap does to the catching of a Mouse. For, though I look and leer,
as if I intended somewhat, and as if I took aim: but they are those same
pernicious second causes that do all: they charge, and propound; and tickle and
pull down the little Cartesian tricker, and then bounce go I off at the Watch.


Phi. As apt an instance, Tim, as thou think this to be for thy purpose;
thou could not have given one more for my advantage. For killing of Mice and
such like Vermin is good for the Commonwealth: but, as for stealing, it is a
thing that does hurt: it is noxious, Tim; as I have at large taught in my
Liberty and Necessity. And therefore though every action of a man's life be
equally unavoidable; yet those only are punishable that are found to be noxious.


Tim. Only those, Sir: and therefore, though a Knife cuts and slashes a stick,
or a piece of meat never so sorely; yet the Knife is not blamed and chastis'd
for this; because it is not noxious. But if it chances to get never so little
way into a Child's finger, it is then presently chidden and condemned; and
sometimes flung away with such displeasure, that for a week after it is ready to
turn tail, at sight of a Pint of Butter; and you can scarce get it to come
within a yard of a Pudding.


Phi. But this is only to cheat Children, and make them leave crying.


Tim. And to hang a man that has been past crying forty years, is every whit
as great a cheat: for he could not avoid stealing, any more than the Knife
could avoid cutting.


Phi. I know that. But the end of punishment is to fright and deterr: and to
frame, and make the will to justice.


Tim. I believe that if I be once hanged for stealing, my mind will be
strangely framed, and made against stealing any more.


Phi. But though your^ cannot; yet other men's minds may receive advantage and
instruction hereby.


Tim. I thank you for that indeed. I shall be hanged for nothing at all, only
to do my Neig^bour a kindness. I don't at all like (without any fault of my
own) to be made a mere memorandum for the County, and a framer of other men's
minds.


Phi. But you cannot but say, that the punishment of on^ man is a very proper
means to keep others in awe.


Tim. Who was ever so silly as to say otherwise? But here is the case: which is
most reasonable, to punish a man for doing of that which is noxious, and which
he could have avoided, that hereby others may be affrighted: or to hang him up
as a Crow upon a Pear Tree, for no other reason at all but only to affright
others.


Phi. I take them to be much alike.


Tim. Hugely alike indeed! for if the first be true, every man's sin and ruin
lies at his own door: but if the last, I see no ways to avoid it --


Phi. To avoid what?


Tim. But that God must be the Author o^ all sin.


Phi. The Author of all sin! whoever that Divine be (for this is an old
Black-Coat objection) that talks of God being the Author of sin is not fit to
go Chaplain to a Mackerel-Boat. For the word Author, Tim, is a latin word; and
to be the Author of any thing is to give it authority and credit: that is, to
command it, warrant it, and own it: now I suppose, Tim, that you cannot find
any where in Scripture, that God did ever command sin, or issued out any
Warrants or Certificates for sin to be committed.


Tim. 'Twere strange if one should. But yet if your opinion of necessity be
true, one may find out that which is full out as strange, if not stranger.


Phi. What Is that I prithee?


Tim. Whereas God has given plain Commandments against sin, and manifested his
great displeasure at it: notwithstanding this he has so far authorized or owned
it as (according to you) to be the contriver, and finisher too, of all the sins
that ever were committed in the World.


Phi. I do grant, and don't look upon it to be any blasphem^ to say, that God
has so ordered the World that sin may necessarily be committed.


Tim. Then I pray is not sin of his ordering?


Phi. Not at all: ^or to order sin is to put out an order to have sin committed.


Tim. And what is it to order the World so, that sin may necessarily be
committed.


Phi. It Is to put things of this World so and so together, that people will
necessarily fall into such and such sins*


Tim. Now I count these to be much the same. For, suppose, I give order to my
man, first by word of mouth, and afterward under hand and seal, to charge the
Musket, and to shoot such a Neighbor as he goes to morrow to Market. Every
body, I know, will grant, that I have taken very sufficient order about this
man's Death. But, suppose I do not dispatch him thus exactly, according to the
Roman use o^ the word: but, I knowing that this day twelvemonths, he will
certainly ride to such a friends House, and certainly go through such a G^te;
and I put things so and so together, that he shall choose to go so much out of
^he road, as to fall into a Pit and b^eak his neck: for my part, I should
reckon, that in so doing, I did as it were order his tumbling into the pit; and
that I was a kind of an Author of his destruction, notwithstanding Author is a
Latin word, and that he himself choose to go out of the way, seeing that I had
laid a trap for that choice.


Phi. I suppose you are not so much a Heathen, Tim, as to imagine God should go
about to decoy men into sin, and to set snares for their destruction.


Tim. I am so far from that, that I had much rather believe that there is no God
at all, and no sin at all; but those of your opinion must believe so: for, if
God makes man of such or such a consti^ution, and puts him into such and such
circumstances, that every action he does (be it good or bad) it was as
impossible for him to have avoided it; as it is for fire to avoid burning: I
know in what sense it is that he has made fire to burn; and I dread to think
that in the same he should make any man to ^in.


Phi. What a havock's here about a little sin? when you have it so plainly in
your Divinity Book, how that God hated Esau, and hardened Pharaohs heart: how
that he commanded Abraham to murder his only Son Isaac, and gave Commission to
the Israelites to cheat and rob the Egyptians: and how besides all this God
himself says by the Prophet Amos, non est malum in Civitate quod ego non feci?


Tim. 'Twas well done indeed to put the last in Latin. For some body or other
perhaps might be so silly as to think that malum did signify sin: whereas, in
that place, it means nothing at all, but only those great judgments and
afflictions, which God denounces against the people of Israel, for their
oppression, Idolatry, and such like impieties. And you might as well have
produced Gods raining Fire and Brimstone upon wicked Sodom and Gomorrah, to
have lessened the impiety of your opinion of sin, as that place of the Prophet.


Phi. Say you so? What think you then of the Israelites robbing the Egyptians,
according to Gods own direction and warrant? was that, Tim, a mere affliction
too?


Tim. Truly I take it to be so; seeing that God himself tells Moses, that the
last Plague that he intended to bring upon the Egyptians for their oppressing
his people, should be to spoil them of their Jewels. And, as for Gods making
use of the Israelites in this affair, that was all one, as if he had given
Commission to a Whirlwind, Fire, or Angels to have done the same, and to have
been Executioners of his just displeasure.


Phi. Surely we shall have all the Bible turned into Judgments and Afflictions.
Must Gods hardening of Pharaohs heart come of thus also?


Tim. Just thus, Sir. For it is plain that God did not harden Pharaoh's heart,
till he had hardened his own heart six times after so many judgments: and then
God is said to have hardened his heart; that is, he choose rather to raise him
up, or keep him alive, and to inflict upon him that punishment of hardness of
heart, whereby the divine power by miracles might still be more manifested,
than to destroy him by the Pestilence.


Phi. But before ever Pharaoh hardened his own heart, so much as once; God was
resolved to do it; and said ( Exodus 4. 21.) I will harden his heart, that he
shall not let the people go.


Tim. And you may as well remember, that in the Chapter before ( Exodus 3. 19.)
the same God said also, he was sure that he would not let them go: that is,
that he would harden his own heart.


Phi. But I would know, what it was that God did to Pharaoh's heart, when he
hardened it. That expression, methinks, sounds as if it had something of
positivity in it (as the Jargonists speak) and seems to make God every whit as
much concerned in sin, as my opinion of necessity.


Tim. What did he do, say you? he did the same that the Scripture tells you he
did to the Jews: who, when they had several miracles do^e amongst them, and
would not see, and would not understand: God inflicted this just Judgment upon
them that they should not see and should not understand. In my opinion, it is
very reasonable; and there is nothing at all i^'t tending toward the Author of
sin.


Phi. But it is strange if this way of judgments and aff^ictions does for Esau
too: for, before he was born, he was hated of God.


Tim And so were all the Women in the World hated, in respect of the Virgin
Mary; she being the only blessed among Women, and preferred to be the Mother of
our Lord Jesus. For as 'twas impossible that Christ should be born bu^ of one
Woman: so likewise was it as impossible that he should be descended but of one
Man. And though God promised to bless Abraham and his seed after a most special
manner, yet he never promised to do the like to the elder House or line.


Phi. But what say you to Gods commanding Abraham to kill his own Son? you
cannot surely call that, merely not preferring.


Tim. You know well enough that it was the contrary that he commanded: for he
said* lay not thine h^nd upon the lad. It Is said indeed that Abraham was
tempted and tried by God: and that accordingly he obeyed, and made all things
ready to do it.


Phi. But the Author to the Hebrews tells you, that he did offer him up: for
doubtless Abraham did believe, that God did really intend that he should kill
him; and that it was not at all unjust.


Tim. And well he might: not doubting, I suppose, but that God might as well
choose by Sacrifice, or what other means he pleased, to take away any innocent
man's life, as by a Fever or any other sickness. So that we hear nothing as yet
of the Author of sin, nor any thing toward Gods being at all concerned in sin,
after any such manner, as most inevitably follows from your opinion.


Phi. Therefore I have saved the great business for the last: viz. the eternal
decrees and prescience of God Almighty. I suppose it will take you some time to
explain them, and to reconcile them to your Freewill.


Tim. They are done the easiest of any thing you have yet mentioned.


Phi. How so, I prithee?


Tim. How so? I don't believe any such thing at all: that is my way, Sir. --


Phi. What, no decrees? no prescience? a most solid Divine without doubt!


Tim. Nay hold, Sir: it is only when I meet with one that has such a God as
yours: for I believe always according to my Company: and when I meet with one
that has nothing else for his God but omnipotent thin matter, it is very idle in
my opinion, to talk about his foreknowing or determining beforehand what shall
come to pass in this World. For the World may as well foreknow what God shall
do, as God can what shall be done in the World: they both running into one
another and so proving to be exactly the same.


Phi. But to say that God is the World is a most horrid opinion: and therefore
in my Leviathan I utterly reject it, as very unworthy to be spoken of God.


Tim. Then you must reject your omnipotent matter also. For if God be nothing
else but matter; and this matter be in every particle of the World or Universe,
that is (to speak according to your self) of all that is; either we have no God
at all, or they are all one which you please.


Phi. But the thinness, Tim! and the omnipotency.


Tim. Never talk to me of thinness, for thinness takes up as much room, as
thickness. And Omnipotency it self can never take away that incurable nuisance
that belongs to matter, viz. of one justling out another.


Phi. But you make nothing to jumble man's body and soul together, and never
think then of any such clashing or enterfeiring.


Tim. Therefore it is you that have helped us to answer that difficulty: for the
body of man being only flesh and bones, and the soul blood and spirits; their
quarters (setting aside some few straglers) are even as different as the
Oat-tub is from the Hay-Chamber.


Phi. But stay a little, Tim; you are, I perceive, very severe in demanding how
that if God be merely matter, the World and God should both stand together: now
suppose I should grant the soul of man to be quite different from his body
(which is a thing much too ridiculous to be so much as supposed) I pray, cannot
I, (seeing you are so very curious in your enquiring) enquire also, how
contradictions can dwell together: that is, how matter and no matter can be
joined, and move one another? do you think it would not take much more time to
remove and conquer such an absurdity as this, than any thing that is to be
inferred from my opinion?


Tim. Nothing nigh so much, Sir: for though we cannot punctually tell you, by
what Chains and Fetters, matter and no matter (or spirit) are fastened
together; yet by our senses we are so exactly acquainted with the lodgings,
haunts, and all the powers of the former, and do so very well know that the
most subtle and most refined of all must be subject to the common encumbrances,
as evidently to perceive, that matter alone can never do the business.


Phi. Why so?


Tim. Because we don't only find several things very difficult to explain,
should there be nothing else; but somethings there be (especially two) which
ever to explain is utterly impossible. And from the utter impossibility of
their ever being explained, we have abundance of reason to believe that there
is somewhat else: the name of which we agree upon to be a spirit.


Phi. And I prithee, Tim, may not I know what those two things be, which thou
do prophecy will never be explained?


Tim. I have told you them already, Philautus. The one is, that God and the
World are the very same; of which I desire no more may be now said. The other
is, that a man cannot choose of himself to stroke his beard, when it would oblige
the Company every whit as much, if he cockt his Hat.


Phi. What a mighty business is that? to stroke a man's beard!


Tim. It Is such a trick, Philautus, which neither Prince Rupert's famous Dog,
that eat up the Parliaments Ammunition, nor Banks's ingenious Horse could ever
arrive to; as was before briefly hinted, in what was said about train of
thoughts. And though it be not needful now to enquire how far further; yet most
certainly in this Man differs from all other Creatures whatever.


Phi. In this! in what I prithee?


Tim. In Freewill, Sir.


Phi. I see not the least difference for my part. For, don't Horses, Dogs, and
other bruit Beasts demur oft-times upon the way they are to take, the Horse
retiring from some strange figure that he sees, and coming on again to avoid
the spur. And what is it I pray more that a man does when he deliberates: but
one while he proceeds toward action, another while retires from it, as the hope
of greater good draws him, or the fear of greater evil drives him away. This I
take to be the utmost that man can do.


Tim. This is nothing, Sir: for a Dog can do much more than this: for you may
instruct him at the naming of the word States, to bark and rouse as if (without
the King of France) he would pull 'em all down: and at the word King, to cringe
and be as submissive as a Dutchman in the days of Queen Elizabeth. But now
comes the trick, Sir: I would have this same Dog two or three times in a week
(not out of any Pique to Monarchy, or favor to Commonwealths, but only out of
pure innocent mirth and phansy) be a little cross and humoursom; and swagger
when he should sneak, and sneak when he should swagger. This is the Dog that I
would have put into Doublet and Breeches too: and to be kept in the Tower for a
precedent of Freewill. But, O the sufficient cause!


Phi. That Is out of pure madness now: because you know well enough, that it
utterly routs all that you can say either for Freewill, or immaterial
substances. And therefore, seeing you make such a noise with your absurdities
(or as you call them impossibilities) that you draw upon my opinion; the best
way, Tim, will be to go to the poll: and then you shall see that, whereas you
can find but two things impossible to be explained, should there be nothing in
the World besides matter: I have no less than four or five impossibilities (and
all swingers too) to stake down against there being any thing else.


Tim. Yes, I do, in part, remember what kind of impossibilities they are. In a
sunshine day, you get into the Balcone in Queen Street, and there you cry
Matter, Matter, nothing but Matter. And, when the people come to see what is to
do, you have nothing to tell them, but only, Truly Gentlemen you look like
persons of parts: and it is great pity that such as you are should be abused and
spoiled for want of the knowledge of motion. Therefore might I advise you I
would have you well acquainted with what I have written concerning motion (of
which no body has done any thing but my self,) and with the nature and
properties of matter: for there is no such thing at all as an immaterial
substance: never stand to consider of it, for I am sure there is not: verily
there is not: Faith and troth there is no such thing: upon the word of a
Gentleman, a Mathematician, and a Traveller, there is no more immaterial
substance either in England, France, or any other Country whatever, than there
is to be seen upon the back of my hand. It Is all a mere cheat, and a forgery of
Sextons to raise the price and credit of Graves.


Phi. And do thou think, Tim, that I have fetched over such brave men to my
side, with nothing but so it is: verily so it is: Faith and troth, Gentlemen,
it is just so. Do you think Gentlemen that stand so much upon their honor and
reputation, will not demand better satisfaction than this?


Tim. They may demand what they will, but they will find no better than what I
tell you.


Phi. Why, Tim, don't I, in the first place, plainly show, that an immaterial
substance is a mere dream and phantasm; an image or a thing behind the
Looking-glass; a faiery and an old Wives tale; a small Creature of the brain,
and a device of the Kingdom of darkness?


Tim. No truly; I never found that you did show any such thing at all, any
further than merely by saying so.


Phi. Why, man, to say so, as the case stands, is all one as show it to be so.
For an immaterial substance cannot be shown.


Tim. But, by your bragging, I thought it might have been shown, that there was
no such thing.


Phi. You don't at all take it, Tim. For upon that very account, that an
immaterial substance cannot be shown, it is my second demonstration that there is
no such thing.


Tim. Now, Sir, I think I have got it. Because an invisible thing is somewhat
wild, and cannot endure to be star'd on long together (besides a great defluxion
of rheum that it occasions in the Spectators eyes); therefore there is no such
thing.


Phi. I don't say so: but I say thus: whatever is (or rather we know to be)
must some ways or other strike and affect our senses. For to know is to
perceive by imagination; and to imagine is to perceiv^ by sense.


Tim. Delicate! delicate! the question is whether we have reason to believe
that there is any substance in the World, differing from such as do affect our
senses. No, no: says Philautus, it cannot be: it cannot possibly be: for there is
no reason to believe there is any thing in the World different from what does
affect our senses. And so score up two demonstrations against immaterial
substances. The basket will be full, by and by.


Phi. And well it may, for the bigest are all still behind. And therefore in
the next place, Tim, let me know of thee which of all words do thou think to
be the most proper to signify the whole World?


Tim. Universe, as I take it, is counted the best.


Phi. Yes: it is so: and that word alone clearly cuts out all your immaterial
substances. For, what is the Universe, but the whole sum or aggregate, the
(...) of all the matter that is in the World?


Tim. Very right, Sir: and therefore whatever pretends to be (or, which is all
one, to be in the Universe) must cease being a dream and phantasm, and list it
self under the notion and protection of matter. For the word Universe being
made up of unum and versum: and unum being taken adverbially for only; and
versum by a kind of a figure, signifying matter (which, upon such an occasion
it may be persuaded to do) whoever talks of immaterial substances being in the
World or Universe, does most absolutely confute himself: for thereby he
confesses there is only matter in the World. And upon this I suppose, Philautus,
rather than God Almighty should prove to be only a thing behind the
Lookingglass, you have been pleased to admit him also into your great pound of
matter.


Phi. He must come in there, or else not be at all. But yet, because some
giddy-headed Ecclesiastics had prated against my Leviathan, therefore, in my
Appendix to it, I have shown both from the best Authors, and Scripture it self,
that God is so far from being immaterial, that he is much more material than
any thing else.


Tim. I marry, Sir, this does it indeed!


Phi. So it does, Tim, (to the shame of all your spiritual men) for it is plain
that never any of your Roman Authors did speak considerately of God* but they
always styled him Maximus, as well as Optimus.


Tim. They do so: and if he be Maximus, to be sure he is Magnus, (and a great
deal to spare) and every body knows of the alliance between magnitude and
matter. Deus optimus Maximus. Most specially good! now if the Scripture proves
but as well --.


Phi. It Is no other than that famous place of the Apostle; for in him we live
and move and have our being. Upon which, I do thus reason: if all men be in
God, and live in God, and move in God (which the Apostle plainly affirms) and
that to every man there belongs so much bulk or quantity: he ought to be sent
to the Hospital, that denies God to have quantity, for he has got within
himself all the quantity that men have, and his own quantity besides.


Tim. So, so: Very well. Very well. Because the Apostle tells us, that God
created all men, and gave them life and power to move; and by his daily
providence continues these blessings to them: therefore we feed upon God, and
swim and fly in God: just as wild fowl do, in St. James's Park. I wish with all
my heart that the basket was full.


Phi. You need not wish for that, Tim: for I have one demonstration more
against immaterial substances so very big, that it is enough to fill a basket
alone. It lies in the very words themselves. Don't you see it, Tim?


Tim. Not in the least.


Phi. That Is strange. You Will grant, I suppose, that an incorporeal body is a
good rousing contradiction. Will Not you?


Tim. Yes, Sir: it is one of the first head.


Phi. And, so is immaterial substance: for immaterial and incorporeal every man
grants to be the same: and I Will undertake for body and substance being the same.


Tim. You don't prove it, Sir: do you?


Phi. No, no: it need not, it need not; for I Will swear they are the same.


Tim. Faith and troth would have come in excellently well there: for, by
chance, all the controversy is, whether they be the same or not. ( i. e.
whether there be a substance distinct from body) but that is nothing: for, it
need not, it need not, no, no: it need not. For, Philautus is the man that has
farmed all the custom for the signification of words: and suffers none to go
out of his office, but such as are sealed: and because your Apothecaries give
out of the same pot, Mercury or quicksilver, which the customer pleases to
call for: therefore Philau^us, in his great shop of words, has a box
superscribed substance or body. And that is all his reason they are the same.
And therefore, say I, if any Gentlemen be so overkind and complemental, as to
gobble down such things as these (and these are the very best that I can find)
for demonstrations against immaterial substances, by all means, let Philautus
take such Gentlemen, and Tim will be content with their Estates.


Phi. I Will take no Gentlemen on my side, but such as are convinced by solid
reasons: and by your leave, Tim, I can tell you of several of my opinion, that
scorn to be convinced with any thing less: and that are very ready to affirm,
that what Philautus has said, against incorporeal substances, has not been
without some reason.


Tim. Yes, I remember one, Sir: who, in a late Preface to a Play, tells us just
so: viz. it is not, says he, without some reason, that Philautus thinks
incorporeal substances to imply a contradiction.


Phi. What (and be hanged) would you not have a Gentleman speak truth?


Tim. O by all means, Sir: especially such a Gentleman as this: for he is so
hearty a friend to your opinion, that he has added much strength to it.


Phi. Matter! but I don't like that at all, that any man should be so
conceited, as to think himself able to add any thing to what I have written.


Tim. Nay, I beseech you, Sir, be not offended: for it is so very little that he
has said, that you may easily lay it aside. The great business is the novelty
of the Argument.


Phi. Don't tell me, Tim, of any novelties: for I cannot think of any thing
against immaterial substances that I have omitted.


Tim. No? I pray of what profession are they that have been your great
adversaries in this point? Are they not Divines?


Phi. What then?


Tim. There Is a business now, that you never thought of. For it is impossible
for a Divine to write, or so much as to think of a spirit, or immaterial
substance. It Is utterly impossible: it implies a contradiction: it is Jargon,
it is Tohu, and Bohu: the Kingdom of darkness, and all that.


Phi. Implies a contradiction? what a Fool art thou, and all that, to talk
t^us? may not a Divine do, as well as other men, if they would but read and
believe my Books; and such, as I got my learning out off?


Tim. I, I: you may think so: but you are much mistaken for all your cunning.
For there is not one Divine of all the whole Tribe, be he Deacon, or Priest, or
Bishop, or Archbishop; but is most abominably phlegmatic. And it is a Poet
alone, I say again, that it is the Poet who has briskness, fancy, elevate and
all that, that can discourse of such a subtle and gliding subject, as a spirit
or imm^terial substance.


Phi. Divines all Phlegmatic! I have been as much affronted by Divines as any
body: but they never affronted me into such an odd remark as this.


Tim. Therefore you never minded the History of it, Philautus, as this
Gentleman Poet has done. For let a man be of never such a frank and florid
constitution: let him be all flame, all sky, all glory; yet no sooner does the
Bishop lay upon his head his heavy and stupefying hand, but his fancy runs
out at his heels, and the blood presently all turns. The benediction of a
Deacon, indeed, is only Rheum and slaver: but, when he comes to be made Priest,
it curdles all into utter snot and phlegm.


Phi. I prithee, Tim, don't torment me with such abominable nauseous stuff as
this. What have I to do with what other people say?


Tim. But this Gentleman is your friend, Sir: and you must not disregard what a
friend offers in your behalf: as yet you only have heard how Divines come to be
so phlegmatic: you must needs also understand, how that, being so, they cannot
possibly discourse of an immaterial substance, or a spirit.


Phi. I care not for hearing it: for I am sure there cannot be any sense in it.


Tim. O Sir very much: as much as any thing that you your self have said
against immaterial substances. For the argument is taken out of the great art
of Chemistry. Where, you know, nothing is at such variance with a spirit as
phlegm. And there can happen no such scandal to a spirit, as to have any phlegm
upon its skirts. And therefore your wary Druggists will scarce suffer a
Clergyman to come into their Shops, for fear they should bind and phlegmatize
their spirits. And you cannot, I suppose, have altogether forgot, how an whole
brewing of strong waters, had like to have been quite spoiled, only by a
Clergy-man's Gown sleeve, that, in passing by, dangl'd into the door: and
therefore it is not for a Clergyman (whose heavy gown damps the apprehension of
a spirit, as much as great top't stockings does the sound of a Theorbo) I say
it is not for a Phlegmatic Clergyman (who can only cough to an Organ, and
thrum upon Thomas Aquinas) to think to raise himself to such a tall
imagination, as that of immaterial substanc^s: for they are of a very thin and
aerie composure; of a flooting and fluttering consideration: and when a man of
gravity, sense, and judgment, goes dully about to invoke them, and to pore into
their notion and condition, they presently all bush, and are as still as birds
in an Eclipse or great thunderclap. But let the trim, the gay, the sharp and
piercing Poet get about him but half a score Violins, an huge Plume of Feathers
on his Hat, and only thrip his fingers, and briskly say, Come my Daphne, and if
there be an immaterial substance within a mile, it presently stoops to the
Poetical Lure. But besides, Philautus. --


Phi. I prithee, Tim, let us have no besides: for I am already almost quite
killed with this damnable Poet.


Tim. But you must not be tired, Sir: I profess it is uncivil: for, if you part
with this Gentleman, I don't know where you will get another to commend your
reasons against immaterial substances. And withal I would have you consider,
Philautus, that it is a very unsafe thing to slight such a man's approbation:
for, he may chance to have you into the next Prologue he makes; and a Poet, you
know, is as ill as a whole Nest of Hornets: nine of which, they say, will sting
an Horse to death. And therefore it is your interest, Philautus, to be kind and
respectful: for, he has also done so much credit to your opinion, as to tell us
that you have got some of the Fathers, on your side. And you know, Philautus,
it is a great honor and security to have the Fathers on ones side.


Phi. A very kind Poet indeed! I know not how many years agon, I found by
several Places, that Tertullian was of my opinion --


Tim. And you might have found as good ones in Caesar's Commentaries.


Phi. And now, this Gentleman having in some of my Books either read so, or met
with somebody that told him so, he sends me word of it again.


Tim. I profess, Philautus, I am perfectly of your mind: for I look upon it to
be very indiscreet and dangerous for a Poet, who renounces all judgment and
sense, and betakes himself wholly to the wing of fancy and imagination, to
meddle with such dull and melancholy stuff as Fathers. For your Fathers
doubtless (though they were counted pretty honest people) yet they were all
very Phlegmatic. And some think that Levi himself was a kind of a blew, green,
yellow man. So that there has been a constant succession of Phlegm and dullness
in the Church from the very beginning. And therefore, I say, I don't think that
this Poet of ours durst ever venture to meddle with any Father, except such as
Father Horace, Father Juvenal, and the like: for alas, Sir, one page of a right
true Phlegmatic Father would so fetter, and jade his fancy, that 'twould
scarce get into a good Heroic rhiming condition in a months time. But besides,
Sir --


Phi. What have we more besides's still? is there no way, Tim, to persuade thee
to hang thy self?


Tim. Yes, Yes, Sir: I had done it long ago: only you sent no particular
directions; and so I deferred the business a little, least I should not have
performed it according to your Philosophical mind. I pray, Sir, what do you
mean by the word hanging?


Phi. Why, Tim, must thou needs have a definition of it, before thou go
about it?


Tim. O by all means, Sir, for, such a nice matter as that, if it be not done
with all the consideration and curiosity imaginable, a man may chance to do
himself a mischief, before he be aware of it. And I am sure, Philautus, you
cannot but call to mind; that most of those tumults, and rebellions, deluges,
and Earthquakes that have happened in former ages, were chiefly because they
were ages of great equivocation: not being sufficiently mindful to signify
their meaning in settled words, which by the learned is called defining. And
therefore I wonder, Sir, that a man so exact as you are, of all things, should
omit to give us a definition of hanging; it being a thing of so great moment:
and besides in the 18th page of your Leviathan you have laid so good a
foundation sor't. For seeing politics (as you there have it) are only the
addition of pactions to find out men's duties: and Law is only the addition of
Laws and facts, etc. what else can hanging be, but only the concluding or
summing up of a man from the premises: from whence we learn the exact
difference between condemning and hanging: viz. to be condemned is only to be
cast: but to be hanged is to be summed or cast up. And though breaking a Leg or
Arm be not altogether of such great concern, as the other thing we have been
speaking of; yet, upon this account questionless it was, that the Author of the
Medicinal definitions (lest a man in distress should be equivocated, and send
for the Joiner instead of the Bone setter) like a most safe and careful Artist,
brands Surgery after an everlasting manner: Surgery (says he) is the
quick motion of an intrepid hand joined with experience: or an artificial
action used by the hand in physic for some convenient intent.


Phi. What thou drivest at, Tim, I know not: unless it be, that thou would
have hanging to be as much a Science as Surgery. For, I grant thee, that
most of those mistakes, fooleries and absurd opinions that have crept into men's
minds and their writings have been, because they have ventured to reckon
without setting ^own their first Items right: i. e. without agreeing upon sound
and substantial definitions: but I would not have thee therefore think, that,
before I call for my Horse, I must needs examine the Osler how he is furnished
as to the genus and specifical difference of saddle and bridle.


Tim. Truly, I thought that might have been your meaning. For you must now give
me leave to tell you, Philautus, and that a little more plainly and largely
too, than I could do last time we met (being in haste) that there is scarce any
thing so mean and trivial, but you make it your business to puff it up either
with some lofty and magnificent description, or else to fix upon it some smart
or curious character: and this is your constant practice from one end of your
writings to the other.


Phi. Never was any thing more improperly and unseasonably applied: it being my
humor to meddle with nothing but rarities, and things of fundamental moment:
and whereas thou talkest, Tim, of my puffing definitions, and of my contriving
curious characters; and, that I do this from one end to the other: I am
confident that (had I patience to pose thee) thou do not so much as
understand either what it is to begin or end, or what is curiosity, or what it is
to define: and yet this is Tim that accuses me of defining trifles.


Tim. I beseech you, Sir, cast away one small bit of those thousand years, you
have still to live (for, you know, it is not good to be stinted) and hear me
say. As for the bounds and measures of beginning and end, I must step a little
back, and consider there be two sorts of parts, middle and extreme: which being
granted I do then proceed to set them out after this manner. That part which is
between two other parts is called the middle: and that which is not between two
other parts, is called an extreme. Now, of the extremes, that which is first
reckoned (I say of the extremes that there may be no mistake) that that very
extreme so first reckoned, in strictness of speech, is always to be looked upon
as the true beginning; and that which is last reckoned to be the true ending.
As for example, take me the number three: which is bounded on each side with an
Unite: (for no number is actually infinite) now that Unite which stands before
the middle Unite, (provided it be first reckoned) is to be looked upon to be
the beginning or first Unite of the number three: and that which stands after
the middle Unite, the end or last unite of the number three. And now,
Philautus, I am confident, that were you not wholly taken up with commending
your self, as severe a Judge as you are, you your self would be ready to
confess this first task to be very accurately performed*


Phi. Confess, Tim! I don't use to make Fools and Children my Confessors, but
only those that have the supreme Authority.


Tim. I thought I should be thus put of. For let a man be never so wary, and
take never such care about his Items; and settle things with never so much
exactness, yet one had as good grope for Guineas in an Oyster pit, as expect
any approbation from Philautus.


Phi. Go on, Tim: thou shall have, it upon my word by and by: 'twill come
pouring down; approbation, or somewhat else.


Tim. I thank you, Sir; for one minutes commendations from a person that has
kept a constant register of Consequences is worth an age-ful from any body
else. And therefore I proceed to the great mystery of curiosity: concerning
which (in short) I thus give out. Namely, that it is a desire to know why, and
how. And I am sure there is no body can be so harsh and churlish, but must look
upon this same why and how, as a most distinguishing and Philosophical Earmark.
And therefore, if approbation be not just approaching, I don't expect ever to
deserve again.


Phi. Yes, Tim, it is just at hand, and therefore I do bless thee after this
manner: reckoning thee, looking upon thee, and approving of thee --


Tim. I am glad to hear these words. They are every one of them words tending
to renown. O, what a blessing it is to be allowed of by the ancient! and to
have an Item set upon a young man by an intrepid hand joined with experience.


Phi. O it is a most inestimable blessing! and therefore, Tim, I do say once
again, that I do set thee down, and account thee, and allow of thee for the
greatest pilferer, shirk, and notion-stealer, that ever thiev'd out of a Book.
For all these great truths, which thou have now pretended to knock out of thy
own noddle, are nothing else but my very own contemplations irreverently
slaver'd out of thy mouth. And if I should try thee in forty things more: I
believe I should find it just so: i. e. thou would either talk right down non
sense, or steal from me. And therefore, seeing thou pretendest to judge what
things are needful to be defined; do so much as tell me now what a definition
is.


Tim. I remember some of them tell us, that a definition is that which explains
a thing --


Phi. A definition that which explains a thing! that now is most horribly
obscure, ridiculous, and absurd. A Definition, say you or they (for I think you
are all alike) is that -- is that? what that? that same, or the other same? how
shall any man in the World understand which of the that's you mean? again, you
talk of your definition explaining a thing. After what manner, I prithee, Tim?
what, as the Table-Cloth is explained upon the Table: or as butter is explained
upon bread? thou surely would have a man to be spread into Animal and
Rationale. Therefore take it me altogether thus. Definitio est propositio cujus
praedicatum est subjecti resolutivum ubi fieri potest, ubi non potest
exemplicativum. Instead of which you come in with your blind ids and quods, and
I know not what is.


Tim. I pray, Sir, be not so angry with me; for 'twas not I that put in id est,
instead of propositio; or that said, that the nature of man was to be unfoulded
like a Napkin; whereas I perceive it is to be unrop'd and unbound like a load of
Faggots.


Phi. But you are always prating as if you favored such nonsense.


Tim. Truly, Sir, I must confess, that I never did much admire the temper of
that wary Gentleman, who being requested to help to make an Inventory for his
neighbor, would by no means be persuaded to engage in the business, till they
had first agreed upon principles, and set down quid est fire shovel, quid
tongs, and quid bellows. And very little better opinion have I of those, who
observing the Mathematicians to choose their own terms, and to give them what
signification they pleased, shall vainly do the like in all kind of discourses:
defining things, that by custom have been long determined; or that have been
sufficiently defined before. For my part, I always thought, that a man might
have a very nigh ghessing, when he was in the Jail, and when not: till I looked
into the 164th. page of your Leviathan, and then I found, that 'twas almost as
hard for a man to understand what a Prison was, as to get out of it. For,
imprisonment (to define it fully and exactly) is all restraint of motion,
caused by an enternal obstacle, be it a House, which is called by the general
name of a Prison, or an Island. Thus Du Val and such others, have (upon
occasion) been restrained by the external obstacle of Newgate for some
convenient intent. And, you know, Jack Lambert is at this time obstacl'd up at
the Isle of --


Phi. Well: and what then?


Tim. Even what you please, Sir.


Phi. Then I tell you, that though others may have observed, that a House may
come under the notion of a Prison, yet, that an Island may do so likewise, was
a great observation of my own.


Tim. I do a little question it, Philautus: for now I think on it, in an old
merry song, there is a very notable hint toward an Island being a Prison; and
more than that too, there is direction given how, if need be, to break Prison.
For the Poet does not only say, that the Land is a large Prison enclosed with
Sea: but adds further, that if we would but set lustily to it, and drink up the
obstacle (i. e. the Ocean) we may set our selves ^ree. But for all that, I
don't absolutely say, that you stole your notion from the song.


Phi. I steal from songs: I that have a thousand things that never were in any
Book whatever?


Tim. Ay, and a thousand too. I Would fain see any body show me, either in Book, or
Manuscript any thing like what you have in that Chapter of yours, called the
nutrition and procreation of a Commonwealth.


Phi. Why, what have I there?


Tim. What have you there? why, Sir, you have there, not only a most exact
division of all commodities into Native and Foreign: but (lest people should
loose their time a Nutmegging, or Cloving in Enfield, or Epping Forest) you are
pleased to acquaint us besides with the very essence, and nature of each
commodity. A Native Commodity (say you, very gravely) is that which is to be
had within the territory of the Commonwealth. That sounds bravely. Within the
territory of a Commonwealth. 'Twill almost furnish a shop alone. And a Foreign
Commodity is that which is imported from without.


Phi. And is not this very true, and useful besides?


Tim. It Is so very true, that I much question whether it be useful at all. For
there is scarce an Apprentice, that has but had the improvement of twice wiping
his Masters shoes, but would look upon it to be a most abominable affront, to be
informed with such Ceremony, in such a trivial matter. And more than that,
Philautus, I am very confident, that should any man go about solemnly (as you
do) to advise and caution one of these same Youngsters, in what immediately
follows; and deliver but his message in the common Town language, he would
count himself so horribly abused, as presently to cry huzza, and break all the
Windows of such an Instructor.


Phi. Why, what is it I prithee?


Tim. The very bottom of the notion is only this, Sir: viz. that if we have,
suppose, here in our Country, more Pudding than Plums, and other people have
got more Plums than Pudding; the best way will be for the Pudding and the Plums
to hold a correspondence. But now, Sir, from the consideration of Native and
Foreign Commodities, to biggen this spare and lean notion into a Sir John: it is
thus. And because (it begins as statelily, as a Preface to an Act of
Parliament) there is no Territory under the Dominion of one Common wealth,
except it be of very vast extent (that is to prevent objections) that produces
all things needful for the maintenance and motion of the whole body; and few
that produce not something more than necessary; (here is the groundwork; now we
build) the superfluous commodities to be had within become no more superfluous,
but supply these wants at home by importation of that which may be had abroad,
either by exchange, or by just War, or by labor. For a man's labor also, is a
commodity exchangeable for benefit, as well as any other thing. Yes, yes:
without doubt it is. That is, if a man has a great superfluity of those native
commodities of Legs and Arms, but as great a scarcity of those Foreign ones,
called Cloths and Victuals; nothing more frequent than for such an one, to
betake himself presently to his flail, or spade, and to exchange benefits: full
well knowing, that Labor is a very good commodity, and as likely a way to
fetch in money, as most things that have been invented. And this politic
remark of yours puts me in mind of a most admirable Receipt, that I have
somewhere met with, to awake a man that is asleep.


Phi. I suppose, Tim, if he ben't deaf, and be but called loud enough; we need
not go to the Queens Closet, nor Triggs secrets, to awake a man.


Tim. Called! but how shall he be called? that is the mystery, Philautus; what
method, what means, what instruments are the most natural, and proper for this
purpose?


Phi. I prithee, has not the man a name: and cannot you call him by that?


Tim. Call him by his name! what a deadly black, dull, phlegmatic story is
that? call him by his name! (Dick, Jack, Robin, or any of the rest know, and
can do that:) no, no, Philautus: you are quite out. The way is this. Seeing
that humane Creatures as well as some others are not altogether free from the
thraldom of sleep: and that it may be for the interest of some private person,
or for the good of the Commonwealth, to loosen and redeem one so bound and
captivated: and seeing besides that there be several noises and sounds, that by
different motion, do differently invade the Territories of the ear: from most
diligent observation it has been at last concluded, that, of all noises or
sounds, there is not any so fit and proper to awaken a humane Creature, as a
humane voice: especially, if the proper name belonging to the humane Creature,
be plainly pronounced by the humane voice. Roger: I come, Sir, cries he
presently.


Phi. And I prithee, Tim, how differs this from what I said before?


Tim. Just as much, and no more, Sir, than as a thousand things, that you
magnificently and flaringly dress up, differ from what Dick, Jack, or the other
says. Only, as I hinted just now, out of Mathematical apishness, you fall to
your drawing, and deducing, and gathering a Company of trifles, which are not
worth the while to pick up in the streets.


Phi. Timothy, Timothy, I shall make thee repent of this, Boy. For it plainly
shows, that thou do in no ways understand the greatest instance of sagacity,
and a mature judgment: and that the highest advancement, and very top of
reasoning, is to make discreet, and holding inferences.


Tim. O, Sir, that is a most admirable perfection indeed! and how far you
transcend all others in it, one may plainly see, in the tenth page of your
Leviathan. Where (having in the Chapter before carefully laid down, that much
memory, or memory of many things is called experience;) you thence firk out
this for a great certainty: namely, that by how much one man has more
experience of things past than another, by so much also he is more prudent, and
his expectations the seldomer fail him. As suppose, Sir, a Tailor makes a
Gentleman a Suit of Cloths; but sees not a farthing of money, but only a very
sweet promising countenance. And, upon the same terms, he proceeds to a second,
a third, and a fourth. Most certainly this sweet promising countenance will
take much better with a fresh Tailor, than with the old beaten Dog of much
memory: for he has four very bad consequences, already upon the file. And
therefore, (as you have it in the same page) as long as we live, we must note
this; that, he that is most versed and studied in the matters he ghesses at, is
certainly the best ghesser. And that, because he has most signs to go by. From
whence it follows, that though no sign is absolutely certain; yet (we may take
this for certain) that the oftener the Consequences have been observed, the less
uncertain is the sign. As suppose, the Dun-Cow turns up her tail, and frisking
about the Close immediately upon that we have a shower of rain: this being the
first consequence, it is possible that the Farmer may venture his Corn abroad,
for all the Dun-Cow. But suppose her fancy continues; (for I cannot think,
that the mere motion of her tail can physically pull down the Clouds) and that
the same consequence is strictly observed for a whole year together; Will.
Lilly may send his Almanacks to Market, and so forth; but, upon my word, the
Dun-Cow will send them home again with rattle. Men may talk of finding out
this, and finding out that: but there is not one of a *thousand that knows how
to make the best of a notion. That is, how to nurse it, and brood it, and
improve it.


Phi. It Is true enough, Tim. For a mere Fool may by chance, stumble upon a vast
truth. But the great emolument thereof lies wholly in the inferences.


Tim. Yes, yes: there lies all the skill. For, though a man of less sagacity
than your self, might possibly have blunder'd upon what you say (Le. p. 36.)
viz. Of all discourse, governed by desire of knowledge, there is at last an end
either by attaining or giving over. Yet there is no body but Philautus (who can
make notions breed, long after Geese have done laying) could ever have thence
disclosed, that which follows: viz. that in the chain of discourse, wheresoever
it be interrupted, there is an end for that time. I profess, Philautus, 'twas
very well for you, that you did not make these politi^k inferences, in
Hopkins's days. For upon my word, (as great an unbeliever, as you are in his
profession) he would have had you into his inquisition, and tried whether you would
have swum, or sunk. You talk of deducing and inferring! whereas in the 3d.
Chapter of your Book de Cive, you make such a notable remark, about putting
things to arbitration, that to me is right down witchery and divination.


Phi. Why, Tim, is it not highly reasonable and convenient, that if two parties
disagree about matter of right, it should be referred to some third indifferent
person, called an Arbiter.


Tim. Very reasonable and convenient, Sir. And accordingly you write it down
for your fifteenth law of nature. But the divination lies in hatching out of
this fifteenth, a sixteenth law of nature. viz. that no man must be judge in
his own cause. Which sixteenth law comes into the World, after this manner.
Seeing that when two parties disagree about a matter of right, it is a law of
nature that they should leave it to the determination of a third: we gather
(say you) what? that this third must not be one of the two. No, no: that would
be most horrible foul play indeed: that when two disagreeing parties had taken
pains to choose a third, and had bespoken a very good Dinner: no sooner does
this third get into the Chair, but whip goes he into one of the two; and
there is all the fat in the fire.


Phi. This now is so abominably ridiculous, that it is ten times worse than
positive nonsense.


Tim. But hold a little, Philautus; you should have asked first, whose it was.
For, in good truth, this same of the third being none of the two, is one of
your own Mathematical gatherings. And because (I know) you love your own words,
better than any bodies else; you shall have them exactly as they stand, p. 49.
upon condition you will trust me another time. But from this ground (say you) that
an Arbiter or Judge is chosen by the differing parties to determine the
Controversy, we gather (in Latin it is colligitur) that the Arbiter must not be
one of the parties. Do you see Philautus? it is plainly your opinion, that the
third person that is chosen by the two differing parties, must not be one of
the two that chose. For it takes two and one more, to make a third. And
besides, 'twould be a very inconvenient thing; as you proceed to demonstrate
it, in the same Article. For, say you, every man is presumed to seek what is
good for himself naturally, and what is just only for peace sake and
accidentally; and therefore cannot observe the same equallity commanded by the
law of nature, so exactly as a third man would do. No, no: he cannot observe it:
nothing near so exactly. For supposing the third should be one of the two, to
be sure he, after a few Complements, would so utterly forget that he was a
third, that he would even deal as archly for himself, as if he were merely one
of the two. So that having thoroughly weighed, not only the great absurdity of
three being two, but also the great mischief that might thence arise in a
Commonwealth; we safely gather, that the third neither can, nor ought to be
one of the two.


Phi. I shall maintain, Tim, against thee, and all such bold faces, that to
choose an Arbiter is a fundamental law of nature: and that it was the
Philosopher of Malmsbury that first found it out; because no body before him
had gathered it according to art.


Tim. I, I; there lies the skill, Philautus; to nick a notion, and to gather it
according to art: to take it at the critical minute, and register it upon the
right file. As (in the 68. p. of your Leviathan) I remember you do the business
of covenanting with Bruits.


Phi. Why, Tim, can any Covenant, or bargain be made between a Man and a Beast?
is it not demonstrable, both from the nature of a Covenant, and the nature of a
Beast, that there cannot possibly be any such thing?


Tim. It Is very demonstrable, Sir. For suppose a man proffers his Dog Jowler a
good large piece of bread; upon condition that he skips cleaverly over his
stick. Here seems indeed a tacit kind of promise, that the Dog should have the
piece of bread for his pains; ( a Dogs labor being a Commodity exchangeable
for benefit as well as a man's:) but, by reason the Master only held forth the
piece of bread, and did not orally say to the Dog; here, Jowler, skip over this
stick, and thou shall certainly have this piece of bread; or if he had said so,
yet Jowler being not able to take him at his word, and to say done Master; (by
which the right of the bread might be transferred upon performance of
Covenants:) thereupon it is that, if the Master either eats the bread himself,
or gives it to any other Dog (though never so little deserving) Jowler can
never recover of his Master this piece of bread, or any other thing to the
value of it, either at Common Law, or Chancery. And why? because (as you very
learnedly gather it, in the forementioned place) seeing that bruits understand
not our speech, they understand not: (all understanding being nothing but
knowledge of words:) and if they don't unde^stand, they can neither accept of
any translation of right from us, nor can translate any right to us; and
without mutual acceptance there is no Covenant. There now lies the point of
law: without mutual acceptance there is no Covenant. This place most certainly
deserves a cut; it is so mathematically managed. And therefore, in the next
edition, I Would have Jowler pictured, jumping at the overture of his Master.


Phi. 'Twould be a better sight by half, Tim, to see Jowler and you hanged up
together for a couple of Curs. For what more easy, than out of the best Book
that ever was printed, to pick three or four places; and, by forgery and
malice, to represent them as trivial, and contemptible?


Tim. It Is not three or four places, or three or four hundred that I should
have much minded: and whereas you talk of representing, etc. there is so little
need of any such thing, that this kind of gullery and affectation discovers it
self in every page almost of your Writings. What forgery or malice, I pray, is
required, to make what you say, Lev. p. 29. most notoriously idle, and
frivolous?


Phi. Why, what do I there say?


Tim. As in your Humane nature, you invite down the Jocqueys (which I formerly
told you of) to see your race of the passions: so here you call together the
Schoolmasters; and, much to their astonishment, show them the great harmony
that is between the passions, and the several Moods of a Verb. First, say you,
generally all passions may be expressed indicatively; as I love, I fear, I joy,
I deliberate, I will, I command: upon my word, the Indicative Mood has a fine
run on it: it is in at all. But some of them have particular expressions by
themselves; for instance, deliberation is expressed subjunctively; which is a
speech proper to signify suppositions with their consequences. What a brave
definition is there of the Subjunctive Mood! the Subjunctive Mood is a speech
proper to signify suppositions with their consequences. The language of desire
and aversion is imperative: as, fall on, bear back: the language of Vainglory,
etc. is Optative; as Utinam, or would to God, I had a piece of Bread and Butter
round about the Loaf: but of the desire to know there is a peculiar expression,
called Interrogative. A very peculiar one indeed! ('it is great pity there is no
Interrogative Mood:) and therefore, if a man be either in haste to know, or
eager to know, the best way will be to make use of that same peculiar
expression, called inquiring or asking: for it will take some considerable time
for another man to ghess, what I have a mind to know. Again, Sir, when you
advise such as have the supreme Authority to affix punishments to the breach of
their laws, you do very well: but when you advise them further ( Civ. p. 207.)
to put those laws sometimes into execution; and withal so heartily prove the
convenience thereof, I cannot see, but that a man without either forgery or
malice, may make shift to smile. The fear, say you, whereby men are deterred
from doing evil, arises not from hence, namely, because penalties are set, but
because they are executed; (and that is the reason that people are not so much
afraid of Paper and Ink, as Rope, Ladder, and the consequences thereof:)
because, as you proceed, we esteem the future by what is past; seldom expecting
what seldom happens. And therefore, man being of a collecting nature, he
certainly ought to be hanged for a Coward, who fears to be added to the law for
stealing, if no body upon that account, had ever been added before him; because
he reckons badly, and expects that which never, as yet, came to pass. But I
shall not at present, Philautus, trouble my self any further to set forth how
laboriously you argue, when it is to no purpose. Only I cannot forbear showing
some little respect to one thing more, because you so accurately discuss it.


Phi. All that I ever writ, has been very accurate.


Tim* Yes, Sir: but this is not only very accurate, but of extraordinary
concernment. For it removes a very considerable objection against Government.
viz. if it be so necessary for the Peace of Mankind, that men should confer all
their power and strength upon one man, or one assembly of men, that may reduce
all their wills, by plurality of voices, unto one will; how comes it about then
that Bees (and such like Creatures) live so quietly and contentedly, without
either choosing one supreme unlimited buzzer, or one Assembly of Bees, that by
plurality of buzzes may be brought to consent in one buz? Of this there be no
less than six very remarkable reasons: (no body but Philautus could have found
out half so many:) In the first place, it is to be considered, that amongst Bees
there is no contestation of honor and preferment: if one Be has a mind to be
made Burgess or Knight of the Shire; march on, say the rest: Honey is a very
good thing. Now it is not honor or preferment, but the contestation that does
all the mischief in a Commonwealth. It being that alone which begets envy and
hatred, and these beget sedition and quarrelling, and quarrelling begets War,
and War in time spoils Peace. We may possibly, now and then, have observed a
couple of Bees wrestling two or three falls or so; where sometimes one would be
above, and sometimes another: but we are to know, that in strictness of speech,
this being above is not to be called preferment, nor this endeavoring to be
above contestation of preferment: because preferment (to say no more of it now)
is a kind of a notable business. In the next place, we are to consider, that,
that which makes men to quarrel unless awed by some supreme power, is their
esteeming of those things only which have somewhat of eminence in the
enjoyment. But it is not so with Bees: for suppose one of them grows fatter, or
proves taller by the head and shoulders than all the rest; notwithstanding
this, there is no need o^ choosing a Hive-holder, to keep them from mutinying:
they having no such as custom to register their Statures upon the Wainscot, or
Mantletree; as man does, who is a comparing Creature, and relishes nothing but
Phoenixes and eminencies. In the third place, that which secures Bees from
waging War is, that they don't keep any Scales in the House, to weigh how much
Honey every Be administers toward the Winterstock: or if they did, they
having not so much the use of reason, as men, are not able to weigh it. For to
weigh is only to ponderate, or compare reasons. But, in the Section before, it
was proved that man alone was a comparing Creature. Therefore to bed Bees, for
fighting is a vanity. Fourthly, though Bees have some use of voice to signify
their mutual affections, and to buz and hum out one another to public duty;
yet, they having never read either Seton or Keckerman, want the art of
disposing these buzzes and hums into propositions; and also of managing those
propositions into eloquent and crafty orations. So that, suppose some factious,
aspiring, innovating Be should go about to disturb the Peace, and make an
uproar; yet because this Be has not a true humane tongue (which is as very a
Trumpet of War and Sedition, as a Warming-pan is of Peace and settlement, to a
swarm of those Creatures) though it be as big as an Elephant it can never like
Pericles, by its elegant speeches so thunder and lighten as to confound the
Hive. And therefore sleep on Bees. Fifthly, give but Bees their belly full, and
set them out of the wind; and libel them, and lampoon them as long as you will,
all this breeds no ill blood: and the reason is, because as yet they never read
Philautus's Politics; and so cannot distinguish between injury and harm. Hive
and Honey! What times should we have, if these Stingers should once but find
out the difference between injury and harm? Sixthly, and lastly (I am sorry for
this lastly: what would I give for six such more) seeing that neither the
present Bees, nor their Predecessors, did ever take either the O^th of
Allegiance, or the Solemn League and Covenant, or the Engagement, or the Oath
upon Triplow-heath (where they say there grows many a sweet bit) what need is
there, or can there be, for these Creatures to choose any supreme Magistrate to
keep them in awe; when as they did never either swear, or covenant or engage to
keep any thing at all? and therefore finally, good night Bees; for the Moon is
in the Flock-bed.


Phi. All this is most abominable forgery.


Tim. If you had not said so, it is like some of your friends might. And
therefore let us have pure Philautus, word for word, as he discusses the
business in the 77th. p. de Cive.


Phi. And will not you put in none of your own wild, non-sensical Jimcracks, to
interrupt the drift, and contexture of my reasons?


Tim. No no, Sir: I am so far from any such thing that, to give your reasons
all possible advantage, I Will take in Preface and all. The point to be debated
in the Margent stands thus, viz. why the government of some bruit Creatures
stands firm in concord alone, and not so of men. To decide which we make this
preparation. Aristotle reckons among those animals, which he calls politic,
not man only, but diverse others; as the Ant, the Be, etc. which though they be
destitute of reason, by which they may contract, and submit to government,
notwithstanding by consenting, (that is to say) ensuing or eschewing the same
things, they so direct their actions to a common end, that their meetings are
not obnoxious unto any seditions. Yet is not their gathering together a civil
Government, and therefore those animals not to be termed political, because
their Government is only a consent, or many wills concurring in one object, not
(as is necessary in civil Government) one will. It is very true, that in those
Creatures, living only by sense and appetite, their consent of minds is so
durable, as there is no need of any thing more to secure it, and (by
consequence) to preserve peace among them, than barely their n^tural
inclination. But among men the case is otherwise. Now begin the six reasons.
For first among them there is a contestation of honor and preferment; among
Beasts there is none: whence hatred and envy, out of which arise Sedition and
War, is among men, among Beasts no such matter. Next, the natural appetite of
Bees, and the like Creatures, is conformable, and they desire the common good
which among them differs not from their private; but man scarce esteems any
thing good which has not somewhat of eminence in the enjoyment, more than that
which others do possess. Thirdly, those Creatures which are void of reason, see
no defect, or think they see none, in the administration of their Common-weals;
but in a multitude of men there are many who supposing themselves wiser than
others, endeavor to innovate, and diverse Innovators innovate diverse ways,
which is a mere distraction, and civil War. Fourthly, these Brute Creatures,
howsoever they may have the use of their voice to signify their affections to
each other, yet w^nt they that same art of words which is necessarily required
to those motions in the mind, whereby good is represented to it as being
better, and evil as worse than in truth it is; But the tongue of man is a
Trumpet of War, and Sedition; and it is reported of Pericles, that he sometimes
by his elegant speeches thundered, and lightened, and confounded whole Greece
it self. Fifthly, they cannot distinguish between injury and harm; Thence it
happens that as long as it is well with them, they blame not their fellows: But
those men are of most trouble to the republic, who have most leisure to be
idle; for they use not to contend for public places before they have gotten
the Victory over hunger, and cold. Last of all, the consent of those brutal
Creatures is natural, that of men by compact only (that is to say) artificial;
it is therefore no matter of wonder if somewhat more be needful for men to the
end they may live in peace. Now am I as much taken with these six reasons, as
the Gentleman was with his good piece of road. I profess, I have a great mind
to ride 'em all over again: they are so incomparably close, so smooth, and so
pleasant.


Phi. Yes, yes, without doubt, Tim, set but such a one as thou art on
Horseback, and there will be riding. Thou talkest of close reasoning! thou
never said in thy whole life one line of such deep sense, as that which just
now thou did repeat.


Tim. But you have said many things as deep, Sir; as one may plainly see by
your Leviathan, p. 86. where you thought the mooting this point of the Bees to
be so very necessary for the understanding the causes, the Generation and the
definition of a Commonwealth that; with great delight to your self, we have
all the forementioned reasons over again. And seeing you are so very much
delighted, I am as conformable as any Be; and am resolved to be delighted too.
Thus then: It is true, that certain living Creatures; as Bees, and Ants, live
sociably one with another, (which are therefore by Aristotle numbered amongst
Political Creatures;) and yet have no other direction, than their particular
judgments and appetites; nor speech, whereby one of them can signify to
another, what he thinks expedient for the common benefit: and therefore some
man may perhaps desire to know, why mankind cannot do the same. (I don't
believe any man in the World had ever such an odd appetite, unless he had the
green sickness:) To which I answer,

First, That men are continually in competition for honor and dignity, which
these Creatures are not; and consequently amongst men there arises on that
ground, envy and hatred, and finally War; but amongst these not so.

Secondly, That amongst these Creatures, the common good differs not from the
private; and being by nature inclined to their private, they procure thereby
the common benefit. But man, whose joy consists in comparing himself with
other men, can relish nothing but what is eminent.

Thirdly, That these Creatures, having not (as man) the use of reason, do not
see, nor think they see any fault, in the administration of their common
business: whereas amongst men, there are very many, that think themselves
wiser, and abler to govern the public, better than the rest; and these strive
to reform and innovate, one this way, another that way; and thereby bring it
into distraction and civil War.

Fourthly, That these Creatures, though they have some use of voice, in making
known to one another their desires, and other affections; yet they want that
art of words, by which some men can represent to others, that which is good, in
the likeness of evil; and evil, in the likeness of good; and augment, or
diminish the apparent greatness of good and evil; discontenting men, and
troubling their peace at their pleasure.

Fifthly, Irrational Creatures cannot distinguish between injury, and damage;
and therefore as long as they be at ease, they are not offended with their
fellows: whereas man is then most troublesome, when he is most at ease: for then
it is that he loves to show his wisdom, and contro^l the actions of them that
govern the Commonwealth.

Lastly, The agreement of these Creatures is natural; that of men, is by
Covenant only, which is artificial: and therefore it is no wonder if there be
somewhat else required (besides Covenant) to make their agreement constant and
lasting; which is a common power, to keep them in awe, and to direct their
actions to the common benefit. I wish, with all my heart, I could tell where to
happen of these six reasons, but once more: for I am as fresh, methinks, as
when I first set out. Never in my life did I meet with such a Company of good
words, so artificially put together, to no purpose. And yet, now I think of it
Camoraldo, the great Spanish Politician gave a friend of his six very good
directions for Traveling. If (says he to his friend) you be not sufficiently
content with such knowledge of Foreign Countries, as Maps and Historians do
afford you; but that you have a mind to peruse the Countries themselves (or at
least some of them) with your very own eyes; in the first place, I do advise
that into such Countries, as you have a mind to peruse after the supposed
manner, you send not your man, but go your self. In the next place, when you be
once fixed and determined to go; it will be very requisite then to think of
going: and that either by the motion of your own feet, or by the motion of the
feet of one Horse, or of more Horses (as by Tumbrell, Cart, Wagon, Coach,) or
by no Horse; as by the motion of Boat, Ship, or by some other means and
instruments of motion. For, Native and Foreign being altogether opposite,
there is no possible passing from one extreme to another without motion.
Thirdly, When you be once come (according to the directions laid down in the
foregoing Article) to that Town or City that you have most mind to see and
remember; be sure you stay longest there: for the longer you stay, the more you
may look; and the more you look, the more you will see; and the more you see, the
more you will remember: as was said before, he that has most signs to ghess by, is
certainly the best ghesser. Fourthly, such notices and informations of things
as you intend to take in at the eye, choose rather to do it in the day time,
than in the night. For though the eye and object be full out as big, after as
before the Sun is down; yet by reason of the many mists, vapors, Hobgoblins
and Witches that trade in the night, the sky becomes much thickened; and
thereupon observations are rendered much more weak and uncertain. Fifthly, If
after particular observations of Houses, Churches, Cathedrals, etc. (made at
the time above prescribed) you should have a mind, (the day, suppose, before
you go out of Town) to sum up all, and at one view to take the dimensions of
your whole improvements; don't you go to Bed, and draw the Curtains Close about
you: for they will refract and scare the light; nor into the bottom of a well; (as
some by equivocation have done, because Stars are thence best seen:) but climb
you me some Steeple, Tower, or other high place: for though it must be granted
that the higher you go, the further you will be from the earth; yet the further
you are from the earth (so you be not too far) the more you will see, in all
probability, of those things that are built upon the earth. Sixthly, and
Lastly, Suppose you don't travel by a proxy, but go your self in person, and
perform all according to the laws of motion, and set a work those laws of
motion more or less according as it is worth the while to stay, and that you
don't make your observations at midnight, nor out of the Cellar; then, quoth
Camoraldo to his friend, as a Crown to all, I do advise, that you take a
Table Book in your pocket, or some other little portable instrument to register
consequences: for though it be said of Julius Caesar (who for a need could
thunder and lighten as well as Pericles) that he never forgot any thing but
injuries; yet it does not, you know, fall to one man's share of forty to be so
great an Emperor, as Julius Caesar: and though Paper, Parchment, and Velam be
all subject to the teeth of time, envy, and rats; yet by no means is the memory
wholly to be trusted, being ofttimes as treacherous, as a sieve or scummer.


Phi. The teeth of time! it is very good really: and so is a treacherous sieve
or scummer. But for the memory to keep Garrison is much better; especially, if
it be but like ^ sieve, or scummer: because the enemy may pass and repass at
the little Portholes. Doubtless this Cam^raldo was a most excellent Statesman.
I wonder, Tim, where thou pickest up such abominable,
metaphorical-simili^udinarian-Rascals. (that similitudinarian is not a just
word, but I have not patience to make a better now:)


Tim. Why, Sir, you know that a little slice or so of a trope, or figure, gives
a fine relish and hogoo. It Is as good, Sir, as an anchovy or shalot.


Phi. A relish and a hogoo! to what I prithee? to a Treatise of Philosophy or
Dominion: or to directions for traveling, by which Gentlemen may come to
understand the Generation of a Commonwealth, and afterward become helpful in
Government? I Will give leave to a Jugler, or Barber to put into their common
tittle tattle, their relishes and hogoos, their anchovie^ and shalots: but when
Divine^ shall tell you ( Lev. p. 17.) of in-powred virtue, and in-blown virtue
(as if virtue were tunn'd into a man's mind, just as new drink is into the
Vessel) and of this and that man being extraordinary assisted and inspired: as
if it were not more credit for a man to speak wisely from the principles of
nature and his own meditation, than to be thought to speak like a Bagpipe by
inspiration: I say, when such things as these creep into serious reckonings,
and Philosophical Bills; then, then is the mischief. ^ perceive, Tim, that thou
never did read the 5th Chapter of my Leviathan: for if thou had, thou
would have there found, that amongst the many causes of the absurd opinion^
that have been in Philosophy, there has not been any greater, than the use of
Metaphors, Tropes, and other Rhetorical figures, instead of words proper. For
(as I there go on) though it be lawful to say, (for example) in common speech
the way goes or leads hither, or thither, the Proverb says this or that
(whereas ways cannot go, nor Proverbs speak;) yet in reckoning, and seeking of
truth, such speeches are not to be admitted.


Tim. What, neither back-stroak, nor fore-stroak? I know, Philautus, that you
have spent much time in this sort of reckonings; and therefore you must needs
be a notable accomptant in Philosophy: but when I find (as ^ do in your
Treatise, called Computation) that a Proposition is the first step i^ the
progress of Philosophy, that a Syllogism is a complete pace, trot, or gallop in
Philosophy; being made by the addition of steps: and that method is the
highway that leads to Philosophy: (where note, though it is not proper, in
reckoning, to say that the way either goes or leads; yet I perceive that
Propositions and Syllogisms may both walk and gallop, provided it be in the way
to Philosophy:) again, Sir, when I read ( Levi. p. 108.) that a Commonwealth
is an artificial man, ('it is as like him, as ever it can look: 't has got just
de Father's nose, and de powting lip) or an aggregate of Puginellos made for
the attaining of peace; and that the civil laws are only artificial Chains; (so
the Dutch broke the civil Law that went cross the River at Chatham) which men,
by mutual Covenants, have fastened at one end, to the lips of the man, or
Assembly, to whom they have given the Sovereign power; and at the other end to
their own ears. (I Would scarce have the place to be so fastened:)


Phi. What if I do say this: is this like the teeth of time, and your sieves
and scummers?


Tim. Moreover, Sir, when you instruct us ( Lev. p. 115.) in all the several
sorts of Systemes of people (this Systeme I look upon to be a kind of Bastard
anchovy, or wild shalot) that belong to a Commonwealth; and how that these
systemes resemble the similar parts of a body natural: and if they be lawful
systemes, they are as the muscles of the body: but if unl^wful, they are Wens,
Biles, and Apostems engendered by the unnatural conflux of evil humors: and how
that a conflux of people to Market, or a Bullbaiting, though it be a lawful
systeme, yet it is an irregular systeme, by reason it is not ordered by law which
Dog shall play first; or which man shall sell the first roll of Ginger bread:
and that the Corporation of Beggars, Thieves, etc. though they may be regular
systemes (having a representative) yet they are not to be looked upon as lawful
Systemes, being not as yet allowed of by public authority: the brick shall be,
out of hand, burnt for the Halls, against the Parliament meet next.


Phi. What of all this?


Tim. Nay, I pray, Sir, don't interrupt me: let me make an end of my sentence:
and that as the several systemes of people are the similar parts of a
Commonwealth, so the public Ministers are the organical part of a
Commonwealth, resembling the Nerve^ and tendons that move the several limb^ of
a body natural: and that public persons appointed by the Sovereign, (this is
all Mathematick^) to instruct, or judge the people, are such memb^ of a
Commonwealth, as may be fi^ly compared to the Organs of voice in the body
natural: and that the service of Sheriffs, Justices of the peace, etc. is
answerable to the hands in the body natural. And that if a man be sent into
another Country secretly to explore the counsels and strength; (i^ he com^ only
to see, he may do well enough; but if he comes to explore, and b^ caught; he
may chance ^o be hanged:) he is to be looked upon as a Minister o^ the Common
wealth, though but private; and may be compared to an ey^ in the body natural:
(and very well, for a blind man makes a very bad Scout:) but those public
Ministers that are appointed to receive the Petitions, or other informations of
the peo* ple, are, as it were, the public ear of the Commonwealth: (I
profess, this artificial man thrives bravely; I hope the cheeks, and the chin
of the Commonwealth will come on by and by:) besides, Sir, when I look --


Phi. What, have not you done your sentence yet?


Tim. Alas, Sir, I have but just begun: my hand is but just in: I say, when I
look into the 24th. Chapter (above cited) of the nutrition and procreation of a
Commonwealth; and observe, how that the commodities of sea and land are the
nourishment of the Commonwealth; and that propriety or the constitution of
meum and tuum is the distribution of the materials of this nourishment; and
that buying, selling, etc. is the concoction of the commodities of a Common
wealth; which concoction is, as it were, the sanguification of the
Commonwealth, being performed by money, which is the very blood of a
Commonwealth: (for as natural blood is made of the fruits of the earth, and
circulating, nourishes, by the way, every member of the body natural: so money
is made out of the fruits of men's labors, and running up to Town, and then
down again into the Country, nourishes those politic members, that live upon
the road:)


Phi. Surely now you have done.


Tim. And when I observe further; how that the Collectors, Receivers, and
Treasurers are the Conduits and Vessels by which this blood (of money) is
conveyed to public use: and that the public Treasury is as the heart of the
Commonwealth; (so that, as the veins receiving the blood from the several
parts of the body, carry it to the heart; where being made vital, the heart by
the arteries sends it out again to enliven and enable for motion all the
members of the same: so the Collectors, etc. receiving the venose money, out of
the several parts of the Country, carry it to the heart politic; where being
vitaliz'd, it does strange things when it comes again into the Country:) and
that if a Commonwealth ben't strictly dieted, but highly fed, how that it
spawns and brings forth little Commonwealths, or Children of a Commonwealth:
(thus the artificial man of Spain laid about him, and begot (the Child)*
Hispaniola; and if Hispaniola should afterward grow up to have a little one,
then would Spain be a Grandfather.)


Phi. Certainly this sentence will have an end at some time or other.


Tim. Pray, Sir, don't speak to me; for I am in great haste, and have a great
way still to go: once again, I say, when I look also into the 29th Chapter of
your Leviathan; and there read of the several infirmities and diseases that
this artificial man, the Commonwealth, is subject to: (for, we must know, that
an artificial man, as well as other men, is very much out of sorts sometimes:)
and how that some proceed from defectuous procreation; (as when an old pockie,
gouty, crasie Commonwealth begets another, by reason of the mala stamina, or
vicious Conception, the Child Commonwealth either comes to an untimely death,
or by purging out the ill quality, breaks out into Biles and Scabs:) some from
seditious doctrines; such as killing a Tyrant is lawful; which venom, say you,
I will not doubt to compare to the biting of a mad dog; (no man in the World
would ever have doubted of it:) which is a Disease Physicians call Hydrophobia
or fear of water: for as he that is so bitten, has a continual torment of
thirst, and yet abhors water; and is in such an estate as if the poison
endeavored to convert him into a dog; (in a still night, you may hear one, so
converted* bark almost srom Dover to Calis:) so when a Monarchy is once bitten
to the quick, by those democratical Writers (and the teeth of time) that
continually snarl at the estate; it wants nothing more than a strong Monarch,
which nevertheless out of a certain Tyrannophobia, or fear of being strongly
governed, when they have him, they abhor: such likewise is the opinion of those
that hold there may be two Authorities in the same Commonwealth, Temporal, and
Spiritual; which disease, say you, not unfitly may be compared (it sits to a
Cows thumb) to the Epilepsie, or falling sickness (which the Jews took to be
one kind of possession by spirits) in the body natural. For as in this Disease,
there is an unnatural Spirit, ^r wind in the head that obstructeth the roots of
the nerves, and moving them violently, takes away the motion which naturally
they should have from the power of the Soul in the brain, and thereby causes
violent and irregular motions (which men call Convulsions) in the parts;
insomuch that he that is seized therewith, (...) down sometimes into the water,
and sometimes into the fire, as a man deprived of ^is senses; (a very good
lecture upon the Epilepsie:) so also in the body Politic, when the spiritual
and windy power, moves the members of a Commonwealth, by the terror of
punishments, and hope of rewards (which are the nerves of it,) otherwise than
by the civil power (which is the soul of the Commonwealth) they ought to be
moved; (this still is pure Mathematics) and by strange, and hard words
suffocates their understanding, it must needs thereby distract the people, and
either overwhelm the Commonwealth with oppression, or cast it into the fire of
a civil war.


Phi. What no end yet?


Tim. Such again, say you, is the opinion of those that are for mixed
government: making the power of levying money, which is the nutritive faculty
of a Commonwealth (that is supposing blood nourishes; for if it don't money is
clearly cut out:) run one way: the power of conduct and command, which is the
motive faculty (that is well enough, because conduct and command is performed by
the motion of legs and lips:) run another way: and the power of making laws,
which is the rational faculty (that is well enough also; because of law and
reason:) a third way: which irregularity of a Commonwealth to what Disease,
say you, in the natural body of man, I may exactly compare it, I know not: this
is the first time that Philautus has been at a loss; but so hoo! I have seen a
man, that had another man growing out of his side, with an head, arms, breast,
and stomach of his own: if, say you, he had had another growing o^t of his
other side, the comparison might then have been exact: (if I meet with the man,
I Will speak to him, to hire another man to grow out of the other side; and if that
be once done, goodnight Parliament for this October, and for ever after:)


Phi. Nor yet?


Tim. When I also read that want of money, especially in the approach of War,
may very aptly be compared to an Ague; (now for as long a Lecture upon an Ague,
as we had before upon the Falling Sickness:) wherein the fleshy parts being
congealed, or by venomous matter obstructed; the veins which by their natural
course empty themselves into the heart, are not (as they ought to be) supplied
from the arteries, whereby there succeeds first a cold contraction and
trembling of the limbs; (a very pretty Hypothesis for an Ague:) and afterward
a hot and strong endeavor of the heart, to force a passage for the blood; and
before it can do that, contenteth it self with the small refreshments of such
things as cool for a time; (a Julap from a Banker:) till (if nature be strong
enough) it break at last the contumacy of the parts obstructed ('it is a little
obscure, but the Devil they say is in an Ague:) and dissipate^ the venom into
sweat; (through ^he sieve, or scummer of the skin:) (...) (if nature be too
weak) the patient dies. Ting, tongue: ting, tongue:


Phi. Then never.


Tim. And that Monopolies and ab^ses of Publicans are the Pleurisy of the
Commonwealth. For as the blood, say you, in a Pleurisy, getting into the
membrane of the breast, breedet^ there an inflammation, accompanied with a
Fever and painful stitches: so say I and you together, money t^ blood of the
body politic, getting in too much abundance into the membranaceous Purses, and
Coffers of Publicans, and Farmers of public revenue; by inflammation, does
distend the Purse-strings, and make the sides of the Coffers to sob and groan:
and that the popularity of a potent subject is like Witchcraft: (though, with
Philautus, there be no such thing, yet for a need that will serve for a Disease
too:) and that too great a number of corporations; which are as it were many
lesser Commonwealths in the bowels of a greater; (that now is a notion) are
like worms in the entrails of a natural man: but that disputers against
absolute power, are not like those belly worms in general; but like those
little worms which Physicians call Ascarides.


Phi. I thought nothing had been infinite:


Tim. And when I meditate --


Phi. What, more mumping still?


Tim. I say when I meditate, upon those four accounts ( de Cive, p. 123.) for
which, the spaces between the times of the subjects meeting, under a Temporary
Monarch, elected by the people, may be fitly compared to those times, wherein
an absolute Monarch, who has no Heir Apparent, sleeps; with the introduction
thereunto, viz. to dissolve the Convent, so as it cannot meet again, is the
death of the people; just as sleeping, so as he can never wake more, is the
death of a man* (yes indeed I believe it may prove his death, if he don't use
some speedy means:) as therefore, say you, a King, who has no Heir, going to
(...) rest, so as never to rise again (i. ^) dying (a very pretty notion of
death: it is a going to rest, so as never to rise again) if he commit the
exercise of (...) regal authority to any one till he (...), does by consequence
give him the succession. So the people electing a Temporary Monarch, and not
reserving ^ power to convene delivers up to him t^ whole dominion of the
Country. Furthermore, as a King going to sleep f^r some season, entrusts the
administration of his Kingdom to some other (he cannot surely govern much, when
he'^ asleep) and waking takes it again; (that is, if no body has broken up the
doors, and stole away the Kingdom; for if so, he may take another nap:) So the
people, etc. and as a King who has committed the execution of his Authority to
another, himself in the mean while waking can recall this Commission again when
he pleases: (or else he has given out a very large one:) so the people, etc.
Lastly, As the King who commits his authority to another while himself sleeps,
not being able to wake again, till he whom he entrusted give consent; (such a
temptation as this would make some Trustees to walk as light as a Chambermaid)
loses at once both his power and his life; so the people, etc. and when I
consider --


Phi. And when I consider, that this sentence may last till to morrow this
time, I shall take my leave --


Tim. By no means, Sir; for I say, when I consider those fourteen elegant
comparisons, between the Papacy, or Kingdom of darkness, and the Kingdom of
Fairies; (with which you conclude your Leviathan) viz. the Kingdom of Fairies
sprung from old Wives Fables, concerning Ghosts and Spirits, that play seats in
the night: and what is the Hierarchy of Rome, but the Ghost of the deceas^d
Roman Empire, starting up from the ruins of that Heathen Power. There Is Ghost
for Ghost already: A second Ghostliness they agree in is, that t^ Papists use
in their devotions the Latin language: and what, I pray, is Latin but the Ghost
of the old Roman language, walking up and down Calepine, Cooper, Goldman, and
such like enchanted places? Thirdly, The Fairies have got but one Universal
King, called King Oberon: the Ecclesiastics have got a King Pope, that shall
play, in the night, at push-pin with their King Oberon. Fourthly, The Fairies
are Spirits and Ghosts: Ecclesiastics outdo 'em there; for they are spiritual
men and Ghostly Fathers. Fifthly, Fairies and Ghosts inhabit darkness,
solitudes, and graves: Nay, if you be good at that, we can be as private as
you: for, Ecclesiastics walk in obscurity of doctrine, in Monasteries,
Churches, Churchyards, and dark colored Cloths. Sixthly, The Fairies have
their enchanted Castles and certain Gigantine Ghosts, that domineer over the
Regions round about them: say you so? we can fit you there too: clap but a
Gigantick Pontificial Clergyman upon the top of his Cathedral; and he looks
over all the little Parochials, just as the Devil looked over Lincoln:
Seventhly, The Fairies can never be arrested or sued, though they steal
Garters, Shoo-strings, Pin-Cushions, etc. and, if the Ecclesiastics be not as
sly I am much mistaken: for no sooner do you call 'em to appear before the
visible Tribunal of civil justice, but they presently vanish into their Ghostly
Courts: Eighthly, The Fairies are said to take young Children out of their
Cradles, and to change them into natural Fools or Elves; the Ecclesiastics are
old Dogs at that; for they take young men out of the Cradle of reason, and lay
them upon the hurdle of hard words, Metaphysics, and Miracles. Ninthly, The
Shop or Operatory of the Fairies is not as yet determined: there we get ground;
for the operatories of the Clergy are well enough known to be the Universities:
Tenthly, When the Fairies are displeased with any body, they are said to send
their Elves to pin^h them; the Ecclesiastics (I Will warrant you) will not be cast
out at pinching; for no sooner does any state displease them, but they enchant
the elvish superstitious subjects to pinch their Princes: and sometimes enchant
one Prince to pinch another. Eleventhly, Fairies marry not; there you get
nothing; neither do Priests. Twelfthly, It is said of Fairies that they enter
into the Dairies, and Feast upon the Cream which they skim from the milk. The
Ecclesiastics are very good at skiming: for what are the Church lands but the
very Cream of Nations skim'd from the Estates of ignorant, flotten, Gentlemen?
Thirteenthly, What kind of money is current in the Kingdom of Fairi^s is not
recorded in the story; but with the Ecclesiastics, all is Fish that comes to
the Net. Lastly, As there is no such thing at all as Fairies, but only in the
phansies of silly idle people; so, though it be strongly reported, yet there is
no such man at all as the Pope; but he is as mere a Phantasm, as Beelzebub the
Prince of Phantasms:


Phi. And what of all this? here is no conclusion yet.


Tim. No, Sir: but now I conclude, and say, that when I find such things as
these, and a thousand more such, not in your Peak or Ulisses, (for a Poet has
his privileges as well as a Jugler or Barber;) but in your grave and
Philosophical reckonings --


Phi. What then? I hope we are not beginning the sentence again:


Tim. Then, say I, that though Metaphors, Tropes, and other Rhetorical figures
be the cause of very absurd conclusions; and therefore must not by any means;
no, not by any means, be admitted in reckoning and seeking of truth; and though
again (as you have it Lev. p. 21.) the light of humane minds is perspicuous
words, but by exact definitions first snuffed and purged from ambiguity; Reason
is the pace; Increase of Science, the way; and the benefit of mankind the end.
And on the contrary, Metaphors, and senseless and ambiguous words, are like
ignes fatui; and reasoning upon them, is wandering amongst innumerable
absurdities; and their end, contention, and sedition or contempt; Yet Philautus
himself (as great a reckoner, and stickler for truth as he would seem to be;)
when it is for his tooth, can smack his lips at an Anchovy, as loud as a
Coach-whip. And now I have done.


Phi. In good time indeed! and what, Tim, is there no difference to be made
between the Rhetoric which is all flash and froth; and such as drives at
notion, and carries that which is weighty and considerable at the bottom?


Tim. O, Sir, a very great difference: because you have found out a very
peculiar way of making your self and your Writings considerable, which no body
else ever thought of.


Phi. I am considerable for the sake of my works; and my works are considerable
for their own sakes, and mine together. I know no other way of being
considerable.


Tim. This way, Sir, is very troublesome: a man must write well, and meditate
much to become thus considerable: there is a much easier way, than this, Sir.


Phi. How so prithee?


Tim. Get some body to write against some Book of yours; and let the title of
it be Philautus considered; and before the ink be dry, you will become as
considerable, as the House of Austria.


Phi. Thou art a most arch wag, Tim: here take a Plum. Philautus considered,
and therefore Philautus is considerable! or an account of Philautus, therefore
Philautus is of account. May not Tom Thumb, or Tom of Odcomb be made
considerable after this manner?


Tim. Yes, Sir; and so may Tom of Malmesbury too; having in the 51. page of his
Letter to Dr. Wallis tried the experiment upon himself. Where, the Doctor
looking upon you as one to be pitty'd or contemned rather than meddled withal;
Pish, say you; the egregious Professor is a Fool for that: for if Mr. Hobbs be
not a considerable person, how came he to entitle the beginning of his Book,
Mr. Hobbs considered? now whether this be Wit, or Mathematics I know not: but
one of them I am sure it is. For Philautus is a man that plays at nothing less;
despising all the middle regions of knowledge.


Phi. Well done, Tim: specially well done: for it is not above six or seven
years agone, or thereabouts, since I wrote a Book called, contra fastum
professorum Geometriae: wherein I have plainly shown, that there is full out is
great uncertainty, and as many cheats, errors and falsehoods in the writings of
Mathematicians, as in the writings of other kind of ordinary Philosophers.


Tim. This Dr. Wallis is a most wicked and pernicious Creature; a man of the
most rural language, and absurd reasoning that ever spoke or writ.


Phi I know that well enough: but what makes you say so?


Tim. Because, till he took you to talk for your Geometry, and showed you to be
no Mathematician; Mathematics (as it is said in another case) was the very
smile of nature, the gloss of the World, the varnish of the Creation, a bright
paraphrase upon bodies; whether it discovered it self in the morning blush of
computation in general, called Logic; or opened its fair and virgin eyelids
in the dawning of the computation of men's duties, called Ethics; or whether it
darted forth its more vigorous and sprightful beams in the noon day of motion
called Physics. However 'twas the first born of corporeal beings, the Lady and
Queen of sensitive beauties, the clarifier and refiner of the Chaos, etc. but,
immediately after the Doctor put forth his Elenchus Hobbianae Geometriae; one
would wonder to see how the price of Olives fell. Alas! before that scurvy Book
came forth, Philautus sometimes could not get above three or four lines into an
Epistle dedicatory, but he must be slabbering over his dear Mis, his sweet and
honey Mathematics: (but poor Aurelia is now grown old:) Hum: not: my most
honored Lord, from the most principal parts of nature, reason, and passion,
have proceeded two kinds of learning, Mathematical, and dogmatical: as for
Mathematical, it is free from controversy and dispute, etc. but in the other
there is nothing undisputable. Sometimes Philautus dissembles his love, and
goes a little further into the Epistle, before he falls aboard. Ep. Ded. de
Cive. Were the nature of humane actions as distinctly known, as the nature of
quantity in Geometrical figures, the strength of avarice and ambition, which is
sustained by the erroneous opinions of the vulgar, as touching the nature of
right and wrong, would presently faint, and languish; and mankind should enjoy
such an immortal peace, that (unless it were for habitation, on supposition
that the earth should grow too narrow for her inhabitants) there would hardly
be left any pretense for War. There would be brave Mathematical days! such an
immortal Peace, that there would be neither War, nor pretense for War. And all
because of Mathematics. For, say you, in another place (Lev. p. 50.) the
doctrine of right and wrong is perpetually disputed by the Pen and Sword:
whereas the doctrine of lines and figures is not so.


Phi. Why is it?


Tim. Not much till you pretended to the Mathematics. But yet they are never
the more free from dispute for your reason, viz. because men care not in that
subject, what be truth, as a thing that crosses no man's ambition, profit, or
lust: (ah! woe's me; woe's me: for Philautus, upon my word, has cared very much
ever since his Mathematical Girl gave him a clap from Oxford:) for I doubt not,
but if it had been a thing contrary to any man's right of dominion, or to the
interest of men that have dominion, that the three Angles of a Triangle should
be equal to two Angles of a Square; that doctrine should have been, if not
disputed, yet by the burning of all Books of Geometry, suppressed as far as he
whom it concerned was able.


Phi. Why, don't you think, Tim, if the soremention'd property of a Triangle
should prove injurious to a Commonwealth, but that those who have the supreme
Authority would call a meeting, and take some speedy care about it.


Tim. Care about it, Sir? they would have a Session purposely, not only to turn out
all Triangles out of Office, and places of trust and strength; but to banish
them forthwith five miles from any Corporation.


Phi. I say again (as I said, in the 2d. page of the Epistle Dedicatory to my
Humane nature;) that the reason why Mathematics, or that part of learning
which consist in comparing of motion and figure, is free from controversy and
dispute; is because there is nothing in that Science against a man's interest: i.
e. there is nothing that crosses a man's ambition, profit, or lust.


Tim. Fie, fie! don't say it over again, Philautus: you had better say you were
at that time a little too much in love with the Mathematics: and, you know, in
that condition, a man may be somewhat abated as for speaking reason. And
therefore if I were you I Would choose to have it go for a sudden pang, rapture, or
any thing else rather than sense: for you cannot but have read, Philautus, what
a World of Pens have been drawn and blunted in the great quarrels and Wars that
have been about blazing Stars, solid Orbs, the motion of the Earth, and such
like points: and yet I don't remember that Copernicus or his Doctrine did ever
whisk away any man's Titles of honor, or ran away with his Estate into another
Country, or choused him of his Mistress. And therefore don't let us talk any
more of this, Philautus: for without doubt, when you writ those two places, you
had had a sad night on it, and been in a most strong fit of the Mathematics.


Phi. So, so: this is well: it seems then to thee, Tim, that my Book contra
Geometras, or contra fastum, etc. does contradict what I formerly said of the
Mathematics, and Geometry. Therefore, prithee, do so much as answer me one
question. What Is the difference between Geometria and Geometra? they both end
in a; and therefore have a care of being out.


Tim. The first, Sir, I take for the Science it self; the latter for him that
is, or pretends to be a Master of it.


Phi. Now, Tim, do but consider my first four lines contra fastum, etc. viz.
Contra Geometras (amice Lector) non contra Geometriam haec scribo. Artem ipsam,
artium navigandi, aedificandi, pingendi, computandi, and denique (scientiae
omnium nobilissimae) Physicae matrem, aeque ac qui maxim, laudibus extollendam
censeo. Do you see, Tim, how horribly you are mistaken? it is not against the
Science of Geometry, or Geometry it self that I write: for without doubt
Geometry it self is an absolute Science, and being a Science --


Tim. Yes: and being a Science, it is certainly a Science: but what then do you
write against?


Phi. What do I write against? I write against the Authors; the silly,
negligent, sloathful Authors; that are as full of errors, as a Beggar is of
lice: the proud, haughty, supercilious Authors; who if they can but raise, or
let fall a perpendicular, think there is no certain knowledge without rule and
compasses: I say, I write against these; who always were, and are, and (if I
live) shall be as much cheated, and gulled and fopt, as any men in the World.


Tim. But have you not, Philautus, several Seats and Pews to place these
Authors in? methinks, those same malicious Raskals, that answer Books, and
will not let Circles be squared, ought to be set in the Bellfry: for they are much
more scabby, and lousy than the rest.


Phi. I deny not but there may be some mean Ecclesiastical wretches, that may
pretend to Mathematics: but my design, Tim, is not to take down the Crest of
this or that small, pedantick Geometer; but I fly at the whole Covy:
Geometrarum totam invado nationem; as I have it in my Dedication: and again p.
5. ipsa aggredior principia, and interdum etiam demonstrationes. Pro Geom^tris
autem omnibus oppugnabo Euclidem, qui omnium Geometrarum magister existimatur,
and interpretem ejus omnium optimum Clavium. Because they make such boasting of
him, I set upon their great Flag-man, Euclid himself; and his Vice Admiral
Clavius.


Tim. For my life, I cannot get it out of my mind, but that the price of Olives
is certainly fallen. For, till about the year 56. Philautus did not only think
that Geometry, or the Lady her self was the beauty and Cream of the Creation;
but that the very men, the two-legg'd men that studied and admired her, were
the most careful, the wisest, and most happy people that ever opened Book. And,
I am confident, that had not Philautus himself been a little disappointed in
some of his Writings, by this time (had he believed any such things) they would
have proved all Angels.


Phi. Never did I intend any such thing at all: for whatever I have written to
the honor and commendation of Geometry; 'twas (as I said before) Geometry it
self that I always meant, not those fantastical, conceited people that
ignorantly profess it.


Tim. If this, Philautus, was always your opinion, in my mind you have a very
crasty style. For suppose one should take up your Book de Cive --


Phi. Then, do I say, that he has taken up one of the best Books that ever was
written in the whole World: for, though I say it my self (as I do in the 7th
page of my Letter to Dr. W.) never was any Book more magnified beyond the Seas;
and therefore, as I my self say again (six Less. p. 56.) in French it carries
the Title of Ethics demonstrated:


Tim. Very modest: it is pity any body should say so, but ones self: now, Sir,
if you please to let this same honest Gentleman read the seventh page of your
Epistle Dedicatory, he will find these words. And truly the Geometricians have
very admirably performed their part. (do you see, Sir, they are the two legged
Geometricians that have done the feat:) for whatsoever assistance does accrue
to the life of man, whether from the observation of the Heavens, or from the
description of the Earth, from the notation of times, or from the remotest
experiments of navigation; finally, whatsoever they are in which this present
age does differ from the rude simpleness of antiquity, we must acknowledge to
be a debt which we owe merely to Geometry.


Phi. Now, Tim, let me ask thee one thing: whether is a man's mind best to be
ghess'd at from the beginning of a sentence or end of it? don't I conclude and
say, that all those fine things are owing to Geometry it self, and (to keep out
the pragmatical Geometricians) don't I say besides, merely to Geometry?


Tim. Merely may do excellent service now, to hedge out the Geometricians; but
when you writ that Book, you designed no such thing.


Phi. How can you tell what I designed?


Tim. Very well: because you tell us your self, in the words immediately
following this great encomium of Geometry. viz. if, say you, the moral
Philosophers had as happily discharged their duty, etc. As what? as Geometry it
self? Geometry it self was never upon duty; and knows no more how to discharge
any duty, than to discharge a Musket. No, no, I am confident, Philautus, it
must be the huffing and pragmatical Geometricians, that you then meant. But
however you need not be at all concerned about it; for neither Geometry, nor
the Geometricians can ever sue you, for those commendations; because you have
in print revoked the whole sentence. And in law, you know, the last Will always
voids the former.


Phi. I revoke in print? I have made many of my Adversaries to pull in their
Horns, and hang their Ears: but never said any thing so hastily my self, as to
recant, or repent of it.


Tim. How it came about, I know not: (perhaps Poetry might send you a Basket of
Chickens;) but all that same observation of the Heavens, the description of the
Earth, and the rest of that rich treasure, and furniture which about 47. you
gave to Geometry, in the year 50. you bequeathed it all to Poetry; just as it
stood, silk Curtains and all.


Phi. To Poetry? that is very like Geometry indeed!


Tim. Yes to Poetry: you shall hear it Sir: it is an excellent sentence, and may
do afterward for Grammar; upon condition 'twill be towardly, and promise to be
guided by the Precepts of true Philosophy. Whatsoever commodity men receive
from the observation of the Heavens, from the description of the Earth, from
the account of time, from walking on the Seas; and whatsoever distinguishes
the civility of Europe from the barbarity of the American Salvages, is the
Workmanship of fancy but guided by the Precepts of true Philosophy.


Phi. But where is Poetry all this while?


Tim. Here Is fancy; and that is as well, Sir.


Phi. But how do you know, that by fancy I must needs mean the fancy of a Poet;
and not that of a Geometrician? and again how do you know but that by
Philosophy, I meant particularly Geometry.


Tim. I Will tell you, Sir, how I came to discover these two great secrets. The
sentence I just now mentioned is in the 132. page of your Answer to Sir William
Davenant's Preface before Gondibert: which answer is so richly freight with the
History, nature and laws of Poetry, that I am more than pretty well assured,
that by fancy you could not easily mean that of a Geometrician. And that by
Philosophy likewise you meant not particularly Geometry, but Philosophy in
general, I am as well assured; because in the very next words you advise Poets,
to be well skilled in the true doctrine of moral virtue; (that in their Heroic
Poems they may exhibit a venerable and amiable image of Heroic virtue) and (a
little after) to consult the possibility of nature; and not to talk of their
impenetrable armours, enchanted Castles, invulnerable bodies, iron men, flying
Horses, and a thousand other such things which (as you say) are easily feigned
by them that dare. But, now I think on it, why am I so mad as to trouble my self
about this? it is better by half for me to let all pass for Geometry; for then
have I two most tearing sentences in praise of the Geometricians: for, as for
Geometry it self giving any precepts for the guidance of the fancy, she is so
modest and mealymouth'd, that I Will trust her for doing any such thing; unless
she make use of the pen, or mouth of some Cuckoldy Geometrician.


Phi. You may catch, and carp, and wrest Tim, as long as you will: but you will
never be able to find any one place, wherein I do absolutely and positively
affirm, that the Writings of Geometricians do any ways transcend the Writings
of other men.


Tim. Absolutely and positively affirm! that truly may be somewhat difficult.
That is, you would have me, I suppose, show you some such place as this, viz.
Whereas I Thomas, the great Mathematician and Philosopher of Malmesbury;
having, for ten years together, taken all occasions to magnify the labors,
and admire the success of the Geometricians in their several undertakings above
all other Writers: do now publicly declare to all the World, that by
Geometricians, I meant Geometricians. In witness whereof I have set my hand and
seal in the presence of etc. Such a place as this I don't know, on a sudden,
where to find: but setting aside the solemnity of such an acknowledgement, I
don't know any thing that ever was more plainly expressed, than what you have
in many places said to the vast credit of Geometricians themselves. But now
they are all Canniballs and Cuckolds. Let but any body read the 15. page of
your Leviathan.


Phi. So he may, if he will: 'twill do him good at the heart; that or any other
page.


Tim. For all that you would give money to buy it out of your Book.


Phi. I will not part with any one line of any Book that I ever writ, in my whole
life, for all the money you can offer.


Tim. You shall keep it then, Sir: the only way, say you, to become truly wise,
and to avoid false and senseless tenets, is to order words aright: that is, to
determine what every word shall signify, and how it is to be placed: which no
body has done but the Geometricians.


Phi. Now, I am sure, I have caught thee, Tim: for the word Geometrician is
not in that whole page.


Tim. But there is that which is as like it, as the Philosopher of Malmsbury is
like Mr. Hobbs. I think I can say it just as you do. Seeing then that truth
consists in the right ordering of names in our affirmations, a man that
seeks precise truth had need to remember what every name he uses stands for;
and to place it accordingly, or else he will find himself entangled in words,
as a Bird in Lime-twigs, the more he struggles, the more belimed. And therefore
in Geometry (which is the only Science that it has pleased God hitherto to
bestow upon mankind) men begin at the settling the signification of their words;
which settling of significations they call definitions, and place them in the
beginning of their reckonings. Do you mind it, Sir? they are those same men,
that begin at the settling of the signification of their words; and they call
such settling of significations definitions; and (by the blessing of God upon
their extraordinary care and endeavors) the doctrine of lines and figures is
so accurately performed by them, that that alone as yet deserves the name of
Science.


Phi. I am not bound, Tim, to remember every word that I have ^poken, or writ.


Phi. No, Sir; that would be a most unreasonable burden: and therefore I
suppose when you writ your contra fastum, etc. You might have forgot also what
you said Lev. p. 20. viz. that of all Creatures none is subject to absurdity
but men: and none so much as those that profess Philosophy. For it is most true
that Cicero says of them somewhere; that there can be nothing so absurd, but
may be found in the Books of Philosophers. And why? because all, but
Geometricians, are Sots, Lubbers, and Logger-heads.


Phi. I am sure these last are none of my words.


Tim Right: but these that follow are (which are as good) and the reason, say
you, is manifest. For there is not one of them (and now there is ten thousand
since you failed in Geometry:) that begins his ratiocination from the
definitions, or explications of the names they are to use; which is a method
that has been used only in Geometry; whose conclusions have therefore been
made indisputable. Do you mind it again, Philautus; it is not an idle tale of
ambition, profit, or lust; (such as you talked of before) that makes the
conclusions in Geometry to be indisputable; but it is the admireable method,
etc. which Geometricians alone make use of?


Phi. I don't speak one word of the method which Geometricians use; but only of
that which is used in the Science of Geometry.


Tim. By whom: by Sow-Gelders or Rat-Catchers? I beseech you, Philautus, don't
try at that any more: for you know well enough that Geometry her self cannot
wipe her own nose according to art; unless she borrows a quadrant of some
neighbor. And besides, I find that you right down affirm, that the
Mathematicians are the only men, that reason methodically; and in a discourse
too, where one could not easily expect any such thing; ( viz. in your
Animadversions upon Bishop Bramhall's Vindication of true Liberty, etc. p. 46.)
but only I consider, Philautus, 'twas in the days of ^our Amors; when you took
all possible occasion to hook in that venerable esteem you had of those kind of
Writers. Reason teaches, say you, and the example of those who only reason
methodically, say you, which are the Mathematicians, say you, that a man when
he will demonstrate the truth of what he is to say, must in the first place
determine what he will have to be understood by his words; which determination
is called definition; whereby the significations of his words are so clearly
set down, that there can creep in no ambiguity. Thus 'twas, Philautus, for many
years together: write about Humane Nature, Ethics, Politics, Liberty and
Necessity, or any thing else, still Mathematics was the word, and the
Mathematicians were the only white boys. I know that that part of Philosophy
wherein are considered lines and figures, has been delivered to us notably
improved by the ancients. I confess indeed that that part of Philosophy by
which magnitudes and figures are computed is highly improved: the like
advancement I have not observed in the other parts of it, etc. Because the
Elements of Geometry having been improved by the best wits of all ages, has
afforded greater plenty of matter than can well be thrust together within the
narrow limits of this discourse; I thought fit to admonish the Reader, that
before he proceeds further, he takes into his hands the works of Euclid,
Archimedes, Apollonius and other as well ancient as modern Writers. For to what
end is it to do over again that which is already done? the little therefore
that I shall say concerning Geometry, shall be such only as is new and
conducing to Natural Philosophy.


Phi. But what is all this for? and whence had it, Tim?


Tim. All this, Sir, I had out of the Translator of your Book de Corpore. The
first place I mentioned is in your Epistle Dedicatory: the second in the
beginning of your Logic: and the last in the 149. page of your Philosophy.


Phi. What is any mechanical Translator to me? this Translator, for ought I
know, is some two-penny Almanack-maker: or some giddyheaded, conceited
Mathematician; who had a mind to foist into my Works some commendations of
himself, and his own trade.


Tim. I don't think, Sir, that the Translator has wronged you much; because (in
his Epistle to the Reader, he says) what he did was viewed, corrected and
ordered according to your own mind and pleasure. But perhaps the noise of your
own Latin may be more delightful to you. Scio Philosophiae partem illam, quae
versatur circa lineas and figuras traditam nobis esse been cultam a veteribus.
Been cultam! I promise you, that is pretty well for such old Fornicators. Fateor
quidem partem Philosophiae eam, in qua magnitudinum figurarumque rations
supputantur, egregie cultam esse. Say you so: Egregie cultam esse? I think they
deserve a largess: for by the following words they have wrought very hard. In
reliquis partibus Philosophiae similem operam positam non vidi, etc.


Phi. And by the words following those; ( viz. consilium ineo, quoad potero,
Philosophiae Universae, etc.) others intend to work as hard, and in time to
deserve as well.


Tim. Who do you mean, Philautus, you nown dear self?


Phi. Yes, Tim, it is I: I my own self that have advanced all parts of
Philosophy to indisputable and Mathematical certainty. It Is I that set forth
the first Book that ever was truly written about civil Philosophy (Epis. ded.
de corp.) in respect of whom (I mean my self) Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle and
the rest were mere Chimney-sweepers, black pieces of superficial gravity,
Phantasms and Ghosts of Philosophy, and served only to be derided by Lucian.
It Is I that first show the way ( Lev. p. 87.) how to generate a Commonwealth
the great Leviathan; or rather (to speak more reverently) that mortal God, to
which we owe under the immortal God our Peace and defense: and that have sent
word to ( Lev. p. 391.) such as govern Kingdoms, that if either they intended
to preserve themselves in authority, or to have their Clergy and Gentry
preserved from the venom of Heathen Politicians, and from the incantation of
deceiving Spirits, they should appoint that Book of mine publicly to be taught
in the Universities. It Is I again that first banished the Hobgoblin
School-distinctions; ( Epis. Ded. de corp.) and i^stead thereof have brought
pure light into natural Philosophy: ( non pugnando, sed diem inferendo, as I
there have it) having first discovered such a principle in the World as motion;
and having out of my many good wishes for the improvement of Philosophy,
revealed this great secret to the lazy backs at Gresham. Who (as I tell them
Ep. Ded. de not. aeris; and in my Letter to Dr. W. p. 55.) may do very well, if
they would not set their minds wholly upon every new gin, and janty device that
is brought from beyond Sea. Nam conveniant, studia conferant, experimenta
faciant quantum volunt, nisi and principiis utantur meis, nihil proficient.
They may meet at Gresham College, and the President (which my dear friend and
Translator Sorbiere wittily observed) may knock the table with the wooden
hammer, and the fellows may lay all their experimental noddles together, and
they may build Furnaces, and buy Coals, and grind Spectacles, and shoot Stars,
and kill Cats and Pigeons; but they will never be able to make so much as the
tail of a Mouse, unless they apply themselves to the doctrine of my motion, and
send for me, who will be very ready to help them so long as they use me
civilly: for I am at a composition with nature; and she has promised to do
nothing but by me and my motion. It Is I that have heard that Hugenius and
Eustachio Divini were to be tried by their Glasses who was most skillful in
Optics of the two; but, for my part, (Letter to Dr. W. p. 54.) before I set
forth my Book de Homine, I never saw any thing written of that subject
intelligibly. Lastly, it is I alone ( Ep. Ded. contra fast. etc.) that have
thoroughly examined and mended the principles of Geometry it self, and in spite
of all my Adversaries have truly squared the Circle.


Tim. What an excellent thing it is for a man to keep a common placeBook of his
own deserts: especially if it be made out of his own works, and that the
quotations be ready? there comes, suppose, a good honest fellow to Philautus;
who having looked upon his Picture before his Latin Works; and finding there,
en quam Modice habitat Philosophia; tells him that those words, as they may be
taken, sit about him excellently well. Say you so, quoth Philautus? if any man
takes those words in a bad sense, let him be who he will that very man do I
take for a Fool. Because I am not only the best Logician, the best Moralist,
and the best Natural Philosopher, but the greatest Mathematician in all Europe.
As at large I grant it, and acknowledge to my self, in several places of my
several Books, such Pages, such Articles, and such Editions. Neither is there
any thing of Vainglory or self-conceit in all this; because (quoth Philautus)
there is not; as I my self have proved it in several places of my Writings. For
(to define it strictly) Vain glory or self-conceit is a certain idle and wanton
form of speech; by which a man, either in the shade or in the open Sun, admires
himself, being not justly called thereunto. And that man has very little skill
in Morality, and the common actions of humane life, that cannot see the justice
of commending a man's self, as well as of any thing else, in his own defense.
And to speak not only prettily well, but extraordinary well of a man's self if
vilified and provoked, is a great instance of Heroic virtue: (as I have at
large proved it, both in my six Lessons, p. 56. and in my Letter to Dr. W. p.
57.) and he that neglects that piece of justice toward himself is a most
pusillanimous sneaker; and (for ought I know) neglects a duty as great, as any
of those that belong to the Clergy-mens two Tables. And thus it happened when I
first put out my Book de Cive: some snarled at this, some looked askew upon
that, and some found fault with the whole. But I being well acquainted with the
value of my self; (keeping always by me a Register of my own deserts:) and
being well skilled in the greatest actions of humane life, presently did my
self justice, and straighten'd all. For (as was said before) I printed a Book a
little after, wherein I told my self, and the Earl of Devonshire, that my Book
de Cive was not merely the best, but the only Book that ever was written of
that subject. And then, I pray, what became of my absurd and rural detractors?
So again, there was a small pragmatical Cypherer (he was one of the resemblance
of Divines:) went and reported that I had committed some great mistakes in the
very principles of Geometry. That fellow, say I, shall presently be made a Fool
of; and forthwith I call to my principal moral virtue self justice, to rally
together all the famous things that have been spoken concer^ing me; (now,
there is no self conceit in this, it being other peoples conceit of me, not my
conceit of my self:) I know a passage (Letter to Dr. W. p. 52.) in an Epistle
written by a learned French man to an eminent person in France; wherein I am
reckoned amongst the Galilaeo's the Des Carteses, the Bacons and the
Gassendi's: and it is generally believed that some of these were no
inconsiderable Mathematicians (especially Des Carts) and I am sure in the
Epistle my name stands immediately after his. But if any body should question
the truth of this testimony, it being foraign, I am sure it cannot be denied
(though my name is not to the Book) but that I give this following testimony of
my self ( Lux Mathem. p. 36, 37.) viz. Hobbesius extra legitur, intelligitur,
laudatur: Hobbesii inventa tum in Geometria tum in Physica multa, nova,
excelsa, clara, utilia sunt: imo talia, ut nec aetas prior majora vidit, nec
(quantum conjicio) futura confutabit aut extinguet. O brave Arthur of Bradley!
now they are mere Asses that think any of this ostentation; it being only to
vex and confound my Back-biters. Oh how the Raskals do pine and fret, when I
let go the great consciousness of my own worth upon my self! In short, they may
talk and write what they will; but if I don't commend my self much faster, than
they can possibly ever discommend me, then will I give in, and patiently submit
to their scurrilous, and clownish contumelies. But notwithstanding all this
that you have now said for your self, or I for you; I have a very great
suspicion of one thing --


Phi. What Is that, Tim?


Tim. That though to praise a man's self, in order to the vexatio^ of his
Enemies be a very pretty divertisement; and most undoubtedly a moral virtue;
yet this will not fully reconcile you to your self in the case of the
Mathematics.


Phi. Why not?


Tim. You must hear the last place which I promised to repeat to you,
concerning your former opinion of the Mathematicians; and you will then perhaps
perceive somewhat. Quoniam autem (de Corp. p. 106.) pars ista Philosophiae
(Geometriae) ab excellentissimis omnium temporum ingeniis exculta (we had been
culta, and egregie before; now it is got to exculta:) uberiorem tulit segetem,
q^am ut in angustias propositi operis nostri contrudi possit; Lectorem ad hunc
locum accedentem admonendum esse censui, ('it was then very good advice, and so
it is still for all your contra fastum, etc.) ut Euclidis, Archimedis,
Apollonii, aliorumque tum antiquorum tum recentiorum scripta in manus sumat.
Quorsum enim actum agere? ego vero de rebus Geometricis pauca tantum and nova
and ea praesertim quae Physicae inserviunt proximis aliquot capitibus dicturus
sum.


Phi. Now what do you make of all this?


Tim. Oh Sir! of that same excellentissimis omnium temporum ingeniis exculta,
etc. I make very much: viz. that when you writ that same Book de corpore, you
were so fully satisfied with what the man Euclid, the man Archimedes and the
man Apollonius had done; (who were not three Sciences, but tres substantes viri
in Geometry) that you did then think that there was nothing to be said against
them; nor, as far as they had gone, any thing to be altered. Quorsum enim actum
agere? ay quorsum indeed: ego tantum nova and pauca, etc. but now, Philautus,
they are all Scoundrels, Hedg-hogs, and Caterpillars; not knowing so much as
what a point is, or what a line is, or what superficies is, or what an angle is
nor any thing else: nay you don't certainly know ( non videtur Propositio illa
universaliter vera, say you, sed dubitans nil pronuncio) but the famous 47th
Proposition it self may be false? so that I am afraid that the Gods must
restore to Pythagoras all the Bullocks they have received for that Proposition.
Now, I Will tell you, Philautus, how all this came about. -- 'twas just so:
really 'twas.


Phi. Really 'twas, Tim? thou art really an Owl. 'Twas just so? how so was it?


Tim. You know, Philautus, you have written a Poem upon the Peak: and upon
Ulisses.


Phi. Well.


Tim. Now I am very confident, that were those verses, as capable of being
confuted, as your Mathematics are, and have been; if need were (as was said
before about Logic) we should presently have a Book out contra Fastum Pecci,
and Ulissis: wherein it should be proved that there never was any such place as
the Peak; nor any such man as Ulisses; but that the one was a standing Phantasm
in Derbyshire; 'tother was a Phantasm that traveled.


Phi. And how do you apply this to Mathematics.


Tim. I Will tell you two sayings of your own; and then you may apply your self.
The one is Lev. p. 21. viz. who is so stupid as both to mistake in Geometry,
and also to persist in it, when another detects his error to him? the other is
Ep. Ded. Hum. not. viz. as often as reason is against a man, so often will a man be
against reason.


Phi. I meant that, Tim, only of other people: for I my self never forsook
reason in my whole life; and therefore, suppose, I should grant that in former
times I might speak a little too warmly in praise of the Geometricians: am I,
Tim, obliged to be always of the same mind; when I had so many good reasons to
alter it?


Tim. Now, Philautus, you say somewhat indeed: if you had had any reasons to do
so. But you never had any, nor are ever likely to have any. But only according
as you have been bitten by the Doctor, and the teeth of time; so your distemper
has constantly increased; and thereupon you invent new exceptions, and seek out
new places of refuge. For it is very evident, that when you were first taken
ill; 'twas a mere plain Wallisiophobia: but the Doctor getting deeper and
deeper into you; it is heightened now into a most absolute Euclidophobia: which
is a Disease almost as ill as that same Tyrannophobia you spoke of before. And
I am very much afraid if the rest of your Writings were as strictly examined,
as your Mathematics have been; that at last it may come to a perfect
Philosophophobia; which is the most dreadful howling Disease that can possibly
befall a man: ten thousand Scepticks don't make half such a noise, as one man
that has got the Philosophophobia. Therefore I pray, Sir, have a care of it:
for really I look upon you to be a going that way. And I perceive you your self
are not without some apprehensions of danger; by what you say in your Epistle
Dedicatory to your contra Fastum, etc. For a certain, say you, either I am
stark mad, or all the Geometricians are so: for I differ from them all.
Remember that, Sir; and, as I said, be careful of your self: for I believe, as
for their parts, they all hold pretty sound as yet.


Phi. Sound? Yes, so is a Tub with twenty great holes at the bottom. Their
principles are all false; their demonstrations are many of them false; (and
therefore you are likely to have a good reckoning:) as I have evidently made it
out by most solid reasons.


Tim. I wish, Sir, you would tell me where those same solid reasons lie. For I can
find nothing but only some Grammatical, Metaphysical small-shot: such as you
formerly discharged at the Doctor, when you and Mathematics first fell out.
'Tother day, Philautus, I looked upon a Book of yours, called Examinatio and
emendatio Mathematicae hodiernae; a very good Title: surely, think I, we shall
have some notable Reformation. But reading on I found qualis explicatur in
Libris Johannis Wallisii. Whenever I saw that same qualis etc. in the Title, I
presently, from that Symptom, concluded that there would be very much of the
forementioned distemper in the Book it self. And so it proved: there being very
little besides Grammatical nibling, and tearing rants at Algebra. Quantumvis,
says the Doctor, non sim ^go prorsus nescius, etc. Out, out, out! says
Philautus; abominably out! Quantumvis Wallisius Doctus sit Mathematicus, non
est certe Latinae linguae peritissimus. Quantumvis, prorsus; what both in the
same sentence? the like was never known. For quantumvis is a mark of
uncertainty; but prorsus puts all out of doubt. Etsi might have done well
enough; but quantumvis can never do. Then immediately after this, say you,
follows sigillatim for singulis, instituat for institueret, laboret for
laboraret, proferre for efferre, and those barbarous Scholastical Phrases, viz.
Pro forma, idem erit ac si, and the like: as also this: cum quae in publicum
prodeant, pro more scilicet (eoque satis inveterato) nonnullis inscripta
soleant prodire; in which small piece of a sentence, you find out no less than
three huge Geometrical miscarriages. First, say you, cum quae etc. should be
cum Libri qui etc. for we don't hear of Houses or Churches going to the Press;
but only of Books: therefore doubtless the Doctor had not his Compasses about
him, when he said cum quae etc. (cum quae etc. an ille ipse, say you, quoties
in publicum prodit, inscriptus ((...)) prodit?) in the second place, say you,
the Doctor again is out in prodeant, which should be prodeunt: and in the third
place, as for his nonnullis inscripta, I cannot devise, say you, what possibly
to make of it. For the word nonnullis (solitary posita) standing melancholy
without any substantive, and Rebus being always civil, and ready to be
understood; presently cries out; next Oars, next Oars! so that the Doctor's
Mathematics are certainly most extraordinary Mathematics, for he scorns to
dedicate them to men, but to Rebusses themselves.


Phi. And did not the Doctor, Tim, first nibble at my Writings and my Latin?


Tim. If he did, Philautus, you have clearly got the day; for no man ever
carried on that humor like you. And thus, say you, it happens in all the Books
that he has written. For whatever he says, either non placet, or it is inept, or
childish, or vicious, or unintelligible, or wonderful, or lastly malicious and
ghebrical. For example: he has put out a Book de motu, say you; which (at the
latter end of my Rosetum) I briefly censure and confute after this manner. The
Book (suppose) is sent to me: and I having read it, am asked what I think of
it. In the first place, I say, non placet: and there is for his Book in general.
Then I go on, say you, and read, viz. Mechanica est Geometria de motu: that is
inept; because he lets Mechanica stand alone without ars in the singular
number. Impedimentum est id quod motui obstat, vel eum impedit: to put impedit
into the definition of impedimentum is horribly childish, say you: and to put
resistere into the definition of resistentia is not childish, but vicious.
Celeritas est affectio motus etc. is unintelligible; for affection only belongs
to living Creatures: and no man ever saw motion to hug, kiss, or feed celerity.
Continuum quodvis (secundum Cavallerii Geometriam indivisibilium) intelligitur
etc. for Cavallerius to come into a definition would be very wonderful to any
Logician. Lastly, to make use of Symbols, and to say cujuscunque rationis index
is most maliciously and ghebrically done. And if Euclid, say you, or Archimedes
should ever come this way, and but see those abominable Antichristian scrawles,
which the Egregious Geometer makes, and the word Index, they would be so horribly
scared, that we should never have their Company again. And therefore now you
are in, Philautus, I pray let us hear you rail a little at Algebra and Symbols.


Phi. You are a very scoundrel, Tim, and somewhat besides, for supposing me to
rail: for my language is always clean, gentile, and elegant.


Tim. This is only modesty: for you (...) do it as well as any man alive. Come,
Sir, let me give you the Key. Gheber. Now away with it: id dictum Ghebrice, hoc
dictum ghebrice, gibberice* gabberice, scabice, scrubbice, symbolice,
gambolice, etc.


Phi. What are you doing, Tim?


Tim. Don't you see, Sir? I am confuting and confounding the Whore- Algebra:
that barbarous, Irish, Welsh Whore- Algebra: that nasty, scabby, pestilential,
abomination-Whore- Algebra: that scratching, scrawling, brachygriphal,
stigmatical, symbolical Whore- Algebra. (Exam. and emend. p. 10. p. 100.)
abominans praetereo etc. pro peste Geometriae habenda est, etc.


Phi. I hope you don't call this confuting, etc.?


Tim. Yes but I do; and so do you: for when you would seem mild, and pretend to
reason the case, you talk ten times worse. Algebra? it takes its name, say you,
from one Gheber: who perhaps might be some CombMaker, dextrous Corn-Cutter,
Operator for Teeth or some such Engineer. Symbols? what a silly thing is it to
talk of symbols (Exam. p. 9.) words are the most ancient and current of all
symbols, etc.


Phi. And do you really think, Tim, that Algebra is good for any thing?


Tim. I durst not think any thing of it at all, Sir; for fear Gheber should get
me: but I have heard that Vieta, Oughtred, Carts, de-Wit, and half a dozen
more have, for reasons I shall not now mention, spoke well concerning it: whose
judgments put all together, I shall for once, Philautus, beg leave to prefer
before yours.


Phi. Vie^a I grant ( de corp. p. 156.) by reason of his great skill in
Geometry, was a good considerable person. But as for the rest of those
ghebrical scrawlers, you mentioned; I don't know any one thing they ever found
out.


Tim. And truly, Philautus, as you order the business, I don't see how they* or
any body else ever should. For first of all, you seize upon all motion as
yours; and neither man, nor nature can do any thing, unless you lend them a
little of your motion. Again all reasoning is plainly yours; you being the
first that ever called Logic Computation. And most of the Mathematics is also
yours; you being the first that demonstrated ( de corp. p. 63.) the whole to be
bigger than any one part. And I don't much question but that the Sun and the
Moon also (you may do somewhat or other to 'em) in time, may become yours. But
no more of the Whore- Algebra. Now look to your self Euclid, Clavius and the
rest of you: for Philautus is coming, and upon my word wherever he comes, he
makes most dreadful work. You may think (and so did he once) that you were the
only people upon whose endeavors the blessing of God had fallen. But he has
sent back the blessing of God; and you have made such small progress in your
profession of Geometry, that there is no one of you (besides himself) that
knows so much as the definition of it. Geometry (says a famous man among you)
is an art of measuring well. Neatly (...) for a TimberMerchant, or Dial maker!
but there is very nigh as many absurdities as words in the definition. For first
of all Geometry is not an Art, but a Science; and if that ben't sufficiently
absurd, I know not what is. Secondly, It Is an Art of measuring well, says he:
measuring well? measuring what well? Geometry well? is Geometry then an art of
measuring Geometry well? Lastly, says he, it is an art of measuring well: but
how does that art measure, and by what? by SunBeams, or Rain-bows? all which
abominable absurdities I avoid ( Less. p. 1. cont. fast. p. 7.) by saying, that
it is the Science of determining the quantity of any thing not measured, by
comparing it with some other quantity or quantities measured. Again say you,
suppose we go and search for an exact account of a figure; which is a thing of
such vast concernment, that the whole business almost of Geometry is to
consider nothing else but several figures: and yet, for all that, one had even
as good turn to Rider's Dictionary as Euclid's Elements for any such thing.
Figura, says Euclid, est quae sub aliquibus, etc. How lubberly and Porter-like
was that said? figura est quae? where is here any antecedent for the Relative
quae? (cont. fast. p. 17.) if there be any, it must be either est, or figura.
As for est, surely no body will take that for an antecedent: and figura is even
as bad a Bedfellow. For then it must be figura est figura quae, etc. which
sounds a little oddly out of a Geometricians mouth. I told the Euclidists of
this (for as I said before, it is of infinite concernment) in my six Lessons (p.
1.) and again in my Examinatio (p. 44.) and now again in my contra fastum, etc.
and yet I believe they are so stupid, that in some Copies one may still find
figura est quae, etc. If Philautus had not come, and comforted poor quae, by
saying, figura est magnitudo quae etc. doubtless by this time, she had pined
away her self to skin and bones, for want of an Antecedent. And thus again, say
you, they do in the business of proportion. Which, says Euclid, est mutua
quaedam habitudo, etc. that is in plain English ( Less. p. 7.) proportion is a
what-shall-I-call-it isness, or soness; or, say you, ( Less. p. 16.) a
whatshicalt habitude of two quantities. I wonder where the modesty of these
Euclidists lies, that they should not perceive the bawdiness of this quaedam:
all which they might have easily avoided, if with me they had said proportio
est relatio etc. and truly 'twas worth the writing a Book on purpose to leave
out quaedam, and put in relatio instead of habitudo.


Phi. But when do I speak, Tim?


Tim. Speak, Sir, you speak all this while.


Phi. But you pick the worst and least of my exceptions against the
Geometricians: for I rout them about a point, a line and every thing else of
concernment.


Tim. How so?


Phi. I hold, Tim, that a point and a line are both really bodies; though in
Mathematical consideration they are not.


Tim. What need we then trouble our selves about such an old Metaphysical
nicety, as indivisibile and divisibile in infinitum, etc.? seeing (suppose they
be bodies) we are not, say you, to take notice of that in Mathematical
demonstration.


Phi. But, Tim, there is a vast deal, a very vast deal depends upon a point
having bigness, and a line breadth.


Tim. A vast deal indeed! if you have but the carving it out. For seeing that
your squaring the circle, etc. don't well agree with the principles of
Geometry; you will shew'em a trick, and make the principles of Geometry, to comply
with your squaring the circle: and then huff comes out contra fastum, etc.


Phi. Did you ever know me to wrest, or force any thing to comply, etc.? were
you, Tim, at my elbow, when I squared the circle?


Tim. No: nor any body else, that I can hear of; for though you have done it
twelve times over, yet several people say, it is still all to do.


Phi. I say, I have done it; and have demonstrated it too (cont. fast. p. 43.)
as manifestly as any proposition in Euclid. And therefore why may not I be
believed as well as other people, and why should I be said to wrest, etc.?


Tim. As for your being believed, Philautus, I did never care for relying much
upon any man's judgment, that looked upon self-conceit to be a moral virtue: but
as for 'tother thing, I had it in part from your self.


Phi. From my self; how so?


Tim. In the 41. and 43. pages of your contra fastum, etc. you tell us that had
the business of punctum, linea, and some such principles of Geometry, been
sooner examined and corrected; we had had squaring of circles and many other
admirable things long before this time. Now I have a fancy that this sentence
ought to be thus turned: viz. seeing that squaring the circle is a most
admirable thing, if it would but agree with the principles of Geometry; it is
high time now even to make 'em agree. But, which is worse than all, Philautus,
your dear friend tells you, that they will not agree yet. And whereas you have
taken such vast pains to prove a point to have bigness, and a line to have
breadth; he is of the mind ( Heaut. p. 112.) that Cheapside is much too narrow
to do the business. Therefore in my opinion, Philautus, you had much better
have suffered quae, quaedam, punctum, linea, and the rest of them to have
continued, as we had them from Euclid; unless the alterations you made had been
more to your profit; and the grounds you went upon more considerable. A point,
say you, is a body: and why? because (de corp. p. 59.) the whole earth is a
point, in respect of the Heavens; Ergo. Again, a point is a body, for it is a
mark; and the nature of a mark is to be visible: and if visible, then, say you,
(Lux Mathematica p. 11.) it must be divisible: and if divisible; then say I, it
must be indivisible: for we will never stand out for one syllable. And then for a
line having latitude, and being a body; that is so very plain that if it ben't
granted nothing, say you, ( Lux Math. p. 12. 32.) can be demonstrated in
Mathematics. For there is no demonstrating without Diagrams: and no Diagrams
can be made without drawing of lines, and no lines can be drawn but they will
have breadth. And by such niceties and whimsies as these, (of which I could
give you many more instances) have you vainly endeavored to preserve your
credit, and make people believe you had great skill in the Mathematics. And
the very same shifts you have made use of, to secure your Carcass, in all that
you have said about Government, and Religion: being all plainly founded upon
your three Cardinal virtues, Self-conceit, bad nature, and most irreligious
cowardice.


Phi. No man ever writ two such Treatises of humane politics, and Christian
politics, as I have done --


Tim. Those Phrases are perfectly new:


Phi. In both which I have given the Prince such due Authority, and such a vast
power as will be a foundation of perpetual Peace, and happiness in his Kingdom.


Tim. It Is a vast power indeed, Philautus, that you have bestowed upon him; and
he is very much beholding to you: for, at one stroke, it utterly destroys both
himself and his Government.


Phi. How is that?


Tim. You allow him, you remember, to be the maker of all good and evil.


Phi. What then?


Tim. I would only know which way you conferred that power upon him: did you
send it him in a Basket, as a token of your pure love to absolute Sovereignty:
or how was it?


Phi. That power was originally divided amongst all his Subjects; but they all
joined together, and turned over all their power of making good and evil to him.


Tim. Don't you believe that, Philautus: that any man, that ever thought he had
the power of making good and evil, would so part with it, as not to reserve a
little for private use; or at least to keep the Receipt. And therefore you may
make a noise about absolute Monarchy, and unlimited Sovereignty; and that if
the Prince ben't able to raise money at his pleasure, he will catch an Ague, as
certainly as if he went into the hundreds: and if he takes any advice about
making of Laws, he will have a man grow out of his side; and very tender you may
seem to be of the Sovereign's health (with reflections bad enough upon our
Government) but you are even with him for all your kindness: for you give him
indeed a little money; but withal every subject leave to take away his throne,
and life also.


Phi. But a subject, Tim, is one that has given up all his power, etc. and a
Prince cannot be removed without power.


Tim. But, by your principles, he can call for it again, when he thinks it for
his advantage.


Phi. But he has promised he will not; and every man is bound to keep his promise.


Tim. How (according to you) is he bound? has he promised to keep his promise:
or has he sworn to keep his promise; or how has he so fastened himself, but
that your principles will unty him?


Phi. But for a man to break his promise is absurd.


Tim. It Is very right: it is absurd; I remember it very well, in your 3d.
Chapter de Cive. He that contracts, say you, in that he does contract, denies
that action to be in vain: and if he thinks himself not bound to keep it, in
thinking so, he affirms the contract to be made in vain: now for a thing to be
done in vain, and not in vain is a contradiction: which is absurd. Whence, say
you, it follows that an injury (which is breaking of a bargain) is a kind of
absurdity in conversation, as an absurdity is a kind of injury in disputation.
And therefore when Oliver cut of the Kings head, etc. he was guilty of an
absurdity, and that is all.


Phi. I hated Oliver, and his practices as much as you.


Tim. That you might do in your heart, Philautus: as you love Christ, when you
renounce him. But your Writings favor his actions so very much, that there is
not one thing that he, and his Rogues did, but upon your Principles may be
easily defended: nay, and demonstrated too; and trained from Article to
Article. And were not your Books much too ridiculous for people to be guided by
(any further than of themselves they are debauched, and villanously bent) those
two opinions alone of yours, viz. that interest is the measure of good and evil
in this life; and in the next life that Heaven is only a little better than
Spring-Garden; and Hell not so ill as the Counter, are at any time sufficient
to set up such another pack of Rebels. And yet you are the man that have set up
Princes, and established them in their Thrones: and have shown such a
Generation of a Commonwealth, that (give it its due) is to be called a mortal
God.


Phi. Methinks, Tim, you begin to be somewhat hot: but be as hot as you will, I
stand to this, that no man before me had ever justly stated the rights of
Princes, nor given them such power as become them.


Tim. You are a very liberal Gentleman indeed, Philautus: and have granted to
Princes, power in a great measure: but by chance so ridiculously blasphemous,
that you will get never a Prince in the World to accept of it.


Phi. Can you confute --


Tim. Confute? what should I confute: all the madness of Bedlam crowded into
one man? for once I Will try two or three instances of your bounty; and let
standers by judge what kind of confutation it deserves. The first Complement
you pass upon your Prince is, that it would please his Sovereignty to umpire
the business of the Creation: (a very pretty point indeed for the civil
Magistrate to decide with his Sword:) i. e. whether the World was eternal, or
whether it was created by God. Here Is honor now for a Prince! The King of
Sweden or so, if requested, may give his opinion concerning Flanders, or
concerning Liberty of fishing: but Philautus's Prince is to have the
arbitration of Heaven and Earth: his Prince is to determine whose the whole
World is; and to whom it belongs; whether to God Almighty, or to its own self.


Phi. Who says that God does not govern the World?


Tim. I don't know indeed; but I say if the World made it self, it may even as
well make shift to look after it self.


Phi. But I am not, Tim, against the Providence of God: but thus much I say; (
de Corp. p. 204.) seeing that all knowledge comes from Phantasms; and no man
can have a Phantasm of that which is infinite: and seeing that it is very
laborious, and would tire the best Philosopher to proceed from cause to cause,
till he comes to the first and truly eternal cause: I say, upon these and such
like accounts, I think it reasonable, that this of the Creation of the World,
and all such knotty points should be left to the determination of that
Authority, which has right to determine all things.


Tim. I think, Philautus, I understand you: seeing that there is no man now
living upon Earth, that was really and actually present at the Creation of the
World; nor that did bona fide see, or speak face to face with any man that was:
and seeing that the tallest subject, or Philosopher that any Prince has, cannot
stand upon his threshold, and from thence look to the furthest end of the
World, unless he cuts down the great Pear Tree; nor can stand so long upon one
leg, hopping from cause to cause, but that if he hops long enough he may be
tired; therefore we Prince, by the Authority aforesaid, do declare and
determine that the World had no beginning, but was eternal. Given at our Court
-- dasho.


Phi. I don't say it is so to be determined: but that he that has the supreme
Authority (seeing the case is very doubtful, and too difficult to be determined
by natural reasons;) may determine it so, if he please.


Tim. Yes doubtless: and that by right and virtue of the first fruits.


Phi. The first fruits! what firstfruits?


Tim. Don't you remember, Sir, that the dispute concerning the Creation of the
World is the first fruits of all disputable questions: and upon that account
the decision of that controversy as first fruits belong to him, that has the
supreme power?


Phi. I don't easily call to mind the meaning of these first fruits.


Tim. Look, Sir, but the abovequoted place de Corp. and you will soon perceive it.
For say you there; as Almighty God when he had brought his people into Judaea,
allowed the Priests the first fruits reserved to himself; so when he had
delivered up the World to the disputations of men, it was his pleasure that all
opinions concerning the nature of infinite and eternal (as the Creation of the
World and the like) known only to himself should (as the first fruits of
wisdom) be judged by those to whom he had given the supreme Authority. I
wonder, Sir, you should forget such an admirable reflection as this: Judaea
being so very like the many disputations that are in the World; and that
concerning the Creation so very like firstfruits. But if you please, Philautus,
we will go on to the next Complement you bestow upon your Prince. And truly if
there ever was a Complement to purpose, this is one: it is down, and down, and
down again to the ground.


Phi. What is it, Tim?


Tim. It Is such a swinger, I can scarce get it out: it is only, Sir, whether
there be a God or not?


Phi. Whether there be a God or not? what shall the Civil Magistrate (whom I
never granted to be more than Gods Lieutenant, Lev. p. 361.) determine whether
there be a God or not?


Tim. Shall he? why not? for all knowledge comes from Phantasms, etc. and no
body whom we can trust, has lately seen or discoursed with God Almighty: and
it is plainly a first-fruits-disputation; i. e. concerning infinite and eternal:
and all first fruits disputations belong to the Magistrate.


Phi. Whom do you mean: the Hangman? (Let. to Dr. W. p. 36.)


Tim. That Is a very good hit: I perceive Philautus begins to be a little angry;
and when so, then a Magistrate, forsooth, in strictness of speech, signifies
only some Officer of the Sovereigns, not the Sovereign himself. But you may go
on, Philautus; and, if I had occasion for any Latin, I Would put in quae and
quaedam too: for I love to cross a man, that is made wholly up of such starched
curiosities. And therefore, I say, you have so far honored your Prince or
Magistrate, that if he please indeed there shall be a God; but if he be out of
humor, there shall be none at all.


Phi. What, can he pluck God Almighty out of his Throne: and banish him out of
the World?


Tim. That, Philautus, is a little more than he can do; but (by your great
bounty to him) he can banish him out of his Kingdom; or if he cannot do it
alone, he is to call in the assistance of all his subjects.


Phi I ghess how you mean, Tim; the Prince, I warrant you, is one day or other,
to put out a Proclamation against the existence o^ a God: and this is to be
posted up at every Corner of the streets. Cannot I, in passing by, pull off my
Hat very low, and cry Vous avez Mr. Prince: and for all that walk religiously
home; believing and trusting in God every step that I set; and praising him for
all the good Victuals that I have eaten, and all the great victories that I
have obtained, over such as out of envy have endeavored to answer my Books?


Tim. But suppose, Philautus, he sends Poker for you, with an Halbert or a
Musket.


Phi. He need not trouble himself so far: for I am past those vanities, and had
much rather go to him privately, than in such pomp.


Tim. And when you come there, he tells you that he has been that Morning
running over the World, and the affairs thereof; and, upon the whole, he cannot
find that there is any God besides himself. What would you then say, Philautus?


Phi. I should beg his pardon as to that, as great as he is; and tell him
plainly that I know what belongs to a God better than he; and I know that he is
no more than Gods Lieutenant; and that I am more obliged to God (being more
powerful) for the several kindnesses that I have received srom him, and the
great mischief that he may do me, than I ever was or can be to him.


Tim. But if upon that, Philautus, the Lieutenant cocks his Hat, stamps, looks
stern and big; and says that he is sure, he is very sure that there is nothing
(either in Heaven or Earth) better or greater than himself; and that you shall
be sure of it too, before he and you part. What shall we do now, Philautus?


Phi. Hah! how is it? cocks, stamps, stern, big?


Tim. Yes; it is just so: come I Will tell you what you would say, Sir: -- truly says
Philautus, Majesty is not to be put out of humor for every small matter: it is
pity the Prince should spoil his Hat with cocking it; or his shoes with
stamping, or his countenance with frowning: meekness becomes a subject; and
therefore I Will be silent. But being silent, Philautus, will not serve your turn:
for you must pronounce with a clear and loud voice that he, before whom you now
stand, is not Gods Lieutenant, but God himself: and not only so, but that he is
the Almighty, Omnipotent and Eternal God; who, when you were asleep Created
you, and all things else; but especially his own great Grandfather; you must
say, pronounce, and subscribe all this; or else -- You need not go on, says
Philautus, I am yours, I am yours, Sir: for what is a true Prince but one, to
whom all the right and power of the whole Kingdom is transferred: and if he
comes to his Sovereignty by right of succession I have (Lev. p. 99.) proved
such Sovereignty to be a kind of eternity. So that he understands nothing at
all of the Generation of a Commonwealth that sticks in the least to grant
every absolute Monarch to be Almighty, Omnipotent and Eternal. But you have not
done yet, Philautus, for after all this you must engage to worship the Prince
with the very same words, and same postures, as you use to do God Almighty:
praying unto him for health, long life, rain, fair-weather and the like: and
this you must do so loud, that all your Neighbors may hear you; and besides,
that they may think you to be in good earnest; you must take all public
occasions to curse and blaspheme God, in the most affronting and defying words
that can be invented. -- That Is a little odd, says Philautus, that a Prince,
let him be as absolute as he can, should be able to make it rain or hold up.
But, now I think of it, by right of subjection I have made over my whole body,
and every limb of it to his service: and therefore, if the Prince will send my
tongue upon such an errand, it must not refuse to go, no more than my legs, if
they were spoken to. And then, says Philautus, as for cursing, blaspheming,
etc. God knows my mind well enough as to that: i. e. how I worship him in my
heart; and what honor and service I have done to his Church, to himself and
the whole Trinity by my several writings. But still, Philautus, the Prince is
not so absolutely secure of you, but you may give him a bob at last. For you
know there is a very strong report in this part of the World, that many years
agon there was one, that called himself the Christ, that appeared upon earth:
and he taught that it was better to listen to him, than to the commands of
Princes; and he said that he came from God, and that he was the true and only
Son of God; and, by many things that he said and did, made several to believe
the same. Now, if this be so, Philautus, this will be a notable check and
rebuff to the unlimited Authority of your Prince. And therefore, if you intend
to be a Subject quite through, you must needs also renounce Christ: ('it is a
small matter, for Christ, you know, is no more God the Son, than Moses was God
the Father.) and believe there never was any such person; but that he was a
mere Impostor, or a cheat of the Kingdom of darkness -- to that, replies
Philautus; I must confess, most unlimited and irresistible Sir, that of all
things now visible upon earth, you are to me the greatest and most obliging;
and your opini^n upon all accounts I am bound to adore: for it is by your great
interest in your own Dominions as well as elsewhere, that I continue in fame
and health, and am protected from the barbarous insolences of my Adversaries.
But whereas it is your Princely pleasure to command me not to believe in Christ;
(with humble submission to your irresistibility) I think you are, as it were,
mistaken: for whatever you appoint (...) to do in affront to Christ; I can
therein deceive you, believing on him in my heart: and should your almighty
inclinations proceed further, and force me to deny and forswear such beli^f
(with all imaginable dread again be it spoken) it is not my heart but my tongue
alone that denies or forswears, etc.


Phi. But how do you know, Tim, that I Will say or do any of these things? did
you ever see me tried?


Tim. No: but above twenty years ago you promised to do them all in several
places of your Leviathan. And I know you will be as good as your word; because you
desire Mr. Godolphin (in your Ep. Ded. to him) to tell all people that are
offended at that Book, that you love your own opinions. If, say you, ( Lev. p.
360.) I want rain, fair weather or any thing else that God alone can bestow on
me; and out of my own humor, wantonness, or opinion, I make solemn Prayer for
such things to him who has the supreme Authority; by doing so, I am certainly a
very wicked man, and an absolute Idolater; because out of my own heart I give
unto the civil Magistrate that worship which is alone due unto God: but if I be
compelled to this by the terror of death, or any other corporal punishment, I
may then do it very safely; without any offense to God Almighty, or scandal to
my Neighbor. Well done Carcass! and thus have we turned off Moses, or God the
Father: now let us see how we can get rid of Christ, or God the Son: if, say
you, ( Lev. p. 27.) a King, Senate, or other Sovereign person forbid me to
believe in Christ (if he does not hear me) I Will say he talks nonsense; because
belief and unbelief are not subject to men's commands. For faith is a gift of
God (that comes well out of Philautus's mouth) which men can neither give nor
take away by promise of rewards, or menaces of torture. But if the lawful
Prince (being aware of such subtlety) urges further, that I should say with my
tongue I believe not in Christ; I can he too cunning for him there also; for I
still do but say so: and therefore rather than I Will displease my lawful Prince
(O Heavens! how do I love and honor my self, and a lawful Prince!) it shall be
done, and ought to be done. For profession with the tongue is but an external
thing, and no more than any other gesture whereby we signify our obedience.
Rarely come off Carcass again!


Phi. I must confess that to this purpose I do speak: and very nigh in the same
words: and let Theologers object what they can, I can most easily prove my self
to be a true subject of the Christian City; that is, a Son of Christ's Church,
and an Heir of that Salvation which he has bargained for.


Tim. Prove, Sir? never in my life did I meet with your fellow for proving:
especially considering what inferior tools you work withal. For you shall talk
less morality than a Turk, and less Christianity than a Jew; (for you shall not
only swear that Christ is not as yet come, but that he shall never come:) and
yet give you but a little Country motion, and ordinary Grammar, and you shall
presently be at perch with the Primitive Christians. I deny Christ, suppose,
and when that is done I swear that I do it from the very bottom of my Soul: What
of all this, says Philautus? denying and swearing too are both mere forms of
speech: and speech is but words: and words are but motion: and therefore that
Divine that talks of Blasphemy or Heresy coming out of a man's mouth, whose
heart is truly firm; he may as well gape for Blasphemy or Heresy at the spout
of a pair of Bellows. Besides, says Philautus, people may prate against my
professing with my tongue and so forth; but (to go to the bottom of the
business) he that knows but the very first Elements of Government, knows that I
have no Tongue at all: for it is one of the Princes Tongues that I wear in my
mouth: and what is that to me, or any body else what the Prince does with his
own tongue? and then, says Philautus again: what wondering is here at my
speaking two or three words? is speaking any thing more than a mere gesture of
the tongue? and did Naaman, I pray (when he was allowed to go into the House of
Rimmon) leave his tongue at home? did not his tongue also bow together with his
head? and did it not, as it were, nod and give consent to what his head and
shoulders did? and then in the last place, says Philautus; as for the several
places of Scripture which the Ecclesiastics bring against me: such as those of
our Savior; whosoever denies me before men, I will deny him before my Father
which is in Heaven: and ye shall be brought before Governors and Kings for my
sake, etc. and fear not them that kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul, etc. it is plain, that they don't at all understand the History of that
Gospel, by which they live: for though our Savior, at the first planting of
Christianity, commanded his Disciples and Apostles that they should not be
daunted, nor give in; but rather suffer any thing, than not stand to the Faith:
yet, thanks be to God, says Philautus, such advice is now needless: for
Christian Religion is very well spread and settled now; and has got great
footing in the World; and a man may either profess or renounce it (according as
it lies for his hand) with a great deal less danger, and inconvenience than
formerly: and therefore if two or three subjects in a Kingdom should utterly
forsake Christ, there is still enough: and if two or three Kingdoms should do the
like; there is still more Kingdoms: and if (the Turk prevailing) Europe, Asia
and the rest of the whole World should also do the same; yet Christ is still
Christ: and he has had a fine time of it. And there will be a joyful meeting,
and great doings about Jerusalem, at the general resurrection: and I hope to be
as merry then, as the best of 'em. There be, continues Philautus, I know those
who understanding neither Grammar, nor the History of the Gospel shall tell you
that, let what will come, they will not part with Christ; no not for a thousand
Worlds. They Will dye, yea and that a thousand Deaths. Dye on, says Philautus; for
this is mere Vainglory, and affected Apostleship; and all for want of a good
Dictionary. For Martyr (Lev. p. 272.) is a Greek word; (which they, poor
Creatures! suffer themselves to be knocked off the head, and never think of;)
and signifies a witness, an eyewitness; and especially such an one as saw
Christ before, and after his Resurrection: which few, I suppose, now alive will
pretend to have done: or so much as to have seen those that did see Christ: and
if there be any such as these latter, they are but Martyrs at the second hand;
that is, Martyrs of Christ's Martyrs. And therefore if any man has a mind to put
himself upon any inconvenience, or run himself into any danger upon the account
of Christian Religion, I wish him a good Journey; but I pity him no more than
one that should skip off a Steeple, for fear he should stumble in coming down
the stairs. Here Is a Christian Politician for you, or a true Member not of
Christ's Church, (for that is vulgar) but of the Christian City!


Phi. I say, Tim, that Martyr does signify a witness.


Tim. And so does amo signify to love.


Phi. That Is false; for in strictness of speech it signifies I love.


Tim. How quick and nimble Philautus is? well, suppose then that Martyr does
signify a witness: are you willing to be such an one for our Savior?


Phi. That is, will I who was born within these hundred years, be willing to be
born above sixteen hundred years ago? well ghess'd Tim!


Tim. You shall then, Philautus, be a Martyr of a Martyr. I Would fain have you
into some employment.


Phi. How can I be any such thing? I never met in my Travels with any of the
Apostles or Disciples, that were sent into the World to be Witnesses of the
Resurrection: and no man can glory in being a Martyr unless he be sent; and he
must be sent to Infidels too: for what need ( Lev. p. 273.) a witness of Christ
be sent to those, that have had sufficient witnesses already?


Tim. If that be all, Philautus, we will speed the Commission, and you shall be
sent, etc.


Phi. But, I tell you, I had rather stay at home, than be cut of the Crown like
a Goose, to be a Martyr, of a Martyr, of a Martyr, of I know not whom, or what.


Tim. I see this Martyrdom (or Greek affliction) will not down with you,
Philautus; will you, if need be, for Christ's sake suffer a little in plain
English? we will engage you shall not be abused, and called Martyr: nor have any
such improper, and unfashionable word written upon your Tomb.


Phi. How much would you have me suffer: what, dye?


Tim. Suppose such a thing should be, Philautus: according to Christian
Politics, you will clearly be a saver by it; when you meet Christ at Jerusalem.
For when he comes to reign here upon Earth, he has promised, you know, to make
very much of those (you may chance to be Chief Secretary of State) who are
faithful to the end. And his Kingdom, you know, is a dainty fine Kingdom: and
worth two or three of the Kingdoms of England.


Phi. But it is a great way, Tim, to go for preferment to Jerusalem: and it may
be a great while, before Christ will come to have his Court there.


Tim. I believe indeed it may; after that childish, ridiculous, gross, profane
manner that you describe. Are you not ashamed, Philautus, to pretend to Wit,
Philosophy, Mathematics, etc. and to go about to face, and huff down God
Almighty, and our Savior, with such intolerable fooleries as first fruits,
Martyr, etc. Was ever old fop so utterly benum', and besotted, as to turn
Providence out of the World, to prevent tumults and uproars; and to think to
complement his Prince, by offering such saucy and witless affronts to God
himself? I Will undertake, Philautus, give but a very small-wit sufficient
impudence, profaneness, and a Glass of Wine, he shall abuse the Scriptures,
scoff at Heaven, and talk better and more reasonable Atheism ex tempore, than
you have labored into all your grave Periods.


Phi. Hey day! how huffing and swaggering is this Tim, because he has got a few
of those same Churchmen on his side? who are for a spiritual Commonwealth; not
minding what I learn them ( Lev. p. 317.) that there are no men on earth whose
bodies are spiritual; and therefore there can be no spiritual Commonwealth
amongst men that are yet in the flesh. I say, Tim, some such as these, that
talk of a spiritual-body-politick you may have on your side; but I am sure all
the great Wits, and the men of depth, and business go all my way.


Tim. And my Lord Bacon is your way too.


Phi. If he were now alive, it is likely he would.


Tim. Yes very likely: for, says he, in his Essays, it is true, that a little
Philosophy inclines man's mind to Atheism, but depth in Philosophy brings
men's minds about to Religion.


Phi. This now is very scurrilous, and most uncharitably said: and if the
Bishop of Durham were now alive --


Tim. What should he do?


Phi. He should testify, Tim, to the confusion of all my slanderers, ( Ep.
Ded. to his Majesty) how godlily I behaved my self, when I was ready to dye:
and what a sound and clear Conscience I had.


Tim. Conscience? that is good indeed! Conscience, you know, is only when one
looks over your shoulder, or in at the Keyhole. For, you remember, there must
be two at least, to make up a true Grammatical Conscience; (because of cum and
scio:) and as for any other Conscience (Lev. p. 31.) i. e. knowledge of ones
own secret facts or thoughts, that is only a Metaphorical or Rhetorical
Conscience. But I pray, Philautus, after what manner did you confess to the
Bishop? did you confess with your tongue, or how?


Phi. With my tongue? what, Tim, would thou have men confess with their Legs,
or Shoulders?


Tim. Truly, Philautus, you are such a moveable, slippery, and Philosophical
kind of Christian, that I think the Church ought to appoint a peculiar sort of
confession for you. For if, after you were recovered, you had but met with any
body that had a little scared you, you should have unconfessed all again; and
have sworn, and cursed, that you did but droll with the Bishop.


Phi. Under favor, Tim, that is a lie. For I only say that if my Lawsul Prince
or the supreme Magistrate require any such thing, for Peace sake, and to
preserve my life I am bound to obey.


Tim. And I say, that if the lawsul Ostler, or supreme Magistrate of the
Stables, should take you into his office, and show you but a switch (for that
may Gangrene) I understand the Principles of your fidelity, and Christian
courage so well, that, were he so wicked as to demand it, you should not only
renounce all belief in Christ, but all allegiance to your lawsul Prince too:
for a breathing time, you know, is very desirable, and whilst he has you in
his power, he is to you as good a Lieutenant of God, as any Prince upon earth.
And Naaman the Syrian (Lev. p. 271.) shall do for all; for the Ostler, as well
as for the Prince himself.


Phi. For my part, Tim, I cannot see (when compelled) why I may not allow my
self as much liberty, as the Prophet did to him.


Tim. But how are you sure, Philautus, that the Prophet allowed him any at all?
for there be some, and those learned too, who question whether go in peace
signify Naaman's waiting still upon his Master, etc. or whether he should
forthwith leave his service. But suppose it does; do you think, Philautus, that
what Naaman did (which may several ways be imagined to be far enough from
Idolatry) will countervail, or void all those several plain places of
Scripture, that are most absolutely against your whimsycal, and profane
opinion? but Philautus's Divinity is like the Gentleman's, who (a little before
he was to suffer for padding) being asked by his Confessor how he came to
follow that employment: told him, that he took it up from Gods advising the
Israelites to spoil the Egyptians; which to him, he said, was a plain place
for robbing at any time, and any where: whereas thou shall not steal, and the
like, were all typical and metaphorical; and only true upon some occasions. But
it is wonderfully strange to me that his Majesty should suffer it --


Phi. Suffer what, suffer me --


Tim. No, Sir: suffer his spightful, ambitious Priests to preach in his Chapel
against you.


Phi. So it is, Tim: and I make bold to tell his Majesty to that purpose, in an
Epistle Dedicatory to him.


Tim. And you did very well so to do, Sir: for Naaman will do against the whole
Bible; and a line or two out of Tertullian (nothing to the purpose) against all
the Fathers. And seeing you are so firmly fixed in the Catholic Faith, and are
so condescending and dutiful to all lawful Princes, certainly they ought to be
very careful to check and rebuke the adversaries of such a dear and devout
Subject. And therefore let us see if we cannot find never another Complement for
the Prince. If I ben't mistaken ( Lev. p. 205.) there is a pretty obliging one:
viz. that if the Civil Magistrate please, he may take away the word of God (for
we have had it even long enough) and instead thereof, give us Gusman, your
Leviathan, or whatever else he thinks most convenient for his Commonwealth.
For in the first place it is plain say you, that the Book which is now called
the word of God is not really and grammatically the word of God: i. e. it is
neither the Noun of God, nor the Verb of God, nor any other part of Speech of
God. But, be it what it will, it obliges no further than the Civil Magistrate
pleases: who by making it law, made it first to oblige; and by repealing that
Law can make it not to oblige. The Old Testament indeed was a Law, but to the
Jews only, never to us. The New Testament never was a Law to any body at all,
till 'twas made so by Princes and Emperors. For Christ was no Lawgiver:
neither (if he had made any Laws) had he any Kingdom to practice in: neither
did he by his civil Authority command any thing; but only advised and
counseled, etc. and sent out the Apostles to do the like; who were to fish and
allure; (Lev. p. 270.) not like Nimrods by coercition and punishing to hunt men
into Christianity.


Phi. Most of this is true, Tim: but first of all I must chastise thee, for thy
great saw^yness in comparing my Leviathan to such a Raskallionscoundrel-Book as
Gusman: and in the next place, for supposing me to be ambitious of having the
Bibles turned out of Churches, and my Leviathan made Canonical.


Tim. As for Gusman, Philautus, I am not, I must confess, much skilled in that
Author; (and if I were, it would take up a little too long time to debate the
business thoroughly between you two) but if that Book ben't ten times worse than
any I ever saw yet, I don't question but it will furnish out a much honester
Gentleman, a more faithful subject, and a truer Christian than yours shall do.
And then as for your Leviathan being made Canon; you know well enough,
Philautus, 'twas a thing you your self were not without some hopes of.


Phi. What, Tim, did I ever hope, wish, or desire that my Leviathan might be
appointed by Act of Parliament to be publicly read in all Churches, instead of
the Bible?


Tim. You shall hear, Sir: Seeing, say you, (Lev. p. 293.) that neither Plato
nor any other Philosopher hitherto, has put into order and sufficiently proved
all the Theorems of moral doctrine, that men may learn thereby how to govern,
and how to obey; I recover some hopes, say you, that one time or other, this
writing of mine may fall into the hands of a Sovereign, who will consider it
himself (for it is short, and I think clear) without the help of any interessed,
or envious interpreter; and by the exercise of entire Sovereignty, in
protecting the public teaching of it, convert this truth of speculation, into
the utility of practice. It Is worth any Sovereigns pains indeed, to take a
progress of a year or two to settle and protect in his Kingdom a Company of
such speculations, which, if practiced, would (for all your kindness to him)
certainly ruin him.


Phi. But here is not a word, Tim, of my ever hoping that the Bible should give
way to my Leviathan. What made you say that I had any such expectation or
ambition?


Tim. Don't you remember, Philautus, what a huffing challenge you once sent to
a Doctor of Divinity: how that you and your Leviathan should preach with him
and his Bible? and that without any such ceremonious foolery as ordination;
only the Sovereign should lend you one of his Lifeguard to see you into the
Pulpit, and to bang those that would not believe you. If, say you (as I take it
it is in your Stigmai) the Sovereign power give me command (though without the
ceremony of imposition of hands) to teach the doctrine of my Leviathan in the
Pulpit, why am not I, if my doctrine and life be as good as yours, a Minister
as well as you. Right; why are you not? for it is plain that you have the word
of command, as well as the Doctor; and a Minister has nothing more. And as for
Authority, you are well enough with him; for if he swaggers, and produces the
Bishops Orders; then can you bid your Lifeguard man swagger too, and cock his
Pistols: and then as to the Book that is preached out of, there is no difference
at all between you. For you preaching out of your Leviathan preach out of a
Bible, as well as he. For a Bible (in Greek) is only a Book: and most certainly
your Leviathan is a Book: and a most rare one too. But I pray, Philautus, how
came it into your mind that the word of God does not oblige as much, (if not a
little more) than the word of a Prince? I must confess indeed that in the
beginning of the 36th Chapter of your Leviathan, you have a very notable
observation concerning the word of God (as was just now hinted) which, I don't
remember, I ever met with in any Author: but I don't see, but that it may
oblige for all that, without the supreme Magistrate's drawing his sword. When
there is mention, say you, of the word of God, it does not signify a part of
speech such as Grammarians call a Noun or a Verb, or any simple voice, without
a contexture of other words to make it significative; but a perfect speech or
discourse, whereby the speaker affirms, denies, commands, promises,
wishes, or interrogateth: (I profess Philautus would have been a thundering
Preacher: how he pours it out! affirms, denies, commands, etc.) in which
sense it is not vocabulum, that signifies a word (I pray, Gentlemen, remember
that, and turn down a proof;) it is not vocabulum but sermo (in Greek (...))
that is, some speech, discourse or saying. Without doubt, if the Sovereign had
sent out Philautus, this same had been the beginning of his first holding
forth. It Is a most admirable introduction to a body of Divinity. But to
proceed, Philautus, suppose the word of God (as you have most painfully and
learnedly made it out) is neither Noun, Pronoun, Verb, Participle, nor any of
the rest, but only the speech or discourse of God: I pray do so much as let me
know (I desire it once more) some of your best reasons why this same speech, or
discourse of God (seeing you will so have it) does not oblige us to believe it and
practice it, unless it be authorized by Kettledrums, and Trumpets.


Phi. Best reasons? what an impudent trick is this of Tim, to call for my best
reasons? any surely are good enough for such a fellow as thou art: in the first
place, if thou can, thou art to understand that whatever was laid down by
Christ himself, or his Apostles after him, as it was laid down by him or them,
never did, neither does it now at all oblige.


Tim. I am such a fool, Philautus, that methinks I had much rather mind, and
observe what our Savior said, than any thing that can be commanded by the
General of an Army.


Phi. You may mind and observe what you will; but (take that from me) you will
have little thanks for your labor. For it does not at all oblige, ( Lev. p.
284, 285.) as propounded by him.


Tim. Why so?


Phi. Because it is not Canonical.


Tim. Canonical? did not Christ and they that followed him give Articles of
Faith, and rules of an holy life?


Phi. Yes: but neither he nor any of his Successors did ever lay down one
obligatory Canon. For such a Canon is a Rule authorized and enjoined by the
Commonwealth, etc. and that only is truly said to be Canonical, which is
allowed of, and made Canonical by the Sovereign: that is to say which is made
Law in any Kingdom: for a Law is the commandment of that man, or assembly to
whom we have given --


Tim. Really, Philautus, if you don't leave that trick, I Will get a new man to
talk withal.


Phi. What trick?


Tim. You cannot come near the word Law, but presently you spring forth -- for a
Law is the commandment of that man or assembly, etc. and when it is every whit
to as little purpose, as it is here.


Phi. To as little purpose? by the definition alone of a Law, namely, that a
Law is the commandment of that man, or --


Tim. What, shall we have it again?


Phi. I say, by that definition of a Law it is very evident that not any one
Rule or precept in the whole New Testament was an obligatory Canon: i. e. did
really oblige any man living till the New Testament was made Law. And I am sure
it never was made Law till --


Tim. Till when? till 'twas made Law. That Is all that Philautus will engage
for: for he is a very wary Gamester, and he is as sure as can be that the Gospel
was never publicly owned, nor appointed by any Prince to be read in any
Kingdom or Commonwealth; till that very day, hour, and minute that it was so
owned, and appointed, etc. Philautus, I say, is very sure of this; and thus
much he will certainly undertake for, and no more.


Phi. It Is false: for I undertake further to show, that whatever our Savior
propounded to be done in order to Salvation (till obedience thereunto was
commanded by the Soveraign-Ruler) was so far from obliging, that every man,
without the least injustice, might refuse to observe --


Tim. For injustice, (should you have said) is a breach of the commandment of
that man, or assembly --


Phi. Should have said? what, Tim, do thou undertake to teach me what I
should have said: don't I know when to break of, and when to go on?


Tim. Indeed, Sir, I think that in all right the definition of injustice ought
to have come in there: for then the business had been plainly demonstrated.


Phi. It Is plainly demonstrable, Tim, that any man might refuse to obey
whatever our Savior said (till 'twas made Law) without being unjust at all.


Tim. Without being unjust? to whom do you mean, Philautus?


Phi. To whom can a man be unjust but to his lawful Sovereign; and to those
with whom he contracts according to the Laws of his Country.


Tim. Yes, yes: so I thought: I knew as well as could be, that the
demonstration would be thereabouts.


Phi. What did you know, Tim?


Tim. I know this, Philautus; that a man may neglect to obey the precepts of
Christ, and yet not be at all guilty of transporting of Leather, or Wool.


Phi. How do you mean, Tim?


Tim. I mean this, Philautus; suppose I (being a subject of a Kingdom wherein
there were no positive Laws against swearing or private Revenge, but plain and
severe ones against transportation of Leather, and Wool) had been present at
our Savior's Sermon; and believed him and his doctrine: but notwithstanding
had still continued a great swearer, and a most revengeful wretch; thus far I
durst venture to say (and truly you may safely go along with me) that swearing,
to define it strictly, is not transportation of Leather, neither is revenge
transportation of Wool.


Phi. Nor are they a direct breach of any other particular Law of the Kingdom.


Tim. How can they possibly be? what are you mad, Philautus? would you have
those things to be a breach of the Laws of that Kingdom, which we have supposed
not to have taken notice of any such things? never certainly did Catchpole,
Pettifogger, Forger of Wills, more entangle, shuffle, wrest, scrape, and patch,
etc. to bring about their villainous designs: than you have racked and tortured
those two poor words of Law and Justice to make your self singular in
Irreligion. And as in your Morals, you have thereby endeavored to debauch
humane nature, and to taint the very foundations of practical reason: so here
you use the same silly artifice to frustrate the intentions of Christ's coming
into the World, and to void the obligation of those Precepts that he left
behind him.


Phi. You much mistake me, Tim, if you think me to be against Christ, or his
Precepts: for Faith in him, and obedience to Laws is all that I count necessary
to Salvati^n. But thus much I say further, that nothing which either our
Savior or his Apostles propounded was truly Law, or did oblige; for neither
he, nor they had any Kingdom. And though there were many Kingdoms in the World;
over which Christ, if he had pleased, might have challenged to himself the
Sovereign Power; yet it is plain, that he utterly disowned all such public and
Regal authority, by saying, my Kingdom is not of this World. Now, say I, ( Lev.
p. 286.) they that have no Kingdom, can make no Laws.


Tim. Well rhimed, Philautus! Kingdom and Law.


Phi. Why, can any man, Tim, make a Law, that is, give out some rule to be
observed in a Nation, who has no Nation to give it to? must not a man have
Sovereign right to do it, and strength and authority to make it take effect?


Tim. Truly, Philautus, I cannot forbear to say, that if a private
Country-Gentleman, in a rainy day, should contrive a set of Laws; and send
them, by the packet Boats into Foreign Countries, to look for a Nation, and
people to observe them; but that some of his Laws may chance to come home again
unobserved.


Phi. No question, Tim, but that they would: and the reason is because all
Nations are ready stocked; and there is never a void Nation for the Gentleman to
vent his Laws in: and a Law is no Law, but where it is, or ought to be obeyed.


Tim. But, I suppose, you don't look upon our Savior (who was immediately sent
from God, and whom we believe, not minding what you do, to be the Son of God)
to be only a private person. Surely, Philautus, if you believe any God at all,
you must also believe that he can both make and protect Laws without
dispossessing of Princes, and keeping his standing Armies. You may remember
that Christ could violently have been rescued by twelve Legions of Angels: and
could have sent for as many to have enforced his Doctrine: which if he had
done, then possibly it might have agreed with your great curiosity to have
admitted his Precepts to have had the force of Laws: but, why do I talk to
Philautus of such vain-Philosophy as twelve Legions of Angels; which to him are
only twelve Legions of Phantasms; all to be discomfited with the brandishing of
Horn-knifes, and the blast of Elder-Guns?


Phi. I don't at all regard, Tim, any of all this: being most fully assured
that I never read that Christ was chosen supreme Magistrate of any place.


Tim. Neither did you, I warrant you, ever read that he was so much as chosen
Over-seer, or Churchwarden of any Parish.


Phi. You are profane, Tim.


Tim. I bless God, that I believe Christ to be his Son; and that I am more
obliged to observe his Precepts (without your indulgent favoring them to be
termed Laws) than the most immediate and direct commands of all the Princes in
the World: and he that believes otherwise, I suppose, is the man that justly
deserves the title of profane.


Phi. You may believe what you will, Tim: but it is plain that Christ never took
upon himself the Government of any Nation; neither would he accept of any place
of authority or public employment.


Tim. And I pray, Philautus, what do you think might be the reason of it? don't
you think it was for fear people should not only believe his doctrine, but
count themselves obliged to practice it? was not that, Philautus, think you the
business? was it not to prevent some such great absurdity and inconvenience
that might have happened in the World? whereas now every one enjoys a most
reasonable and blessed Liberty: and if the Gospel stands with a man's
convenience, and be the fashionable Book at Court, it may then be read and
practiced not without some delight, and benefit: but when it either crosses my
own particular interest, or the irresistible humor of my most dreadful Prince,
thanks be to God, there be other judicious and practical Authors, in which a
retired and studious Gentleman may make shift to spend his time, without any
ways disobliging Gods second representative, Jesus Christ. This, Philautus, is
such a kind of devout meditation as, I suppose, you take bed-ward. And from
hence any one, that is not utterly blind, may plainly perceive, what it is that
you count obligation: that is, when a man is so chained, rop'd or chorded down
to his bargain that he cannot possibly avoid submitting to it; such a man and
none else will you allow to be truly obliged. Neither must he be fastened with
such Chains and Chords as the joys and terrors of another life; for they are at
a great distance, and with Philautus, very metaphorical: but he is for visible
Grammatical Hemp, and Iron, such as grow upon, and is dug out of the Earth.
Where these things be, there is reason, law, justice, and obligation; but where
they are missing, a man is as free as any fish in the Ocean. Thus if a man,
suppose, has an hundred pound weight of shackles about him, and be under good
store of locks; I believe Philautus will grant such an one to be very properly
and strictly obliged not to ride an Hunting: and if a man has half a dozen
Pikes tickling him at the tail, it is likely that he also may be looked upon a
soblig'd to march on: but if I privately without either witness or writings
borrow a hundred pounds of a friend --


Phi. If you do, you ought to pay it him again, upon demand.


Tim. I ought? why so; how am I obliged? where is the shackles, where is the
Pikes, etc?


Phi. But you know well enough, Tim, that you did really and truly borrow of
him so much money.


Tim. Yes, Sir, that I do very well: but do you think, Philautus, that when a
Gentleman has entrusted me with such a great secret as an hundred pounds, that
I am such a great Booby, as to blab out this in open Court?


Phi. But you forget Conscience all this while, Tim.


Tim. No more than you have forgotten it in all your writings. Cannot I say to
Conscience, Couchee Conscience: down Conscience: close and be still Conscience.
That man certainly is a very passionate fool, that has so little command of his
mouth, as not to be able to keep it shut, when it is so much to his disadvantage
to open it. And se^ing we are fallen upon Conscience, Philautus, let us put one
case more: suppose you find a Neighbor of yours in a Ditch, just ready to
perish: whose life, by wetting the end of your Cane, you might easily preserve
--


Phi. O, help him out, help him out, by all means. What a Man, a Neighbor, and
a Christian and not help him out!


Tim. To what purpose? do you owe him a helping out, or do you lay in one
aforehand? you don't consider, Philautus, that the end of your Cane being
wetted may catch cold; and this cold (by motion) may creep up to your hand; and
seizing your hand, by degrees it may get into the whole mass of blood: and so
bring you into some dangerous distemper; a distemper that may cost you another
confession: and if the Bishop be out of the way; you must then send for the
Lord Lieutenant of the County: for he will do as well as the other being
commissioned by the Prince: and, of the two, is the best and safest Conf^ssour:
for he is one of the immediate Lieutenants, under Gods Lieutenant; and, if need
be, can raise all his Militia, to defend such a confession as he and you shall
agree upon. I say, Philautus, seeing your helping him out may occasion you so
much trouble, if I were you, I Would even let our Neighbor pass on in the
business, he has begun. For if you don't, there is still one much greater
mischief that you don't think of.


Phi. What Is that?


Tim. If, Philautus, you help him out of the Ditch now: you must needs so
contrive it, that he may help you out another time.


Phi. To what end, I prithee, Tim, should I wet and endanger my self when I
need not?


Tim. There is a most absolute necessity of it. For if you omit to do it; this
Neighbor of yours will be your utter Enemy, despise you, hate you, and as
certainly contrive your death, as you helped him out of the Ditch.


Phi. If I thought so, Tim, he should even have gone on, for all Philautus,
till he came to the bottom. What, shall I be thus rewarded for my great pains,
and clemency? shall he conspire to take away my life, because I endangered mine
own, to save his? this truly is very fine ingenuity, and morality!


Tim. It Is just such ingenuous morality as you teach your Disciples, and would
have them to practice. To have received, (say you, Lev. p. 481.) from one, to
whom we think our selves equal, greater benefits than there is hope to requite,
disposes to counterfeit love; (mere cou^terfeit love: he may come, Philautus,
to your Bedside Morning and Evening, and there ask you blessing, and pretend to
adore and worship you; but all this is only to spy out some cunning place to
lay a Barrel of Gunpowder, and to blow you up: for, as you go on very morally)
such benefits do really produce secret hatred; and puts a man into the estate
of a desperate Debtor, that in declining the sight of his Creditor, tacitly
wishes him there, where he might never see him more. (That would be just your
case, Philautus; for the ingenuous Neighbor, whom you have so much obliged,
may, as was said, pretend to come to see you, but at his heart he wishes ten
thousand Devils would fetch you away, so that he might never see you again)
for, as you further go on, benefits oblige; and obligation is thraldom; and
unrequitable obligation, perpetual thraldom, which is to ones equal hateful.


Phi. What a wondering you make, Tim, at this sentence? whereas, I am confident,
I could prove the truth of it from Histories of all Ages.


Tim. I don't at all question, but that in all Ages you may find Rogues and
Raskals, somewhere or other: and it is plain that that is the very method you
took, to make up your moral Philosophy. And whereas other Writers upon that
subject were so civil to humane nature, and studious of the good of Mankind as
to draw their observations from the most brave, the most virtuous, an^ most
generous of Men and Princes: Philautus (as may have formerly been hinted) that
he might be si^gular, and sufficiently scandalize his own kind, appeals to
nothing else but to the very dregs, and sink; to the most vile and most
unreasonable practi^es for his Authority. Obligation is thraldom! and
unrequitable obligation perpetual thraldom and hateful!


Phi. What, have not you done wondering yet, Tim?


Tim. No, Sir: and I say fu^her he that thinks so, and behaves himself
accordingly: thinks nonsense, and behaves himself like a Beast.


Phi. How do you know, Tim, but that Kings may have done so?


Tim. And how can I help it, if Kings will not live and act like men? why,
Philautus, for all your bountiful condescentions and mighty cringes to him that
has the supreme Authority; I believe that such an one, if he don't observe the
laws of nature (which are known well enough without his interpretation) may as
plainly and easily be proved a Tyrant, in the Court of reason; as an ordinary
Subject that refuses to obey his Laws, may be proved a Rebel in
Westminster Hall. But we are not at leisure, Philautus, for that dispute now.


Phi. If you be, I am ready for you: but if you ben't then let me tell you;
that it is thought by some that Sir William Stanley fared never the better for
his overmuch-obligation that he laid upon King Henry the 7th. in Bosworth-field.


Tim. If, upon that very account, he fared the worse, I say --


Phi. What do you say? What, Tim, prate against Kings?


Tim. No, Sir; but I say that his present Majesty (God bless him) is a
reasonable and great man, as well as a great King: who, when highly obliged by
a late subject, could never be persuaded, by your sort of puny, and ill-natured
Politicians, to think it tedious or reproachful so to be.


Phi. That was because he was his superior, and able to requite him; but the
obligation which I observe to be hateful is unrequitable obligation, such as
is, for the most part, only amongst equals.


Tim. Come, come Philautus; for a need you can hate without standing upon the
curiosity of equals: for if the obligation be but unrequitable, let it be where
it will, it is hateful to you. And upon this account, I suppose, it may be that
seeing our blessed Savior has laid, by his Death, an infinite and unrequitable
obligation upon all Mankind; therefore to revenge this kindness, you renounce
both him and his Gospel.


Phi. This is only railing, Tim, to which I have been so long accustomed; that
I am pretty well seasoned against it. For still I keep to this that nothing can
be a Law, that is, a Precept that obliges, unless he that lays it down has both
authority to do it, and coercive secular-power to make it good.


Tim. And would any man in the World, but such a mad one as Philautus, think
that a Commission, such as our Savior had from the great God of Heaven and
Earth should be of less authority than a ticket from Jack of Austria, or any
tiny-earthly Potentate: or that those eternal rewards and punishments which our
Savior plainly promises and threatens should be less obliging than running the
Gantelet, or an hours setting in the stocks? but I know very well what it is
that Philautus drives at: viz. if our Savior had either determined the breadth
of Stuffs, or the weight of bread: or had set a certain mulct or fine presently
to be levied upon every iniquity, then possibly he might have passed for a
Lawgiver; and his word might have been taken without a Canonical Certificate
from two Justices of the Peace. But to say that he that lives and dies in sin
shall be eternally damned, was only a figurative expression, and a mere frolic
which Christ began, and spoke to his Apostles and Disciples to put about.


Phi. I am sure that the Gospel would find but very little entertainment, were
it not for the Sword of Justice.


Tim. Why what, I pray, does the Sword of Justice toward the making the Gospel
oblige? does the Magistrate thrust down the Gospel into his Subjects bellies,
with his Sword of Justice? if he did, 'twould do them but very little good. For
it is plain, Philautus, to any one that knows what belongs to Religion; that
this same Sword of Justice which is to make the Scriptures Canonical has so
very little of any obliging virtue in it, that he that does not count himself
obliged to obey the Precepts of Christ, only because Christ gave them ( i. e.
without your Sword of Justice) is as far from salvation, as one that never
heard of Christ at all.


Phi. I suppose you don't imagine, Tim, the command of a lawful Prince to blast
the obligation of the Gospel.


Tim. No: but, I suppose, he that obeys the Gospel only out of complaisance to
his Prince, will obey any other Book out of the same ^omplaisance; having no
other God, nor Religion, but Power and the Sword.


Phi. It Is a very strange thing to me that the commands of Princes should have
such little virtue in them; whereas the chief thing that our Savior ordered
his Disciples to Preach, was obedience to Magistrates. And therefore St. Paul
bids Children to obey their Parents in all things; and servants in all things
to obey their Masters: now, if it was Christ's mind that such little Potentates,
as Fathers and Masters of Families, should be obeyed in all things; what shall
we say to Fathers and Masters of Kingdoms?


Tim. What shall we say? we must say that they must be obeyed in more than all
things.


Phi. In more than all things? that is nonsense, Tim, and impossible. But it
was certainly our Saviors intention that they should be obeyed as far as was
possible, i. e. in all things.


Tim. Without doubt, Sir: and therefore when our Savior Preached up obedience
to Magistrates, and said that he came not to destroy but fulfill the Law, his
meaning certainly, Philautus, must be this: viz. Whereas I, who am the true Son
of God, am come into the World to give Salvation, and the true means leading
thereunto; which are meekness, sobriety, fidelity, charity, etc. yet, not to
deceive you, you are to know that at present, I am only in a private capacity;
and this is no command, but only my private opinion, judgment and advice: and
therefore if the supreme Magistrate calls upon you to cheat, lie, swear, whore,
sink, damn; and to despise and renounce me and my doctrine; never boggle or
stand to consider of it; but do it, do it: mind not at all what I said: for I
called in now, only by the by: and this is a time only of friendly counsel and
invitation. My time of commanding is not as yet come. But I shall have a time
of it afterward; and that a very great one, when I come to be seated at
Jerusalem; and then I shall have great strength and a long Retinue: but in the
mean while -- obey in all things, whatever I say to the contrary. This is the
very truth and bottom, Philautus, of all your Christianity.


Phi. I am sure of this, that neither Christ nor his Apostles did any thing
more than counsel and invite; never did he, or they impose, or command.


Tim. That is, when Christ sent out his Disciples to preach the Gospel, he did
not bid them fire a Musket at every sentence: and when St. Paul exhorted the
Corinthians to stand fast in the Faith; he did not bid them do it, in the Kings
name.


Phi. No; nor in any other name of secular Authority.


Tim. No; for according to you, they only went up and down the World crying the
Gospel: for a Preacher (as you observe) in Latin is Praeco; that is, a Crier or
Proclamation-maker and as the Prophet Esaias ( Lev. p. 286.) invites and calls:
ho, every man that thirsts, etc. so they that were sent out to preach the
Gospel did nothing more, but knock at men's doors, and cried ho, will you have
any Gospel within? or else got upon a stool in the Market, and made
Proclamation of the Gospel there; which, according to Philautus, (without any
sin) need not be any more minded than the singing of a Ballad: for Christ has
no Kingdom as yet; and where no Kingdom, there is no command, and consequently
no obligation. That a Philosopher and Poet should write this for sense or wit;
or that any body else should take it for such in the reading! for, as for
Religion, that is not to be regarded.


Phi. I am sure I have had many a serious thought about Religion: and have been
very careful to keep a Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward my
lawful Prince: for my lawful Prince is to be minded.


Tim. Yes, Sir, your Prince must be minded: and truly you have complemented up
a fine one. But let me tell you he is not absolute and perfect, till you have
removed one objection.


Phi. What Is that?


Tim. You must needs take away Heaven and Hell: but especially Hell.


Phi. I don't take away Hell.


Tim. No; not quite; but you make such a little, pretty, easy, reasonable,
convenient Hell for Villains, Traitors, Tyrants, and Atheists, as never was
invented. Let me see, say you ( Lev. p. 238.) I have promised my lawful Prince
(or the Ostler) to blaspheme God, renounce Christ and burn my Bible: and for
Peace and Government have advised others to do the like: but there be some
squeamish, Clergyfied, disloyal Simpletons that will be afraid of Hell.
Therefore I must needs make a little, pretty, tiny Hell. For otherwise my
Eternal Almighty Prince may chance to be disobeyed, and the Peace disturbed. I
shall only give you most of your own words, and so take leave. Seeing, say you,
that the maintenance of civil society depends on justice, and justice on the
power of life and (...), and other less reward^ and punishments residing in
them that have the Sovereignty of the Commonwealth; and seeing that it is
impossible that a Commonwealth should stand, where any other than the
Sovereign has a power of giving greater rewards than life; and of inflicting
greater punishments than death: and seeing surther that it is reported by Poets
and some Bagpipe Divines, that Eternal life is a greater reward than the lise
present, and Eternal torment a greater punishment, than the death of nature;
therefore, say you, let us make a pretty good Heaven, to invite people to
obedience to Magistrates: but a very little Hell (about the bigness of a
Quartan-Ague) for fear people should obey God more than Men. And accordingly
you do it.


Phi. My Hell is a very reasonable Hell.


Tim. I remember so much of it that all the men that ever were in the World are
to live upon earth at the same time; and (...), they will eat up one another in a
day and a night or thereabouts, for want of pasture. Cast it up and you will find
it so: you are a Mathematician: and so farewell.


Phi. What will not you talk a little about the Trinity, etc?


Tim. I know what Persona signifies in the Dictionary, and therein lies all
your Divinity. And therefore, I say again, Farewell.


THE END.

