A LETTER To the Honorable Sir Robert Howard: Together with some
Animadversions Upon a BOOK Entitled, Christianity not Mysterious.

By EDMUND ELYS, sometime Fellow of Baliol College in OXFORD.

(...). LONDON: Printed for Richard Wilkin at the Kings Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1696.

To the Honorable Sir Robert Howard.
SIR,
I Challenge the Performance of your Promise, That you will not take it ill, if
any Man shall offer Reasons unclogg'd with Passion against any thing you have
writ; and that if you cannot clearly answer them you will submit, and
acknowledge your Error. Amongst some Papers entitled, Polemica Christiana,
published before I saw the Book entitled, A Twofold Vindication, etc. there are
some Reflections on your History of Religion, which, if I had known to have
been yours, perhaps I might not have used some of the Expressions which you
will find in those Reflections: But whatever they are, GOD is my Witness, no
Inordinate Passion, but a Fervent Love of the Truth, you oppose, prompted me to
those Conceptions, which I designed to declare by them. That prodigious Huff of
your Friend shall not discourage me from publishing some more of my
Amimadversions upon your Book.

The History of Religion is a Test upon all its Readers: No Man can declare his
Dislike of that Book, but at the same time he proclaims that he esteems the
Substance of Religion to consist in that, which is least to be understood, that
he is all for Discipline. GOD knows I am not for any other Discipline but what
may conduce to the Glory of GOD, and the Good of Men. Yet I must declare to all
the World that I dislike your Book: In which, p. 43. I find these Words: I wish
that among the most Reformed Christians these Methods of Priestcraft were not
so much, and violently pursued; the Impositions to believe and profess
unnecessary, and even extravagant things, where neither Reason will justify
it, nor does Religion require it. Here you come out of your Hole, and plainly
enough acknowledge that you charge the Church of England with PRIESTCRAFT, as
well as the Church of Rome. Does not Religion require that the Profession of
believing that JESUS CHRIST, the Savior of the World, is the true and eternal
GOD, should be the principal Term of Christian Communion? If you shall be
pleased to let us know what you mean by unnecessary, and even extravagant
things, I trust in GOD I shall be able to give you an Answer. I have formerly
animadverted on these Words, p. 63. A Man must be his own Expositor, Minister,
Bishop, and Council. I shall now give you some of my Thoughts upon the Words
following, for these will not bear his Punishment, he must bear it himself.

Answ. Therefore a Man ought not to be his own Expositor, Minister, Bishop, and
Council, because if he be so, he shall bear the Punishment of Disobedience to
them, whom our blessed LORD, by his Apostle, commands him to obey, Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your Souls, as they that must give Account. Those Powers and Authorities,
say you, given to others, was the Cause of making and multiplying Creeds, and
Rules of Faith, which ever were modeled according to the present Interests and
Animosities of prevailing Parties. Here you revile all Councils, and
consequently cut off your self from the Body of the visible Church of CHRIST.
It Is evident that he cannot be a true Member of the Church of England that
contemns the four first general Councils, or any one of them. To say that the
Creeds, or Forms of sound Words, which were made by the Councils of NICE and
CONSTANTINOPLE (the two other Councils, viz. Ephesians. and Chalc. made none) were
not Modelled according to Godliness ((...)) but according to the present
Interests and Animosities of prevailing Parties, is, I think, the greatest
Slander, that any Gentleman professing himself to be a Member of the Church of
England was ever guilty of, however provoked by any Interest or Animosity. I
pray GOD to give you true Repentance. P. 96. It Is not reasonable, say you, to
believe that GOD who knows our Infirmities, will punish Error; which is no Sin,
because it comes not from the Will and Intention: One Man may be weaker than
another, and both may mistake more or less, according to the difference of
their Capacities; but neither of them is thereby guilty, because the Mistakes
and Opinions proceed from their Innocence, which is to say their Weakness and
Ignorance. This Conceit of yours is grossly erroneous, that Error comes not from
the Will. I grant that Nescience, or the not knowing of any thing, which comes
not from the Will is no Sin: But I assert that all Error comes from the Will,
being a false or irregular Judgment, an Assent to that which is false, or a
Dissent from that which is true. It Is not only possible, but our absolute Duty
to SUSPEND our Judgment, where we have no Evidence of the Truth or Falsehood of
any Proposition. It Is wisely observed by the Stoics, that it is agreeable to
Nature, that is, to right Reason, that we should suspend our Judgment
concerning any thing, of which we have no Evidence. Epict. lib. 3. cap. 3.
(...). Every (rational) Soul acting according to her Nature assents to that
which is true, dissents from that which is false, suspends her Judgment in
Matters of which she has no Evidence or Certainty. All false Judgments are
self-Conceits, which always proceed from self-will, which is the Head Spring or
Fountain of all Iniquity. I did not think to have taken the Libeller to task,
says your Friend, for any other of his wild Talk about Mystery, because all the
common Mistakes on that Topic are so manifestly discovered by a very great
Master, that I do not expect a Man of Reputation will in have venture a Defense
against him. I do not pretend much to Reputation: I am willing to be made as
the Filth of the World, and the Offscouring of all things. But I solemnly
profess, by the Grace of GOD, to hold the MYSTERY of the Faith in a pure
Conscience: And I should defile my Conscience with a very soul Sin of Omission,
if I should not publish my Animadversions upon that very wicked Book entitled
Christianity not mysterious. I Beseech the only wise GOD to convince you of all
your Errors, and to lead you by his holy Spirit into all Truth, and to give you
all things which he knows to be best for you,

Your Servant E. E.

Animadversions Upon a BOOK Entitled, Christanity not Mysterious.
REason, says this Author, may be defined, that Faculty of the Soul, which
discovers the Certainty of any thing dubious or obscure, by comparing it with
something evidently known.

Answ. This is no Definition of Reason, but an inadequate Description of the
Humane Intellect or Understanding. ESSENTIAL REASON IS INFINITE WISDOM or
KNOWLEDGE absolutely perfect of Being absolutely infinite. Being absolutely
INFINITE communicating it self to the Human Understanding, produces that
Conception which we call the IDEA OF GOD. This is REASON PARTICIPATED by all
Rational Creatures. The Humane Intellect or Understanding is that Power or
Faculty of the Soul of Man, by which he is capable of apprehending or
perceiving that there is a Being absolutely infinite, that is, GOD; and that
all Finite Beings, Natures, or Essences, and all natural Motions or Operations
are derived from him. The Intellect is commonly called Reason. The Ground of
which Appellation is this, that every Act of the Intellect or Understanding, so
far as it is not depraved or perverted by the Will, is nothing else but the
Perception of ESSENTIAL REASON in it self, or in its Effects.

P. 23, 24. No Christian I know of now expressly says Reason and the Gospel are
contrary to one another: But, which returns to the same, very many affirm, that
tho the Doctrines of the latter cannot in themselves be contradictory to the
Principles of the former, as proceeding both from GOD, yet that according to
our Conceptions of them, they may seem directly to clash: And that tho we
cannot reconcile them by reason of our corrupt and limited Understandings; yet
that from the Authority of Divine Revelation, we are bound to believe and
acquiesce in them; or, as the Fathers taught 'em to speak, to adore what we
cannot comprehend.

Answ. We do not say that Reason and the Gospel do ever seem to clash, or to
contradict one another, but only to those Men, who by the Perverseness of their
Will, averting it self from the Divine Goodness, avert their Understanding from
the Truth of that Doctrine which is destructive to all their Lusts or
Inclinations arising from the false Appearance of Good. We say indeed that the
Fathers have taught us, according to the Holy Scriptures, that we must adore
what we cannot comprehend. He that performs any true and acceptable Worship to
Almighty GOD, does most humbly and heartily acknowledge that the Object of his
Worship has all the Excellency and Perfection that he can apprehend or
conceive, as signified by these Words, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, etc. And that
it is infinitely more excellent and glorious than can ever be any way
apprehended or conceived by Men or Angels. It Is evident that though we know GOD
in some measure, he infinitely transcends the Comprehension of our Reason or
Understanding. But says our Adversary, p. 78. to comprehend in all correct
Authors, is nothing else but to know.

Answ. Comprehension is Knowledge, but all Knowledge is not Comprehension:
Comprehension is that Knowledge which extends to all that can be known of the
Object.

P: 88. As for GOD, we Comprehend nothing better than his Attributes. We know
not, it is true the Nature of that eternal Subject, or Essence wherein Infinite
Goodness, Love, Knowledge, Power and Wisdom coexist; but we are not better
acquainted with the real Essence of any of his Creatures.

Here it is manifest that this Man's most prodigious Self-conceit and
Affectation of SINGULARITY averts his Understanding from a due Reflection upon
the true IDEA OF GOD in his own Soul, and in the Souls of all Men, in the
Contemplation whereof we may easily discern this Truth, that the several divine
Attributes are several Significations or Manifestations of the one Being
absolutely Infinite and incomprehensible. They are not in GOD, or the Divine
Essence, as Accidents in a Subject. To talk of the Nature of an Essence is an
Absurdity, which, I think, no Scholar was ever guilty of, but the Author of
this most impious Libel against the Holy Catholic Church. There cannot be a
more Notorious Contradiction than to say we COMPREHEND INFINITE Goodness, Love,
etc. We grant that every Pious Man is better acquainted with the Divine
Attributes than with the Properties of any Creature: But we know it is
absolutely impossible for any Man or Angel to Comprehend the Divine Essence;
and we know it is not so impossible to comprehend the Nature or Essence of any
Creature. Therefore I think it my Duty to proclaim to all the World my just
Abhorrence and Detestation of the blind Boldness of this insolent Writer. I
think, says he, I may now warrantably conclude that nothing is a Mystery
because we know not its Essence, since it appears that it is neither knowable
in it self, nor ever thought of by us: So that the divine Being himself cannot,
with more Reason, be accounted mysterious in this respect than the most
contemptible of his Creatures.

Answ. If the divine Being be truly and really INFINITE, then there is infinite
more Reason that this Being should be accounted mysterious in this respect,
that it passes Knowledge, or the utmost Capacity of our intellective Faculty,
than the most glorious of his Creatures.

P. 91. Such Revelations of God in the New Testament are called Mysteries not
from any present Inconceivableness or Obscurity, but with respect to what they
were before this Revelation, as that is called our Task, which we long since
performed.

I shall here entreat the pious and learned Reader to employ his Thoughts in
the deepest Search after the true and genuine Sense of these sacred Words, 1 Timothy 3.9. Holding the MYSTERY of the Faith in a pure Conscience. (...). The
principal Object of Christian Faith is the Person of JESUS CHRIST; so that no
Man can ever know any thing contained in the Holy Scriptures ((...), 1 Cor.
8.2.) As he ought to know, but when his Apprehensions of it have Reference to
the Love of CHRIST, which (though it be known in some measure) PASSES
KNOWLEDGE, that is to say, is incomprehensible, having no other Foundation than
the INFINITY of the divine Goodness. (...), Ephesians. 3.19. To have a due Reference
to CHRIST in our Apprehensions of any Doctrine contained in the Holy Scriptures
is to give a firm and immovable Assent to it, (...), As the Truth is in Jesus,
who being GOD from everlasting did in time, take on him the Nature of Man to
save us from our Sins. To be saved from all known Sin, so that we would rather
lay down our Lives than hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, or knowingly and
wilfully transgress the Law of our Maker, Redeemer and Sanctifyer, is to keep a
pure Conscience. And he that keeps a pure Conscience through CHRIST enabling
him will easily conceive that this Expression of St. Paul, (...) is of the same
Signification with those Words of St. John, 1 Epist. 5.12, (...). He that has
(or holds) the SON, has Life: And he that has not the SON of God has not
Life. If Jesus Christ, the everlasting Son of the Father, were not Revealed, he
could not be the Object of Our Faith: But the clearest Revelation we have of
him does not make him cease to be a MYSTERY. Great is the MYSTERY of Godliness.
GOD was manifest in the Flesh, etc. The SON OF GOD is revealed, not only as the
Object of our Knowledge, but also of our everlasting Admiration. His Name shall
be called WONDERFUL, Isaiah 9.6. I shall endeavor to give the candid Reader a
further Illustration of this most important Truth, by making some Reflections
upon some other Expressions of the blessed Apostle, Romans 16, 25, 26, 27. Now to
him that is of Power to establish you according to my Gospel, and the preaching
of Jesus Christ (according to the Revelation of the MYSTERY, which was kept
secret since the World began, but now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures
of the Prophets according to the Commandment of the everlasting God made known
to all Nations for the Obedience of Faith) to God only Wise be Glory through
Jesus Christ, for ever, Amen.

The holy Apostle calls the principal Subject of all his preaching ( viz.) that
JESUS CHRIST is the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World) a MYSTERY
both with respect to its having been kept secret, and with respect to its
present Manifestation. If the Word Mystery signified nothing else, but a Matter
kept secret, viz. wholly secret or undiscovered, then indeed the Matter being
Revealed, there would be no Mystery. But certainly if the word had no other
Signification, but of a Matter kept secret, the Apostle would never have used
this Expression, the Revelation of the Mystery that was kept secret. But says
our Adversary, Yes: Even " As that may be called our Task which we have long
since performed.

Answ. A Task being a Work which we are enjoined to perform, we may properly
say, it was our Task, but 'twould be absurd to say that any Work is our Task,
which we have long since performed. It Is evident therefore, that the blessed
Apostle, by the word Mystery, would have us to understand that the principal
Subject of all his preaching, viz. that JESUS CHRIST is the Propitiation for
the Sins of the whole World, though now it be made known or declared to all
Nations, still remains a Mystery, being such a wonderful Contrivance and Effect
of infinite Wisdom and Power to reconcile infinite vindictive Justice or Hatred
of SIN, to infinite Goodness and Mercy in bringing SINNERS to true Repentance
and eternal Life, that it passes Knowledge, i. e. that it infinitely
transcends the utmost Capacity of any finite Understanding, so that a pious
Soul in the Contemplation thereof finds Matter of perpetual ADMIRATION, Ephesians.
3.8, 9. Unto me who am less than the least of all Saints, is this Grace given,
that I should preach among the Gentiles the UNSEARCHABLE RICHES of Christ; and
to make all Men see what is the Fellowship of the MYSTERY, which from the
Beginning of the World has been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus
Christ. By the Riches of Christ we are to understand the Abundance of his
Excellencies and Perfections communicable to those that OBEY him by Virtue of
his being the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World. The blessed Apostle
plainly shows that the Subject of his preaching is a MYSTERY in that he calls
it the unsearchable Riches of Christ ((...),) In the following Verse he
expressly calls it a Mystery.

The LORD grant that by the Illumination of his holy Spirit we may so clearly
understand that CHRISTIANITY is MYSTERIOUS, i. e. that the RICHES OF CHRIST are
UNSEARCHABLE, that all our natural Desires of Knowledge may be so sanctified,
as to be resolved into this one Desire, that we may know the Love of Christ,
which passes Knowledge, that we may be filled with all the Fullness of GOD.

(...).
FINIS.

