A CLERGYMAN OF THE Church of England His Vindication of Himself for Reading
His Majesty's Late DECLARATION.
With Allowance.
Though my Averseness from all appearance of Opposition to Our Most Reverend
Metropolitan, and the Reverend Bishop of this Diocese made me Resolve (as I
acquainted a Learned man in Answer to a Letter I lately received from him) that
I would not Publish any thing upon ^ion of this Great Controversy; yet upon
Second Thoughts of My Duty (...) Our Gracious Sovereign, and the Regard I ought
to have to My own Reputation in reference to that Apostolical Injunction, Let
no man Despise (...) I now Resolve to make known to the World what Reasons I
had to (...) the DECLARATION.

I received it from the hands of the Totness-Apparitor, without the Least doubt
or scruple but that it came from my Lord Bishop of Exeter: I read it the Sunday
after I received it. The Saturday following I received a Letter from the
Apparitor, acquainting me that it was my Lord Bishops Pleasure that I should
not Read the DECLARATION. Since that time I have often said that I shall not
make the least scruple to Read it again, if I shall receive an Order so to do
from the KING, or the Bishops: And yet amongst a Multitude of the Foulest
Calumnies imaginable that have been raised against ^e upon this Occasion, this
is one, that I am so vexed and disquieted in mind for ^aving read this
DECLARATION that I am like to be quite Distracted ^rough Anguish that ever I
did such a thing. This is so Prodigious a Lie, at GOD is my Witness I never had
the least Inclination to Repent of it. ^ave written to several Learned men of
the Church of England, that in a ^^ere Desire to keep a Conscience void of
Offense both toward GOD, (...) toward Men, I resolved to submit to this
Order, upon these, and the (...) Considerations, "That Our Sovereign Lord the
King, has a Right to Declare or make known his Mind as to any Matter
whatsoever, to every ^e of his Subjects: And Consequently that he has a Right
to Constrain ^l Priests and Deacons to be his Instruments to make his Mind
known by ^eading any DECLARATION, etc. I was prompted to these thoughts my
Remembrance of those words of St. Gregory, which I took special (...) of Twenty
years since.

St. Greg. Regist. L. 2. Ep 62. Greg. -- Gregorius Mauricio Augusto. Ego quidem
Jussioni Subjectus, eandem Legem per diversas terrarum pa^ transmitti feci, and
quia Lex ipsa Omnipotenti Deo minime concordat, ecce per (...) gestionis meae
paginam serenissimis Dominis nunciavi Utrobique ergo quae d^ exolui, qui and
Imperatori Obedientiam praebui, and pro Deo quod sensi minime t^

Since I am subject to Your Command, I caused the Law (you had sent me* (...)
be dispersed through diverse parts of the World; and, because the Law it self
i^ so agreeable to the Will of Almighty God, behold I have declared the same by
(...) Paper which suggests my Reasons. And by doing so, I have in both regards
pa^ Duty I owed; while I both perform my Obedience to the Emperor, and (...)
known my sentiments in relation to God.

I suppose all the Learned Clergy of the Church of England know w^ saying this
is: If the Exemption from Obedience be not as Eviden^ (...) the Command to
Obey, it must needs be Sin not to Obey. This I (...) fastly Believe; and
therefore I am Resolved by the Help of God to do (...) thing that His Majesty
shall Command Me, unless I find it to be of s^ nature, that I shall be ready to
Declare to His Majesty and All the W^ that I am so Confident that the
performance of such an Action wou^ (...) Contrary to the Law of God, Declared
in the Holy Scriptures, or to (...) Law of the Land, or to some Canon or
Constitution Ecclesiastical, that I (...) be ready to lay down my Life in
Testimony that my refusing to do* (...) the King Commands is not in
Disobedience to Him, but in True ^ence to the King of Kings: And with this
Resolution I Pity all my ^mies; and I Desire my Friends not to be Troubled when
they hear M^ Bitterly Censured, and Reviled; but to Consider that some of the
Rep^ that are Daily cast upon Me make Me expressly Conformable to the ^ferings
of Our Blessed LORD, of whom it was said: He has a Dev^ (...) is MAD, why hear
ye him?

Edmund Ellis, Rector of East-Alling in Devon.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed, and Published by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1^^^


