THE FOUNDATION OF TITHES SHAKEN:

And the Four Principal Posts (of Divine Institution, Primitive Practice
Voluntary Donations, and Positive Laws) on which the nameless Author of the
Book, called, The Right of Tithes Asserted and Proved, has set his pretended
Right to Tithes, Removed, in a Reply to the said Book.

By Thomas Ellwood.

The Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the
(...), Hebr 7. 12. For there is verily a (...) ^f the Commandment going before
^^c. verse. 18.

In Augustine's time it was no general Law nor Custom in the Church, that
Tithes should be paid, Willet's Symp^^ of Popery, 5th Genesis Controv. page 314.

Nemo plus ^u^is ad Alium transf^rre potest, quam ipse habe^et, U^pian* i. e.
No man can make a better Title to another than he himself has.

Id uod nostrum est, sine facto nostro a nobis ^velli non potest Reg. Jur. i.
e. That which is our own, may not be taken away from us without our own act.

Printed in the year 1678.

THE PREFACE
Reader,
ONe of the great Faults, which the witty Erasmus pleasantly taxed Luther with,
was this, That he meddled with the Monks Bellies: for indeed, that zealous
Reformer did smartly inveigh against the Pride, Idleness, Luxury,
Voluptuousness and greedy Covetousness of the then Cl^rgy. I have of late been
also drawn to meddle a little with the Priests Bellies; the Occasion for which
was thus offered, by one of themselves.

Somewhat more than two years ago, a Book was published, by a Nameless Priest,
bearing the Title of A Friendly Conference between a Minister and a Parishioner
of his inclining to Quakerism, etc. In the latter part of which, he made Tithes
the Subject of his Conference. When I had read that Book, and had observed,
that, in some parts of it, the Author thereof had greatly abused, and
misrepresented the People called Quakers; in others, had endeavored to
deceive his Reader by Sophistical and Fallacious Arguments: I writ an Answer to
the whole, under the Title of Truth Prevailing, etc. which I divided into
several Chapters, according to the various Subjects treated of, the last of
which was Tithes. This, pinching the Priests in a tender part (the Belley) made
them bestir themselves, and lay their Heads together, to consider what was to
be done. After diverse Debates, and much Consultation (as I have been in^ormed)
about it, another Book (written by another Hand, but without a Name too) at
length came forth, entitled, The Right of Tithes Asserted and Proved, etc.
being an Answer to that one Chapter only of Tithes, which though it was the
last Chapter in my Book, yet having the first and chiefest place in the Priests
Minds and Affections, obtained from them the first and chiefest Defense. Some
time after came out another Book, said to be written by the Author of the
Conference, who was not willing yet, it seems, to trust the World with his
Name. This bearing the Title of A Vindication of the Friendly Conference, etc.
(and divided into like number of Chapters with mine) seems to be designed for a
general Reply to my Book. The former (called, The Right of Tithes) came first
to my Hand, and was about half dispatched before I saw the latter. I therefore
chose to t^ke the Chapter of Tithes out of the latter (so much, ^ mean, of it
as seemed Argum^ntative, or pertinent to the purpose) and clap it to the Book
of Tithes, as being of the same Subject. To both these the Book in thy Hand is
intended for an Answer: how well it answers that Intendment, is left to thee,
Reader, to judge.

If thou art a Tyth-Receiver of any kind, there is great danger lest Interest,
mis-guiding thy Understanding, should hinder thee from discerning Truth, and so
from judging truly. For that of the Poet.

Impedit Ira Animum, ne possit cernere verum,
[Anger does obstruct the Mind
That the Truth it cannot find.]
Is not more true of Anger, than of Interest. Advantage, like the Bias on a
Bowl, is apt to sway the Judgment, and draw the Mind to favor that side, on
which the Profit lies. Against this Danger be pleased to take this Caution: and
be entreated to lay aside all Considerations of Gain or Loss, Advantage or
Disadvantage in this Case, not measuring the Justice of the Cause by the
Profit, but weighing the Profit by the justice. Remember that, Nihil utile,
quod non idem honestum (i. e. Nothing is profitable which is not Honest) and
Nihil honestum esse potest, quod justitia vacat (i. e. Nothing can be Honest
which is not Just) were approved Axioms amongst the gravest Heathen
Philosophers, and deserve much more to be observed by those, who bear a Name
derived from Christ.

Ex Damno alterius commoda nulla feres,
[Account not that for Just and Honest Gain
Which got by thee, makes others Loss sustain]
Is a good Document for Men as well as Children. In short, whether thou art a
Tythe-Receiver, or no, this I request of thee, Read without Prejudice, Judge
without Partiality; Examine this Discourse fully and thoroughly; but give the
Reasons therein given their due Poize and Weight.

The Author of The Right of Tithes, in his Epistle, page 2. charges me with
bragging in a Letter of mine to a Quaker at York, that I have showed some
little Learning in my former Book; and there-upon says, I dare affirm he has
but little to show. I am pe^swaded He and I shall not fall out about my
Learning: for he seems willing to allow me a little, and I assure him, I never
took my self to have much. Nor do I think, when his Disdain is at the highest,
he will desire to lay me lower, in that respect, than I, of my self, am willing
to lie, But in charging me with bragging of that little Learning, which his
Courtesy is pleased to allow me, he deals discou^teously^ and injuriously with
me. The Letter he mentions was in Answer to one from a Friend in York (to me
unknown) in which he acquainted me, That my Book having gained Acceptance
there, Endeavors were used to prevent its further Service, by casting out a
Report that I was a Jesuit, at least, that I was no Quaker, but had a mind to
show my Parts and Learning, etc. (The like Rumor also, of my being a Jesuit,
was craftily spread in Nottingham-shire) Hereupon to show the Vanity of their
Slander, I thus writ in that Letter, -- Some (thou say) will needs have me
to be a Jesuit; and why? because of a little Learning: must none then have
Learning but they and Jesuits? This is the common, but poor shift of Priests
hard beset; when they cannot maintain their Ground, they cry out, Their
Opponent is a Jesuit, as if none could be too hard for them, but Jesuits, by
whom to be worsted they are not ashamed to think it no shame, the more shame
for them. Well, Truth is too hard for them and Jesuits too. And a little after,
Whatever they in their Carnal minds may imagine -- I have learnt to know my self
better, than to ascribe to my self or my own Abilities any of that Honor,
which is due to the Power of Prevailing Truth. -- Judge, Reader, whether from
those Expressions, my Opponent had any just ground to tax me with bragging of
my Learning.

But as an Argument of my want of Learning (yea^ gross Ignorance, as he is
pleased to term it, Ep. p. 3.) he charges me with mistaking another Basil for
Basil the Great. This he takes out of that Chapter of my Book which treats of
Swearing; and his Brother Priest in his Vindication of the Conference, objects
the same against me, in his Chapter of Swearing in Answer to mine. When I shall
come to that part of the Vindication, I intend to give an Account o^ that
Passage, and therefore (to avoid needless Repetitions) omit it here; yet
thought it needful to intimate thus much here, lest ^y Opponent should so far
mistake himself as to think I was willing to shift it.

Some Testimonies I have taken out of Fox's Martyrology (or Book of Martyrs)
the various Editions of which render Quotations out of it very uncertain, and
sometimes suspected: the Book which I have used is of the sixth impression, in
two Volumns, printed at London in the year 1610.

These things premised, I now recommend the following Discourse to thy most
serious perusal, and thee to the Guidance of that good Spirit which leads into
all Truth.

THE INTRODUCTION.
WHen Demetrius the Silver-Smith of Ephesus perceived, that by Paul's preaching
his Trade was like to decay, he called his Crafts-men together, and thus
bespake them, Ye know, said he, that by this Craft we have our Wealth;
Moreover, ye see and hear, that not ^lone at Ephesus, but almost throughout all
Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned away much people, saying, that they
be no Gods which are made with hands* so that not only this our Craft is in
danger to be set at naught, but also that the Temple of the great Goddess Diana
should be despised, etc. Acts 19. 25, 26. The Case has fallen out somewhat
alike with our English De^etrius, the Author of the Book called, The Right of
Tithes asserted, etc. who finding his Diana ^otter by a stroke received from
the last Chapter in a Book of mine, called, Truth Prevailing (written in Answer
to one from his Party, called, A Friendly Conference) and apprehensive of
greater Danger, if timely course were not taken, he gives the Alarm to his
Fellow-Crafts-men, and bespeaks him much to the same purpose, as did the
^phesian Silver-Smith of old. He said then, This is the Craft by which we have
our Wealth: This says now, This is the Oil by which our La^p is nourished, the
^ay by which our Army is maintained, page 13. He said then, This Paul has
persuaded and turned away much People; saying, they be no Gods which are made
with hands: This says now, When I consider how easily so plausible a Discourse
(meaning that Book of mine) might (...) some well-meaning men out of the right
way, etc. page 4. Again, The Obstinacy which the unhappy Quakers contract from
such false Ins^^uations as these of T. E. in this Case of Tithes, etc. page 6.
Again, Our Changers of Religion mainly seek to overthrow these things, and to
that end have sent out T. E. as their Champion, page 15. with more to the same
purpose. He said then, Not only this our Cra^t is in danger to be s^t at
naught, but also that the Temple of the great Goddess Diana should be despised.
This says now, They would gl^^ly stir up the People to take away our Books and
Subsistence from us, page 14. To stop the Oil that nourishes our Lamp, and
force us to disband for want of Pay, page 13. And not only so, but wise and
pious men -- look upon them as designing to disturb the Kingdom, destroy
Learning, and ruin the most famous of all Protestant Churche^, page 14. To
overthrow not only the Ministers, and their Maintenance, but also the Peace of
the Church, and Religion, whose safety (he says) depends upon that
Maintenance, page 15. He raised the People into an uproar, and filled the City
with Confusion; crying out for about the space of two hours, Great is Diana of
the Ephesians. This man abounds with confusion also, having little strength of
sound Argument or sorce of solid Reasoning, but crying up the sacred
Maintenance, Divine Tribute, Righ^ of Holy Church, etc.

And indeed, the main difference that does appear between that Demetrius and
this, is, that he (though he sought the destruction of the Apostle) did not
bespatter him with approbrious Language; whereas this man has endeavored to
besmear my Name with all the ignominy, reproach and obloquy his evil Nature
could prompt him to, and his worse Education furnish him with, of which these
that follow are some, This poor Retailer, page 3. Our strutting Quaker, page
16. Obscure and empty Quaker, page ^7. This skulking Adversary, page 19. This
poor Quaker is as bold as he is Blind, page 35. This Quaker has learnt to
Cant, page 40. He has the impudence, page 113. This ungracious Cha^, page 122.
The Quaker is a manifest Liar, page (...). This insolent Quaker, page 161. T.
Elwood is a (...) Wretch, page 173. Though T. E use the name of Popish Priests
to gull the People, yet he is one of their Iourny men, page 179. He is an
inspirado, page 18^. A wild Quaker, page 190. This double-tongu'd and
false-hearted man, page 195. His own base humor, page ^00. Common experience
preclaims him a Liar, ibid. This seditious Libeller, page 201. Is not the
Quaker a Knave, page 212. This malicious Slanderer, page 214. This
black-mouthed Slanderer may publish his own Venemo^s impieties, page 233.

This, Reader, is the Language wherewith he treats me; notwithstanding which he
has the confidence to Brand me with Railing, for calling Tithes the Priests
Delilah, the very Darling and minion of the Clergy: This he says is Ill
Language, page 11. and Scurrillity, page 12. which he will not meddle with. But
if this be ill Language and Scurillity, by what Name I marvel shall that
Language of his pass, which is before recited! Doubtless if Railing be not
Reasoning (as he truly says) his Book is so replete with Railing, that there
is little room for Reasoning in it. And though he terms that expression of mine
Scurrillity, and says he will not meddle with it, yet can he not forbear, but
in the very next page catches up this which himself accounts ill Language and
Scurrillity, and throws it at the Quakers, calling Tithes the Quakers Delilah
the very Darling and Minion of that Sect, page 13. And so transported he is
with passion against the Quakers, that he sees not the absurdity he runs
himself upon, in taxing the Quakers with railing at Tithes in the very same
Line, wherein he calls Tithes the Quakers Delilah, the very Darling and Minion
of that Sect: Is not this contradictory?

And as he all along looks upon the Quakers with an evil Eye of contempt,
disdain, and scorn, so he lifts up himself and his Brethren of the Clergy,
scarce finding words big enough to express the high conceit, and lo^ty Opinion
he has of his own and their Abilities. The leading Quakers (says he)
perceiving the Clergy of England so able and industrious to discover all their
evil Designs, etc. page 12. Again, They know while the Clergy have these
provisions, they will have Books, and leisure to Study, and Learning enough to
(...) all their silly pretenses, page 13. Again, Our Adversaries finding our
study of the Law so destructive of their inspired Nonsense; they would gladly
stir up the People to take away our Books, and Subsis^ence from ^s, that we
might be starved into Ignorance, and by our sad Necessities be brought down to
their scantling of understanding; and then they hope their Speakers would be an
equal match for ^s, page 14. These are the Brags, these the Insults, these the
Vau^ts, these are some of the Rhodomontadroes of this Polemical Priest, who in
the pride of his Heart, and haughtiness of his Mind, looks on the poor Quakers
with the same Eye of Scorn and Contempt, as did the monstro^^ Philistine of
Old, upon the little Stripling David. But when he takes occasion to mention me,
how is he put to it to find words sufficiently significant of his high disdain!
as in page 4. So MEAN a Creature. Again in page 5. I judge it necessary to lay
aside all Considerations of the MEANNESS of the Adversary. And when he has a
mind to throw dirt on me, rather then want a pretense to do it on, he will use
the help of his invention, and suppose things not in common sense supposeable:
As when he says, Dr. Sr, I perceive our strutting Quaker looks on you with a
scronful Eye, and says, page 277. Tithes were w^nt to be claimed as of divine
Right; but he finds this Priest is not hardy enough to adventure his c^use upon
that Title: Sure he takes himself to be very terrible, for he believes none but
a hardy man dare^ s^t upon him, page 16. How can it reasonably be supposed that
I did charge the Author of the Friendly Conference with want of hardiness in
respect of my self? Can he imagine I took that Book to be designed as an Onset
upon me! nothing is more irrational. Again, he says, page 17. It is evident
you laid aside this Weapon (of the divine right) not out of any distrust of the
Argument, nor out of any great Opinion of your Adversaries skill; How weakly is
this argued, for a man of so great Learning! One of my scantling of
understanding might happily have spoken as pertinently as this. The Author of
the Friendly Conference did not lay aside the Weapon of divine right, out of
any great Opinion of his Adversaries skill: Why, did he know what skill his
Adversary had before he tried it? Nay, did he know beforehand, or could he
foresee who his Adversary should be? Surely, either this great Learned man in
the wantonness of his Wit, has over-shot himself, or else he must make his Dr.
Sr. a Diviner instead of a Divine: This he did to fasten on me an imputation of
self-conceit, and stick his strutting Epithet upon me; but in page 3. when he
had a mind to Badge me with the scornful Title of a poor Retailer, he says, I
glea^ed my Quotations out of Fisher against Bishop Gauden, and that with so
little skill, that when the Printer in Fisher had mistaken Fimicus for
Firmicus; this poor Retailer calls him Fimicu^ also, page 115. which very Page
of my Book detects his unfair dealing, and clearly convicts him of manifest
falsehood: for I there quote Gauden's Book of Oaths, and the very page in
Gauden's Book, out of which I took that Sentence, notwithstanding which, so
little regard has he to speaking Truth, that he charges me with gleaning it out
of Fisher. But this is not the only instance of his unfair dealing by me, as I
shall have occasion hereafter to show.

He seems highly offended that I called Tithes the Priests Delilah, the very
Darling and Minion of the Clergy. What ever Reasons induced me so to call them,
I think he has sufficiently proved that I therein expressed my self aptly
enough; for he has not only leap over all the rest of my Book, and singled out
this which was the last Chapter in it, showing thereby how near and dear this
is to him, and that whatever becomes of the rest, this shall have a distinct
Treatise for its particular defense, but in his treating of it also, he
delivers himself in such Pathetical expressions, and speaks so feelingly of it,
that one may easily perceive it is one of his nearest concern^, if not the
nearest of all: Hear what he says, page 13. speaking of the Quakers
withholding Tithes from them, They see (says he) they cannot quench the Lamp,
and therefore they would stop the Oil that nourishes it. Tithes then it seems
(in his own account) is to the Priests what Oil is to the Lamp, that which
makes it shine, that which makes it give any light, that which makes it of any
use or service; can any thing be nearer? No Oil, no Light; no Tithes, no
Preaching; no Penny, no Pater noster. Did ever any, who assumed the Name of a
Minister of the Gospel, speak after this rate before! stop the Oil, the Lamp
^oes out, the Lamp has done shining; withold Tithes, the Priest gives over,
the Priest has done preach^^^. Without Oil the Lamp will not burn; without
Tithes the Priest will not Preach: Methinks this might (...) enough to let the
People see what a Ministry they (...) under, and seriously to consider, Whether
the dim Light their Lamps gives, be worth the Oil it spends them? Certain it
is, that in thus comparing the Priests to the Lamp, and the Tithes to the Oil,
making Tithes the cause of the Priests preaching, as the Oil is of the Lamps
burning; this Priest has spoke the very Truth, though somewhat unadvisedly;
and it is much if this unwary Expression don't lose him all the preferment he
promised himself for his elaborate Book of the Right of Tithes, which smells so
strong of the Lamp. But howsoever he speeds in that, his own comparison will
justify me for calling Tithes the Priests Delilah, the very Darling and Minion
of the Clergy.

But more fully to discover his foundation and standing* take another
expression of his in the same page, And because they dare not engage this Army,
they attempt to force them to disband for want of Pay. It seems then this Army
of Priests fight for Pay; and without Pay fight who will for them, they will
disband first^ But I am of Opinion they will consider twice, before they
disband once. Men once in Arms are seldom forward to disband, while either Pay
or Plunder lasts. How have they behaved themselves toward those that have no
need of such an Army, nor exspecting benefit by them, have Consci^ntiously
refused to pay them? Did they disband, or threaten it? nothing less. They
rather Ralli^d their Forces together, and either by Law, or force without Law,
have fallen upon the Spoil, and taken sometimes three, sometimes five or six
times as much as they pretended to be due to them: So that it is not likely,
while Plunder may be had, the want of Pay will disband the^.

But while this Priest talks of being forc'st to disband for want of Pay. I
doubt he forget^ the Nature of his Warfare, and the Cause for which he pretends
to be engaged. Is not he one that takes upon him ^ Cure of Souls? and can he so
easily quit his Station? Will he leave the Souls of the People for a Prey to
the Enemy, because he has not the pay he desires? Surely then it is otherwise
with him, then it was with the Apostle Paul, who did not say, If ye Pay ^e not,
you will force me to disband; if ye stop the Oil my Lamp will go out; without
Tithes I cannot Preach, but A necessity is laid upon me, Yea, W^ is to me if I
preach not the Gospel, ^ Cor. 9. 16. But this Priest does not appear to be
under that necessity of Preaching, but rather under the necessity of giving
over, if he be not paid to his content; nay, he seems to understand no other
W^, but that of having the Oil stopped, and wanting P^y. The Parishoner in the
Friendly Conference, page 160. was pretty near the mark it seems, when he said,
The Covetousness of the Clergy has given us occasion to fear, that bereave you
of your preferments, and you would soon abandon your Profession: And that
Priest understood better how to Varnish over his Cause, then this has done;
for he answered more warily, I hope (said he) many of (...) can appeal to the
searcher of Hearts, that we embraced the Ministry upon better grounds then
temporal Interests.

Whatever the grounds were upon which they embraced their Ministry, temp^r^l
Interests it seems by this Priest, are the grounds upon which they will quit
it, want of Pay will force them to disband. It Is much if this Priest be not one
of those, of whom his Dr. Sr. the Author of the Friendly Conference speaks,
when he says, page 11. It cannot be expected to be otherwise, but that some
men for a corrupt Interest will intrude themselves into these sacred Offices:
Or at least one of those of whom the same Author complains, in page 160. of his
Friendly Conference, where he says, The secular care of some of the Clergy,
for the Maintenance of their Families have been excessive; some such it seems
there are among them, and he is as like to be one as another: for indeed the
excess of his Secular care bespeaks him An Intruder for a corrupt Interest.

The Jews he says have a Proverb, Sine farina non est lex, page 14. i. e.
Without Meal there is no Law. And have not the Priests a Proverb also, Sine
farina non est Evangelium, i. e. Without Meal there is no Gospel. If his
metaphors of the Lamp and the Oil, the Army and the Pay be thought too weak to
bear my Inference out, I will add what he in the next page tells us Tacitus
says of the State, with his own application thereof to the Church, There can
be no quiet to the Nations without Soldiers, no Soldiers without Pay, nor no
Pay without Tribute, on which therefore the common saf^ty does depend: Even so,
says he, no Peace in the Church without Ministers, no Ministers without
Maintenance, nor no Maintenance without these public Contributions, on which
therefore the safety of Religion does d^pend. The plain English of this is, No
Tithes, no Ministers; no Meal, no Gospel; for all is made to depend upon
Tithes, No Ministers without Maintenance, no Maintenance without these public
Contributions (namely Tithes, no other maintenance it seems will serve the
turn) on which therefore, namely Tithes, the safety of Religion does depend: So
that take away Tithes, and down falls Religion: but that must be understood of
their Religion only, whose Subsistence depends upon Tithes, and I hope not of
all theirs neither.

I am not willing to spend time in tracing him step by step through all his
crooked turnings and winding^, wherein he often contradicts himse^f, one while
making the Quakers to be acted by mere Covetousness (in denying to pay Tithes)
pretending Conscience to save their Purses, supposing this kind of Godliness
great Gain, page 12. insinuating, that the Quakers find their Harangues against
Tithes very taking with the Covetous and Atheistical, with those who care not
much for any Religion, and therefore like the cheapest best, page 14. Another
while, The Quakers Obstinacy in this case of Tithes exposes them to more
Sufferings then all their other Errors, p. 6. One while, I am a bold
Antagonist, page 5. Another while, The Quaker^ dare not engage the Priests
Army, page 13. Anon, T. E. singly provokes the Priest to take up this Argument,
page 18. And (which is beyond all the rest) he calls me both a daring
Adversary, and a sculking Adversary in one and the same page. But I pass over
these, and many other of like nature, being desirous to try what further
Strength and Force of Argument this great Warrior has brought forth in the
Defense of Tithes, then the Author of the Friendly Conference had done before
him.

CHAP. 1.
. 1. TO make out the Divine Right of Tithes, there are three Periods (he says,
p. 19.) to be considered? 1. Before the Law; 2. Under the Law; 3. The Time of
the Gospel. Concerning the ^st Period, before the Law, says he (to his Dr.
Sr.) you said very little in your Conference, as not designing to manage this
Argument.

But why did he say so little? Was it not because he had but little to say, and
as I observed in my former Answer, Though he pretended to be a Minister of the
Gospel, yet he took the Law for the surer holding, and therefore betook himself
chiefly to that? No, says this Priest (to excuse him) It Is evident you laid
aside this Weapon (of the divine Right) not out of any distrust of the
Argument, but in very Truth you seem to have been loath to cast Pearls before
Swine, who understand not the value of them, page 17, 18.

Was his Parishioner then a Swine with whom he discoursed on that subject, whom
he called his Good ^ Friend and Neighbor, page 1. to whom he bore such true
Friendship, page 2. whose serious Inclination, Modesty and Humility he
commended, and the Expressions of whose Affection he accepted in all gratitude,
page 3.

He hinted indeed before (page 6. of his Friendly Conference) that the Priests
People were Beasts, and lean Beasts, no fatter for all the feeding; but then
they seemed to have been Kine, he stroak't so much M^l^ from them; but this
Priest has explained the matter, and declared them arrant Swine, not
considering that he has made his Dr. Sr. a Swine^erd instead of a Shepherd.

But what am I concerned in all this? Will he blame me because his Brother took
up his Cause by the wrong end! If divine Right (as he says) be ant^cedent to
any positive Constitution, why began he at the human Right? Or if he intended
only to manage the Argument of humane Right (as this Priest intimates for him,
page 20.) why did he meddle with the divine Right? but seeing he gave a touch
on each, why am I blamed for answering both? He had^ Reason the rather to have
begun with the divine Right, and to have insisted on it too, and have managed
that Argument (if he understood it) in as much as he began his Discourse upon a
Passage taken out of a Book of E. B's, which related to the divine Right, not
to the humane. Yet had he said nothing of Divine Right at all, it may be I
might have said the less; but seeing he thought fit to say so much as might
intimate a reserve for a divine Right, I think I had reason to examine the
claim, and not as easily grant, as he did weakly beg the Question.

But he says, he perceives his Brother Priest had mentioned, that the divine
Right of Tithes was derived from Melchizedeck, not from Levi. He Is very angry I
fell upon this Passage, and to vent his Passion bestows upon me the badge of a
skulking Adversary: Why so? Because this Passage (he says) was single, not
guarded with any Proofs or Reasons, stood naked, was an open place. Whose Fault
was that? Did he expect I should have guarded it with Proo^s and Reasons for
him? or that I should have been so mannerly as to have past it by because it
was not guarded? He would not it seems have had me enter there, because it was
an open place. Surely if I had meddled with nothing but what was guarded with
Proofs and Reasons, I should have had little to meddle with; for his whole Book
is either u^guarded or ill guarded.

But he would persuade his Reader, page 17, 20. That I had triumphed over this
naked Sentence, (as he calls it) and over the Author too; nay, that I had
boasted, I had disproved clearly the divine Right of Tithes; for which, the
better to hide himself, he assigns no page of my Book; nor do I know any
Passage in it, from which, without ^ positive Resolution to abuse me, he could
draw such an unfair inference. The most I said (that I remember) was in page
282. and the words these, That Tithes were not paid by Abraham to Melchizedeck,
but given, and that but once, and that too upon an Accidental Occasion, nor
then out of his own proper Estate (but out of the Pillage of Sodom, which he by
the Sword had recovered from the Plunderers) I think I need not stick to say I
have already proved. Whethe^ this was an immodest Expression, considering what
I had before offered in the four preceding pages of my Book; and whether he
has dealt fairly with me from hence, to represent me as triumphing, and
boasting that I had disproved clearly the Divine Right of Tithes, let the
ingenuous Reader judge.

. 2. My first Opponent in his Friendly Conference, page 135. had affirmed, that
those that ins^st upon the divine Right of Tithes, derive them not from Levi,
but Melchizedeck: In my Answer to which, page 277. I said, It is then
inquirable, whether o^ no Tithes were ever due to Melchized^ck: That which
should make them due, must be a Command, they were not due to the Levitical
Priesthood, until they were commanded to be paid; but after they were commanded
to be paid, they become due; and so long as the Command stood in force, it was
an Evil to detain them. But we do not find, throughout the Scriptures any
Command from God that Tithes should be paid unto Melchizedeck. Upon this the
Author of the Right of Tithes says, page 20. My first words do declare, I do
not understand the Question.

But I believe, either this Priest does not understand the Question, as the
other stated it; or else he thinks the other Priest did not understand how to
state it as he should do; and therefore he has undertaken to state the
Question anew. The Case was plain enough to be understood before; and I am
content to abide the Reader's Censure, whether by my Answer to it I under^^ood
it or not. I confess, I did not then understand how this man Eighteen Months
after would alter it, no more then I now do how another of them Eighteen
Mone^^s hence may vary it again, if this man's work succeed no better then the
former. The former Priest said, The divine Right of Tithes was derived from
Melchizedeck. Now because no Right could be derived from Mel^hiz^deck to
another, which was not first in Melchizedeck himself, I thought it justly
inquirable, Whether or no Tithes were ever due to Melchizedeck? And because no
certain and positive Evidence could be produced of Melchizedeck's Right to
Tithes, I judged it necessary to consider what way Tithes might come to be due
to ^ him, and therefore said, that which should make them due must be a
Command. This also I demonstrated by an ^nstance from the Levitical Priesthood,
to whom it is on all hands acknowledged they were due, after they were
commanded to be paid to them, not before; therefore I said, They were not due
to the Levitical Priesthood, until they were commanded to be paid; but after
they were commanded to be paid they became due: and so long as that Command
stood in force, it was an Evil^ to detain them. This the Priest was willing to
dash out, lest as the Right of the Levitical Priesthood to Tithes, depended
upon an express Command, so an equality of Reason should drive him to seek a
Command, on which to ground Melchizedeck's Right to them also, which he very
well knew he could no where find.

He attempts therefore to mend the matter by a new stating of the Question: And
whereas the other Priest had asse^ted, that the Divine Right of Tithes was
derived from Melchizedeck, not from Levi; this Priest says, page 20. The
Ass^rtors of the Divine Right of Tithes do not make them originally due either
to Melchizedeck or Levi, but to God himself, etc.

To whom Tithes were originally due, was not the Question; but from whom the
present Priests do deriv^ a Divine Right in Tithes to themseves, whereby Tithes
may become due to them by a Divine Right, which the former Priest asserted to
be from Melchizedeck. He does not claim Tithes from God, to whom they were
originally due; but from Melchizeck, to whom how they became due, and from whom
have they come to be due to these Priests, had well become him to have proved.

. 3. He says, The Tenth belongs to God.

I say, All belongs to God, the Nine Parts as well as the Tenth; for the
Fullness of the Earth is the Lords, Psalm. 24. 1. not a part only; the Cattle on
a thousand Hills ar^ his, Psalm. ^0. 12. not the Tithes of them only. That
Scripture therefore Prove. 3. 9. Honor the Lord with thy Su^stance, is
misapplyed by the Priest, and, as he restrains it to the Payment of Tithes, is
not a binding Rule to Christians as well as Jews; C^ristians being no where
commanded by God to pay Tithes, as the Jews expressly were. But the Christian
does then honor God with his Substance, when thankfully receiving the Goods of
this World from the Hand of the Lord, he does in God's holy Fear so use them,
as not to abuse them, 1 Cor. 7. 31. when both in eating and drinking, and
whatsoever else he does, he does all to the Glory of God, according to the
Exhortation of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 10 31. It Is not to be doubted but that
God, from whose Bounty and Blessing all is received, might reserve to himself
what share he pleased; but what he might do is one thing, what he did another:
That he ever did appropriate the tenth part, I find not in Scripture expressed,
excepting only in the time of the Levitical Priesthood, for which there was a
particular Reason. He then chose the Jewish Nation to be his peculiar People,
which People being divided into twelve Tribes, he separated one entire Tribe,
the Tribe of Levi, to attend the Service of the Tabernacle ^ The Land of Canaan
he divided amongst the other e^eaven Tribes, but gave the Tribe of Levi no
Inheritance amongst them, Numb. 18. 20, 23, 24. Deuteronomy. 10. 9. for they being
wholely employed in that service, could not have leisure to attend the Plough,
or other Rural Occupations. Seeing therefore he had excluded them from a share
of the Land (the manuring of which would have taken them off from the Service
he had designed them to) and that by this means their Brethren, the other
Eleaven Tribes, amongst whom their part was shared, did all fare so much the
better, their respective Lots being so much the greater, he commanded the
Eleaven Tribes that had the Lands, to pay the Tithes of the increase thereof,
out of which this twelf Tribe should be maintained. And while that Priesthood
and Polity stood, which Tithes were suitable and appropriated to, this Tything
Command was in force, and no longer. But that eve^ God did reserve the tenth,
or command the payment of Tithes to any, before the constitution of the
Levitical Priesthood, or since the Dissolution thereof, I no where read in
Scripture. This is proper for the Assertors of the Divine Right of Tithes to
prove, and indeed so absolutely necessary, that if they fail of this, all they
can say beside will be too weak to bear their Title up: For in a matter of so
great moment, it is not ^are Conjectures or mere Suppositions, nor Probability
neither, will serve the turn, but positive Precept. The Levitical Priesthood
was not left to such Incertainties. Though this Priest is willing to take it
for granted, that the men of that Age wherein Abraham lived, knew and
understood by the Light of Nature, that the tenth part belonged to God, and was
therefore to be paid to his Priests: yet we find God himself did not think fit
to hazard the Levitical Priesthood on such uncertain terms, but secured their
Maintenance to them by an express Command, which left no room for any Doubts or
Scruples. And can it be imagined, that the Omm^scient God, whose Eye at once
fore-sees all Events, would leave the Maintenance of his Gospel Ministry, so
much nearer to him then the Levitical Priesthood, to depend upon the ambiguous
and doubtful Constitution of a single Act of Abraham's, or a Vow of Jacob's
uncertain when, or where, or how performed? No doubtless, it cannot reasonably
be supposed, that he who took such particular Care of the Legal Priesthood
(which was to last but for a (...)) and was so punctual in appointing Tithes
for their Maintenance, not thinking either Abraham' Gift or Jacob's Vow
sufficient ground for them to claim upon, although they were the cho^en Priests
of God, without a plain and positive Command, would leave his Royal Priesthood,
the Publishers of his Everlasting Gospel, so ill provided of a Claim to Tithes,
as to be necessitated to strain a Title out of Abraham's Gift and Jacob's Vow,
if he had ever intended Tithes should be the Maintenance of his
Gospel Ministers.

What else does this Assertor of the divine Right of Tithes offer in proof of
his Assertion, but Conjectures and Probabilities, as he calls them, as in page
30. where speaking of Abraham's giving to God the tenth of all the Spoils, he
adds, As in all Probability he was wont ordinarily to do, of all that he got by
God's ordinary Blessing. So again, page 31. T. E. cannot prove Abraham did not
pay Tithes (...), and I can make it appear very probable he did. Again, There
are ancient Authors and probable Reasons to induce us to beli^ve, etc. page 33.
Again, speaking of (...) being Sem, We cannot (say^ he) be (...) i^ a matter of
so great antiquity: but I ho^e these things may suffice to make it very
probable, that Melchizede^ was Abraham' s Priest in Ordinary, page 34. And
though he is able to show no better ground then such probable Mayb^'s as these,
yet he sticks not to require his Reader's Assent as fully as if he had produced
the most positive Proofs and plain Demonstrat^on: for speaking of Abraham's
pitching upon the Tenth, he says, p. 25. In all R^ason we ought to bel^^ve it
was first revealed by almighty God to him, etc. And speaking of Sacrificing
being believed to be revealed by God to Adam, he says, The like we may believe
also concerning this of dedicating the tenth part, page 26. Again, speaking of
so^e Heathens that vowed the Tenths to their Gods, he says, Which therefore we
mu^t believe they had by Tradition from the first Patriarchs, who received it
by Revelation from God, page 27. Yet in the next page says, It is not
necessary (since the Scripture is silent) I should deter^ine, whether Abraham
was immediately directed to it, or whether he learnt it from Melchizedec. Thus
he argues from may be to must be, and from must be to may be back again,
finding nothing firm, nothing certa^n, whereon to build a divine Right to
Tithes.

Yet fain he would have it so, and therefore labors to persuade his Reader,
page 21. that from the Example of Abraham's Giving and Jacob's Vowing the
Tenth, there was a Claim made of this tenth part, as being originally due to
God long before. And for thi^ Claim he quote^ Levit. 27. 30. All the Tithes of
the Land is the Lord's. But he greatly mistakes, and mis-applyes that Text; for
thought the tenth, the nineth, the Eighth and the all was originally due to God
long before, yet as a tenth, distinct and separate from the rest, it does not
appear to have been due long before, nor seems to be here mentioned by Moses,
with relation to any such former Re^erve or Claim, but with respect to the
L^vitical Priesthood, which was then settled in Aaron, the great Grandchild of
Levi; for which Priesthood he who was Lord of the whole, when he gave the Lands
to the other eleaven Tribes, reserved this as a Subsistence more suitable to
their Service, and a Compensation for their part of the Land.

But the better to color this Conceit, of Tithes being claimed in Levit. 27.
30. as due long before, he perverts another Text, and puts a plain Abuse upon
his Reader; for he says, page 22. The first time Tithes are mentioned, Exodus
22. 29. they are not directly enjoined, but supposed due, and forbid to be
withheld: Whereas in Ex. 22. 29. Tithes are not mentioned at all, nor in all
the Book of Exodus, that I observe, nor else^where as enjoined, supposed due,
or forbid to be withheld, until the 27th of Levit. 30. mentioned before the
words in Exodus 22. 29. which he says does not directly enjoin, but supposes
Tithe due, and forbids t^em so be withheld, are these, Thou shall not delay to
offer the first of thy ripe Fruits, and of thy Liquors; the Firstborn of thy
Sons shall thou give unto me. Here is not a word of Tithes; and yet this Priest
has so little regard to Truth, and so much to his own Interest, that he sticks
not to say Tithes are in this place mentioned and supposed due. Neither of one
part of that which is here mentioned, namely, the First born, which is here
c^mmanded to be given to the Lord, is this the first mention; but it was both
mentioned and expressly commanded before, Exodus 13. ^. while the People of
Isra^l were yet in Egypt: and in Numb. 3. 13. the very day is assigned whereon
God did appropriate this part to himself, and from which (with Reverence so to
speak) he dates his Claim thereto: All the First born (says the Lord) are
mine; for on the day that I smote all the Firstborn in the Land of Egypt, I
hallowed unto me all the Firstborn in Israel, both Man and Beast, mine they
shall be, I am the Lord. Here Is the time preci^ely s^t down, here is the day
expressly mentioned, on which God did sanctify the Firstborn to himself, on
which (and not till which) he assumed to himself a peculiar Right to the
Firstborn distinct and separate from the rest, which yet was above four
hundred year^ after Abrah^m's Gift to Melchizedec. Let the Asse^tors of the
Divine Right of Tithes, show as plainly (if they can) when God did appropriate
to himself the Tithe or Tenth Part, distinct from the other nine, before the
time of the Levitical Priesthood, for whose Maintenance he then appointed it.
Can it with any color of Reason be supposed, that he who so precisely and
punctually set down the very day whereon he chose to himself the Firstborn,
which related but to that typical state of the Jews, would have given no hint,
nor left any Footsteps at all of his Right and Claim to Tithes before the
Constitution of the Levitical Priesthood, if he had indeed sanctified them to
himself before, and intended them to be continued after the Dissolution of that
Priesthood, for a Maintenance to his Gospel Ministers!

. 4. The Priest says, page 22. Though God have a right to the tenth part of
our Substance, yet he cannot be his own Receiver: So that we are to enquire who
must be Gods receiver, and for that, even Reason will teach us, that what is
due to the Master, ought to be paid to his next and immediate Servants, that
is, to his Priests.

What he is not able to prove, that he is willing to take for granted. I
acknowledge that God, who is Lord of all, has a right to all our Substance,
and may command and dispose the whole, or what part thereof he pleases: But
that God has a distinct right ^o the Tenth, more then to all or any of the
other nine parts, and that by the Law of Nature, anteced^^t to any positive
Constitution; as this ^riest makes the Assertor^ se^tors of the divine Right of
Tithes to ass^rt, is more then I have yet seen proved either by this, or any
other of the Assertors of the divine Right of Tithes, that I have hitherto met
with. And till this be proved, it is needless to inquire who should be the
Receiver: Though even in that also, the Priest falls short, taking that to be a
dictate of Reason, which right Reason did never dictate to him: for what is due
to the Master, ought to be paid to such of his Servants, a^ he appoints to
receive it, whether they be his next and immediate Servants or not: for it is
not their being next unto him, that does authorize them to be his Receivers,
but his deputing them unto that Service.

Again he says, page 23. Abraham, in paying his Tithes (which were Gods part)
unto Melchizedec the Priest of the most high God, did confirm this dictate of
Reason, etc.

What else is this but begging the Question, and that twice in two lines. He
supposes Abraham paid his Tithes (which the Scripture no where saye^ he did)
and that Tithes (as Tithes, as a distinct part) were then Gods part, (which the
Scripture no where (...) they were) and if this would be granted him, he would
then infer that Melchizedec had indeed a Right to Tithes, and perhaps also that
from him a right to Tithes might be derived to a Gospel Ministry. But he runs
too fast to hold that of which he is willing to make no question, is the main
Question in this part of the Controversy, namely, Whether in Abraham's time,
and antecedent to any positive Constitution, Tithes as Tithes, or a Tenth part
distinct from the rest, was any more Gods peculiar part, then the other Nine:
And whethers Abraham in giving (as the Texts express it) the Tenth of his
Military Spoils to Melchizede^, did pay a just debt to Melchizedec, which he
could not without injustice have withheld; or whether that gift of Abraham's
was a grateful acknowledgment, and voluntary ^eturn of kindness to Melchizedec,
for his so friendly Congratulation, Fatherly blessing, and bountiful present of
Bread and Wine to himself and his weary Followers: This is indeed the sum of
the matter, the very thing on which (and which alone) a claim of Tithes from
Melchizedec to any others, can with any reason be supposed to turn. And if my
Opponents, either first or second, would stick to this, and (though but for a
while) deny themselves the pleasure and delight they seem to take in railing
and reviling, deriding and jeering, insulting and boasting, disdaining and
scorning; and would apply themselves to manage this Argument with that gravity
and seriousness that becomes the Subject, I should not doubt to see this Case
brought to a speedy and fair Issue. But then I should expect to meet with more
forcible Arguments, more cogen^ Reasons, more evident Proofs, and plainer
Demonstrations then Suppositions, Conjectures, Probabilities, Likelihoods, and
May-be's; and that which is a p^orer way of Reasoning then all the rest, and is
indeed too low and mean by much for such lofty pretenses to Learning and
Scholarship, as my Adversary makes for himself and his Brethren, viz. to put
the Defendent to prove the Negati^e, as he has done me more then once, and more
then conduces to the credit of his cause. As in page 31. I may ask him (says
he) where he reads, that Abraham did not pay them. And a few Lines lower in the
same page, T. E. cannot prove Abraham did not pay Tithes ordinarily, and I can
make it appear very probable he did.

But he has so accustomed himself to call Abraham's Gift a Payment, that
forgetting himself, he brings me in as using the same Phrase, as if I also
admitted that, which I have offered to much reason against; his words are
these, page 30. So that T. ^.'^ saying he does not read in Genesis that Abraham
paid his Tithes constantly, is no Argument, etc.

But where does T. E. say this? He quotes no place, no^ indeed had any to
quote; for I no where said so; but he has put a double abus^ upon my words,
first, in making me to say I do not read in Genesis, etc. As if I had limited
the Story of Abraham and Melchizedec to the Book of Genesis only, or had
allowed no Evidence for proof of this pretended Right to Tithes, but what could
be found in Genesis: And accordingly he plays upon me, T. E's saying he does
not read in Genesis, -- is no ^rgument, unless all that Abraham ordinarily did
were recorded there. (to wit, in Genesis) And, I may ask him where he reads
there (to wit, in Genesis) that Abraham did not pay them, page 31. whereas my
words were general, We do not find throughout the Scriptures, (which is more
the^ in Genesis only) any command from God, that Tithes should be paid unto
Melchized^c, page 278. and If Tithes had been due from Abraham to Melchizedec,
then must Abraeham have paid Melchizedec Tithes of all his Substance, of all
that he possessed: But no such thing appears at all, page 279. What pretense
could the Priest have to thrust in Genesis here! But his other abuse in the
latter part of the sentence is somewhat more gross. T. E's saying, he does not
read that Abraham paid his Tithes constantly, is, etc.

These words are not in my Book, but are a mere artifice of his own, to
insinuate as if I had yielded that Abraham paid Tyth^s at that time, upon that
extraordinary occasion, and had only seemed to doubt whether he paid them
constantly or not: whereas nothing (...) more plain, then that I all along deny
that Abraham over paid Tithes at all. This is an art this Priest is expert at,
but I Will assure him it is a black one, and will never credit him or his Cause.
He served me so once or twice before, in his 16. page, quoting me thus, Tithes
were wont to be claimed as of divine Right, but I find this Priest is not hardy
enough to adventure his cause upon that Title. Whereas my words are not, I find
this Priest is not hardy enough; but I do not find this Priest hardy enough.
Which variation how small so ever it may seem to some, yet as Illiterate as he
takes me to be, I understand the different sense of those two Expressions, and
how little he is to be trusted; which I am the more confirmed in from his next
Period, where speaking of me, he says, He persuades his Quakers, that they who
were wont to claim Tithes d^ jure divine, were more bold then wise.

These words were not in my Book, but a suggestion of his to abuse me; for
which (whatever I think of others) I have cause enough to think him more bold
then honest. Nor has he only gleaned on this passage, but insisted deliberately
on it, and presented his false suggestion to the highest advantage he could
make of it. For he says, Let us therefore see who and what they were whom T.
E. thus Cens^res: Truly no less (says he) then Origin, Cyprian, S. Hierom, S.
Augustine, diverse Christian Councils of Old, Justinian, and the Imperial Roman
Laws, Charle^ the Great, and the French Capitulars, the Saxon Kings and
Councils of this Nation, and all Monarchs and Parliaments of later times,
particularly K. Henry 8. and Edward 6. together with the most famous common
Lawyers, as also the unconcerned and incomparably learned Sr. Hen. Spe^man,
with diverse other excellent Writers, two many to recite.

These were too many to have recited, unless he had had more cause for it: At
this rate, he may father what Falsehoods he pleases upon his Adversary, and then
call him an obscure and empty Qu^ker, as he does me; but he may withal assure
himself, he shall never by this means acquire the repute of a just man, or a
fair D^sputant.

. 5. He says, page 23. T. E. is very impertinent in inquiring what command
there is in Scripture to Abraham to pay his Tithes to Melchizedec: for there
was not any Scripture at all in Abraham's time. No doubt he thinks every Body
impertinent that calls in question his beloved Tithes. But wherein does the
Impertinency lie? I hope a divine command for the payment of Tithes had not
been Impertinent to his Claim. I am sure a human command for the payment of
them now is the most pertinent point he has to claim by; and that his Brot^er
Priest understood full well, which made him step so lightly over the former,
and stick so close to the latter. But I am impertinent it seems for inquiring
for a command in Scripture.

Where else I wonder would he have had me inquire! Is any other Book so
pertinent as that to seek a divine Command in? Aybut, says the Priest, there
was not any Scripture at all in Abraham's time.

If he means that Writing is not so ancient, he forgets himself; but if he
intends that the Scriptures we now have, were not then written (which is more
probable) that will not render me a whit the more impertinent for inquiring
what command there is in Scripture to Abraham to pay Tithes, since we find in
Scripture many Commands are mentioned, which were of a much elder date then the
^criptures in which we read them.

There was as much Scripture to be sure when Abraham gave this Gift to (...),
as t^ere was before when he was called out of his Country, when Circumcision
was instituted, and when (...), the Heir of Promise, was made an Offering: and
yet for every of these (and many other (...) besides) we have express Command
recorded in those Scripture^, which afterward were written. Nay, if we will
look back to the times before the Flood, we shall find a Command to Noah for
the making of the Ark, G^n. 6. 14. And indeed the first Command that ever was
given to man, is plainly and fully expressed in Genesis 2. 16, 17. And must I needs
be impertinent in inquiring what Command there is in Scripture to Abraham to
pay Tithes, and that upon this only Reason, that there was not any Scripture at
all in Abraham's time! If no Command at all had been remembered in Scripture of
elder date then the Scripture it self, or then this Act of Abraham's, this
Exception of the Priest had been less impertinent: but seeing, even from the
very infancy of the World, the divine Commands are recorded, and more
especially in so many particular Instance; in Abraham's own time, and to
Abraham himself, whether is more impertinent, I in calling for a Command in
S^ripture to prove Melchizedec's Right to Tithes, or the Priest in sobbing me
off with this evasive Answer, that there was not any Scripture at all in
Abrah^^m's time, let the understanding Reader judge.

He confesses Moses indeed did write a brief History of those times four
hundred years after: but since he comprises the (...) of two thousand three
hundred years in one Book of Genesis, it cannot be expected he should set down
all particulars; nor in all the Actions of the Patriarchs, show what Reason
they had for, o^ how they we^e directed in such an Action, page 24.

Though it cannot be expected, that in so brief an History Moses should set
down all particulars, or show what Reason the Pat^iarchs had for, and how they
were directed in all their Actions: yet in an Action of so great moment as this
is made, from which so large a claim and weighty Title is derived, it may
reasonably be expected he should have been more particular, full and plain; and
would no doubt have been so, had the Divine Wisdom, by which he writ, intended
Tithes to be a Gospel-Maintenance, and to be claimed from hence.

How many other Passages, which seem to be less material, does he insist more
largely on, as the Des^^iption of Places, the Names of Rivers, Mountains,
Towns, etc? How exact is he in setting down the Fashion and Dimensions of the
Ark, ^ow punctual in computing the time of the Flood's beginning, increase,
continuance and decrease, not contenting himself with the year only, or with
the Month, but adding even the very day? and when he comes to Abraham's ^ime,
he gives the very Circumstances of the things he treats of, as in (...) account
of his going into Aegyp^, and what be^el him there, Genesis 12. his parting with
Lot, and the Occasion thereof, Chap. 13. the memorable Battle fought in the
Vale of Siddim, between four Kings and five, the Occasion of that War, the
Names of the Kings on either side, and of the place where the Battle was
pitched, twice over, the Success of the ^ight, the Plunder of Sod^m, and L^t's
Captivity, Abraham's Muster, Pursuit, and Rescue, Genesis 14. In every of which he
is more particular then in this Passage of Abraham's giving Melchi^edec Tithes;
which as it was done upon an accidental Occasion, so Moses runs over it, as
briefly as may be, giving it only a transient touch: And indeed, the whole
Passage seems to be but a kind of Parenthesis; for in the 17th Verse Moses
says, The King of Sodom went out to meet Abram (after his return from the
Slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the Kings that were with him) at the Valley
of Shaveh, which is the King's Dale. Then in the next Verse, he mentions
Melchizedec; And Melchizedec, King of Salem, brought forth Bread and Wine: and
he was the Priest of the most high God. Verse. 18. And he blessed him, and said,
Blessed be Abram of the most high God Possessor of Heaven and Earth. Verse. 19.
And blessed be the most high God, which has delivered thine Enemies into thine
hand. And he gave him Tithe of all, Verse. 20. This is the full and whole
Account which Moses gives of this matter; and then immediately in the next
words resumes his Discourse of the King of Sodom, Verse. 21. And the King of
Sodom said unto Abram, Give me the Person^, etc. What could he have said less?
How could he have mentioned this Passage of Abraham's giving Tithes in fewer
words, and with less remark! which cannot reasonably be imputed to the brevity
of his History, by any one that shall duly consider how copious he is upon
other Subjects, setting down at large even the smallest Circumstances, as
besides the former instances, will plentifully appear in the story of Abraham's
Servant fetching a Wife for Isaac, Genesis 24. Of Jacob's suppla^ting his Brother,
Chap. 27. Of his Service with Laban, Chap. 19, 20, 21. To omit the story of
Ioseph's being sold into Egypt, and what be^el both him and his Brethren
there. But this is an Art the Priest has, to persuade his Reader there is more
in this Passage then the brevity of the History would give room to express. The
History was written by Moses, who was inspired thereto by God, and as it is
irrational to imagine that this Passage of A^braham's giving Tithes to
Melchizedec, would have been past over so lightly, and left so bare, if it had
had relation to future Ages, and that in the Times of the Gospel, a Right to
Tithes was to be derived from hence (as the Author of the Friendly Conference
says it is, page 135.) so it is great Impiety to suggest that any thing was
here omitted, which it was necessary for the Church of God to know and
understand. The Spirit of God has said expressly, Abraham gave Tithes of all.
The Spirit of God has said expressly, It was the Spoils which Abraham gave the
Tenth of, Heb. 7. 4. And who is man, that he should take upon him to add or
alter! Dare thou say he pa^d, when God says he gave! Dare thou say, it was
of his own Substance, when God says it was of the Spoils! Dare thou say, he
did this ordinarily, when the Spirit of God has thought fit to mention this
one only extraordinary time! Add thou not unto his Words, lest he reprove thee,
and thou be found a Liar, Prove. 30. 6.

. 6. But he says, p. 29. To give and to pay is all one in this Case, or else
the Apost^e was over-seen, who not only says he gave the Tenth, Heb. 7. 4.
but, Levi paid Tithes in Abraham, Verse. 9.

Neither is to give and to pay all one in this case, nor yet was the Apostle
over-seen: for the Apostle most properly accommodates his Speech to the several
times it had relation to. When he speaks in Verse. 4. of Abraham, in whom it was
a free and voluntary Gift, he uses the word Gave, as Moses had done before him;
but when in Verse. 9. he speaks of Levi (whom he figuratively mentions, with an
[as I may so say] for he speaks not personally of Levi himself, but of his
Offspring, the Levitieal Priesthood who received Tithes which Levi never did
himself) then I say, refering to the time of the Law, in which God had
commanded the payment of Tithes, he expresses himself by the word Gave. So that
it is manifest he varied his Expression according to the persons he treated of,
and the different times his Speech had relation to. When he speaks of Abraham,
who lived before Tithes were commanded to be paid, he says he Gave, verse. 4.
But when he speaks of the Levitical Priesthood, who lived after Tithes were
commanded to be paid, he alters his phrase, and says he Paid, verse. 9. Abraham
gave, Levi paid, which distinction the Apostle needed not have used, had he
understood (as this Priest does) giving and paying to be all one in this case.

It is very proper (he says) to say, We give a man that which is his due, page
29.

That must be understood in such cases only, where the due is altogether
certain and unquestionable, such as are the instances he has given of David and
Hez^kiah, one whereof says, Give unto the Lord the honor due unto his Name,
Psalm. 29. 2. The other commanded the People to give the Priests their portions,
2 Chronicles. 31. 4. Neither of which admitted any doubt, since every one knew that
Honor was due to the Name of the Lord, and none could be ignorant that Tithes
were due to the Priests, then the Law of God expressly speaking it. But in a
case of so great ambiguity as this claim of Tithes from Melchizedec, which is
so utterly void of all certainty, that the very terms it is expressed in, must
confirm at least, if not constitute a Title to the thing claimed, to express a
Due, by the word Give, would be not only not very proper, but very improper and
obs^u^c: So that what he says, page 30. That the word Give in Genesis 14. does
no more prove Tyt^es were not due to Melchizedec, ^ure divino, th^n the same in
Chronicles proves they were not due to the Levites, jure divine, will not hold.
The disproportion between Me^chized^c's case, and that of the Levites, is too
great; unless he could show as plain a command for the former, as he knows can
be brought for the latter. The word Give in Chronicles, does no way prejudice
the Levites Right, because it was undeniably grounded upon an indisputable
Command: But the word ^ive in Gen^sis does greatly prejudice the pretended
Right of Melchizedec, because there is no command in Scripture, from which such
a Right might be derived. After the same manner argues the other Priest in his
Vindication of the Conference, page 295. urging for an Example the words of
Joshua, Chap. 7. Ver. 19. [My Son, give Glory to God] which being the same with
that of David, Psalm. 29. 2. is answered in that. But he seems to take it a
little ill, that I took no notice of a Greek word he had in his Margin,
Conference, page 135. viz. (...) which he ^enders He^ithed Abraham; and says
in his Vindication, page 296. Now since T. E. pretends to understand Greek, and
this passage being in my Book, how came he to pass it by?

I passed it by as believing it to be of no moment at all; since if I should
allow him even his own rendition, [He Tythed Abraham] it imports no more then
[He received Tithes of Abraham] as both Beza's Latin, and the vulgar English
have it, Heb. 7. 6. beyond which sense if he would strain it, the word will not
bear it: verily, it is an Argument of a very weak Cause, when men are put to
such hard shifts, as to squeez a Title out of one particular and extraordinary
Action, and are ^ain to strain the words also, whereby that action is expressed,
to give some countenance to their Claim. But blessed be God, the Holy Ghost
has hedged them out, and either through propriety of Speech, or divine
Providence (let them grant which they please) has so worded this Transaction,
that in both those Texts where it is spoken of, there is no mention at all of
Due or Payment with relation to Abraham, but altogether of giving. Thrice over
it is said, He gave, Genesis 18. 20. Heb. 7. 2. and 4. but never that he paid.

. 7. To prove, that Tyt^es were accounted due in this Period before the Law, he
urges, The practice of certain of the Heathens giving Tithes to their Gods;
whereof some seem more particular, some more general. The more particular
instances are, of the Tyrians and Carthaginians, the In^abitants of the Island
Syphnus, and the Romans. The more general are of the Greeks; for which he cites
Dydimus the Grammarian, and of all Heathens in general, for which he quotes
Paulus Diaconus. It Is true, Dydimus says, It was a Greek Custom to Consecrate
the Tenth of their gain to the Gods: But how that saying of his to be
understood, Seldom in his History of Tithes, c. 3. well observes, (...) (says
he) those Grammarians mean (for he mentioned Suidas also) that all men paid
their Tithes in Greece, and that of every kind of their Spoils or abundance,
they deceive much, and are deceived: You must understand them as speaking of
what was sometimes, and by Vow, or special Thanksgiving done. The other out of
Pa^lus Diaconus, which says, The Ancients offered all their Tenths to their
Gods; is rejected both by Scaliger and Seldom also, who show that Paulus
(Epitomizing Sext^s, Pompeius Eestus, to whom this saying is Originally
ascribed) has mangled and corrupted the place, and he is severely lash't for
his Pains by them both, especially by Scaliger, whose words are, vide quantum
^uris Barbarus ille sibi sumpserit in hoc loco mutiland^! i. e. See what
Authority that Barbarous man takes upon him in maining this place. And further
calls him home con^identissimus ac ineptissimus. A most confident and foolish
man. And Seldom says plainly, If it be understood of Tithes used to be given
by all, or of all things, it is false. Nor did that learned man stick to draw
an Argument against this Opinion from Scripture silence, Scripture I mean, not
sacred, but profane, the Writings namely of a Learned Heathen? Had the
Offering of Tithes (says Seldom in his History of Tithes, page 29.) been usual
of Yearly increase; Cato, that in his De Re Rustica, has so fully the
Ceremonies of Sacrifices to be used by the Husbandman in his Harvest, had
never omitted it. Whence by the way observe that Argument from Scripture
silence, though profane has been held good by men of Learning, although this
Priest, to avoid the stroke of it, says it is not valid Right of Tithes, page
37. But to the Testimonies brought, all acknowledge that some of the Heathens
did at some times, and upon some occasions, Vow, Give, and Consecrate Tithes to
their Deities: and Seld^^ proves it was no otherwise: Nay, he instances in some
(the Locrians) who gave not a Tenth, but a Ninth part, C. 3. S. 3. And Diodorus
Siculus tells us, (l. 2. c. 2.) The Egyptian Priests had the third part of the
Revenue of the Kingdom. From all which we may gather that these Heathenish
Oblations and Consecrations were neither general in point of place, constant in
point of time, nor certain in point of quantity. Then for the ground of their
thus doing, if it be ask't whence they learnt it, the Priest himself answers,
It was propagated by Tradtion among the Heathens, Right of Tithes, page 26.
again, which therefore we must believe they had by Tradition from the first
Patriarchs, page 27. That they received it by Tradition is probable enough,
though not from the first Patriarchs, who are no where in Holy Writ, remembered
to have paid Tithes. But from the Jews, by whom Tithes were preceptively and
constantly paid, there is reason sufficient to persuade they might learn it.
And so it seemed to Seldom, The payment of the Tenth (says he, c. 3. page 34.)
very likely came to them (the Arabians) from the use of it among the Jews,
their Neighbors, as also to the Carthaginians from their Ancesters the
Paenicians, that spoke the same Language ^ith the Jews, and converst most with
them. Now if the Gentiles practiced it in imitation, and by example of the
Jews, what relation has their practice to this first Period, or time before the
Law? But whether it be more reasonable to think, that the Gentiles received it
by Tradition from the first Patriarchs, by whom we never read that Tithes were
above once actually given, and once Vowed to be given, or from the Jews, by
whom they were constantly and publicly paid, I leave to the Readers judgment,
and will conclude t^is Paragraph with what concludes the Review of Selden's
Chap. 3. page 459. where having showed that the Pelasgi in Vmbria Sacrificed
the Tithe of their Children to Apollo, See now, says he, (when you truly know
the ancient Tything among the Gentiles) how well they conclude here, that draw
an Argumen^ from the general Law of Nature or Nations, as if by that Law any
such use of payment of Tithes had been established amongst them, as was
continual or compulsory.

. 8. In my Answer to the former Priest, p. 278. amongst other Reasons which I
offered to prove that Tithes was not a proper Debt, or just Due from Abraham to
Melchizede^, this was one, That if Tithes had been due from Abraham to
Melehizedec (according as they are now demanded, which must be proved before a
Divine Right to them, as they are now demanded, can be derived from
Melchizedec) then must Abraham have paid Tithes of all his Substance, of all
that he possessed. But no such thing appears at all. We do not read that Abraham
gave him Tithes of his own Estate; but that which he gave him the tenth of was
the Spoils which he had recovered from the Kings that had plundered S^dom. To
this the Author of the Right of Tithes thus answers, p. 30. That was an
extraordinary occasion, wherein Abraham having got a Victory by God's Blessing,
did give to God the tenth of all he had now gotten; as in all probability he
was wont ordinarily to do, of all that he got by God's ordinary Blessing; only
this (as more especially remarkable) is recorded in this short History.

Seeing this was an extraordinary Occasion, he should not urge it for a
President, much less lay so great a stress upon it as he does. Let him read
what his Brother Priest says in page 127. of his Conference, When any Text
(says he) has a r^lation to a particular Case, that Text must not stand for a
General Rule, but must be applied to a like Occasion; for its a most grand
Falla^y to draw an universal Conclusion from particular Premises. Now these
Texts in Genesis 18. and Heb. 7. (wherein Abraham's Gift to Melchizedec is
mentioned) ^ave relation to a particular Case, to an^ extraordinary Occasion,
as the Priest himself says, therefore Th^s^ Texts must not stand for a General
Rule; but if he will apply them at all, he must apply them to a like Occasion,
to wit, a Military Expedition, wherein some notable Victory is in an extra
^rdinary manner obtained, as this was; not (...) them for a general Rule: for
according to his Brother's Position, it is a most grand Fallacy, from
particular Pr^mises, as this Gift of Abraham upon an extraordinary Occasion
was, to draw an universal Conclusion, that Abraham ordinarily did pay Tithes,
and that Christians now must. Thus then he is pincht off of his extraordinary
hold, by his own dear Sir, the Author of the ^riendly Conference. And for what
he talks of Abraham's giving the tenth ordinarily, he has far less ground then
for the former; for in the former, (viz. that Abraham on that extraordinary
Occasion did give and Melchizedec receive) he may as to fact be positive,
though not as to intention: but in the latter; (viz. that Abraham did
ordinarily give the tenth of his ordinary increase) he can be but suppositive
at most. His Arguments and Reasons are may-be's and likelihoods, and his Proofs
but probabilities, strongly enforced with this notable Demonstration, that it
is not said in Scripture Abraham did not pay them, and that I cannot prove the
contrary, page 30, 31. Will he take it then for granted that Abraham did
whatsoever I cannot prove he did not? That would be pretty indeed.

After the same manner the other Priest also argues (in his Vindication, page
296.) where to my saying, Had Tithes been due to Melchizedec, then must Abraham
have paid him Tithes of all his Substance, etc. He replies, We know nothing to
the contrary but that he did so; and I ^an affirm the one, as well as he deny
the other.

Is this like a Disputant? It is enough for a Respondent to deny: But is it
enough for the Opponent to affirm? He says elsewhere in his Conference, p.
152. It is the Opponent's part to prove. That is somewhat more I think then
bare affirming. And the Maxim is, Affir^^^ti incumbit probati^; i. e. He that
affirms must prove. But (in his Vindication, page 296.) he adds, that The
Spoils were in strictness Abraham's own Estate, having obtained them with the
hazard of his Life, in a Just and Righteous War.

This is indeed a pretty fetch; yet so plain and manifest a fetch, that it will
not stand him in any stead. Whether the Spoils were strictly Abraham's own
Estate by the Law of Arms, I will not undertake to determine; especially since
it appears by the story, that Aner, Eshcol and Ma^re were his con^ederates, and
ran equal hazard of their Lives with him in the same War, and that he took not
upon him to dispose of the whole (although to the King of Sodom, from whom it
was taken) but l^^t his Confederates to dispose of their own shares as they saw
good, Genesis 14. 1^, 24. However, whether it was in strictness his own Estate or
no, to be sure it was not his own Estate in that sense wherein I spoke it, and
wherein Tithes are now demanded. So that his urging this here, is altogether
beside the business, and at best but a show of an Answer.

But he carps at my saying, The Occasion of Abraham's thus giving the tenth of
the Spoil to Melchizedec seems to be altogether accidental. This seems to him
to be a mere Trifle; and he says, (Vindication, page 197.) As mere an
accidental Passage as the Quaker would have this to be, yet the Apostle draws a
solid argument from thence.

What then? May not a solid A^gument be drawn from an accidental Passage? Let
any one considerately read the place (in Genesis 14.) and see if he can find any
ground to believe either that Abraham came thither with an intention to pay
Tithes, or that Melchizedec came thither with an expectation to receive Tithes:
and not rather, that Melchiz^dec understanding Abraham's Success and Return,
went forth to meet him, and congratulate his Victory, bringing with him a
Present of Bread and Wine, to refresh him and his Soldiers after the Fight: In
Requital of which Noble and Princely Present Abraham gave him the tenth of the
Spoils.

. 9. The Author of the Right of Tithes finds fault with my arguing, because it
is negative, and says, p. 31. My n^gative arguing is of no more force, then it
would be if I should say, those Ante-diluvian Patriarchs, did nothing else
while they lived but beget Sons and Daughters, because no more is recorded of
many of them, Genesis 5.

Negative arguing I thought had been proper for him whose part it is to deny;
as it belongs to him to prove, who undertakes to affirm. But waving that, I
thu^ answer to the substance of his Objection. Although the Patriarchs before
the Flood did doubtless something else then beget Sons and Daughters, yet
nothing that they did which the Spirit of God thought ^it to pass by
unrecorded, had any relation to future times, or was to be Exemplary to the
Church of God in after Ages. The like concerning Abraham. It Is not to be
doubted but he did more then is recorded of him. But that then, whatsoever it
was, had no relation to future times, nor was to be Exemplary to the Church of
God in after Ages; for if it had, the Spirit of God, who recorded what is
written, would not have omitted that. So that take it which way he will, this
Dilemma will attend him; either that Abraham did not pay Tithes ordinarily, and
so there was nothing of that to be recorded, or that if he did pay Tithes
ordinarily, his so doing had no relation to future times, nor was to be
Exemplary to the Church of God in after Ages, and therefore was not recorded.
Hence then, I hope, my negative arguing (as he calls it) will appear to be of
^ufficient force to prove, that a Right to Tithes now cannot be grounded on, or
derived from any Act that Abraham did, which the divine Spirit did not think
fit to record: for what the Priest says in another place, page 62. Express^
nocent, non expressa non nocent, i. e. Those things that are expres^ hurt,
those things that are not expressed hurt not, is very true, if it be rightly
applied. But as they hurt not him against whom they are urged, so they help not
him by whom they are urged, which he should have done well to have considered.
I Will therefore invert his Axiom (which holds as true the one way as the other)
and present it to him again; Express^ (...), non expressa non prosunt, i. e.
Those things that are expressed do help, those things which are not expressed do
not help. All his Pretenses then of Abraham's paying Tithes ordinarily (how often
soever he repeats them) not being expressed, but leaning on Conjecture, do him no
good at all; they cannot help him, nor stand him in any stead.

. 10. In his next Section he is offended with me for saying, Tithes could not
be due to Melchizedec upon a Right ^ounded in natural Justice and Equity; my
words (p. 280.) are these, He cannot plead tha^ Tithes were due to Melchizedec
upon a Right founded in natural Justice and Equity, since there was not in
those days any settled public Worship, wherein he could perform any outward
Priestly Office or Service, for which Tithes might have been a Compensation. He
in the reciting of this Sentence, leaves out the words outward service, that he
might have the more room to strike at me, and call me (as he does page 35.) a
poor Quaker, as bold as blind, saying, that I have exposed my self to the Scorn
of all knowing men by this absurd Position.

If the Position appear absurd, it is he that has made it look so, by mangling
it. But as it stands in my Book I am not ashamed to own it. And if he or any
other can show me what settled public Worship there was in Abraham's days, in
which any outward Priestly Office or Service was to be performed, for which
Tithes might have been a Compensation, I will acknowledge him to be a knowing
man indeed.

He says, He might confute this Position from that place of Gen 4. ^6. Then
began men to call upon the Name of the Lord; which must (he says) be meant in
public; for in private they did it before, ibid.

Methinks his copious Reading should not suffer him to be ignorant of the
various Judgments of Learned Men concerning this Text, whether it should be
rendered. Then began men to call upon, or then began men to profane the Name of
the Lord; I think it not safe for me to exercise my small Schollarship in the
disquisition. Let it suffice for my little Reading to observe, that Hierom
reads it not in the plural (as our English Translation is) Then began men to
call, etc. but in the singular of Enos, Iste caepit invocare nomen Domini, He
(Enos) began to call upon the Name of the Lord. And Pagnine, though he turns
the Text, Tun^ caeptum est ad invocandum in nomine Domini; yet adds in the
Margin, Invocari nomen, vel pollui, i. e, To call upon or pollute the Name,
etc. But Tremellius and Iunius read it downright profane, Tun^ caeptum est
profanari in invocando nomine Domini, i. e. Then began men to profane in
calling upon the Name of the Lord; to which Genebrard, Brought^n, and others
assent. And indeed the sequel of the Story shows those times more inclined to
Prophanene ^ then Piety, for in all those six Generations between Enos and
Noah, we find but one man, Enoch only, that is said to have walked with God,
Genesis 5. and in the 6th and 7th Chapters we read, the Wickedness of men was
grown to that height, that God repented he had made man, and by an universal
Deluge swept all Mankind away, excepting only Noah and his Family, which were
in all but Eight Souls. All which being duly weighed, I leave it to the
judicious Reader's consideration, whether in those times there was any settled
public Worship, wherein any outward Priestly Office or Service was to be
performed, for which Tithes might have been a Compensation.

But he argues, that Melchizedeck did perform God's public Worship solemnly
and constantly at Salem; and by that had a Right founded in natural Justice and
Equity, to receive Tithes from all within his Jurisdiction.

And this he infers from Moses' s calling him the Priest of the most high God,
from St. Paul's making him a Type of Christ's Priesthood, and from his fixed
Residence at Salem, p. 36.

This has indeed as fair an appearance as any of the Probabilities he has yet
brought forth; yet this will not do his business. For here is not in all this
any mention of any settled public Worship, wherein he could perform any
outward Priestly Office or Service, for which Tithe might have been a
Compensation. No such thing is here expressed; and according to the Axiom which
the Priest himself uses (page 62) Non express^ non nocent, those things that
are not expressed, do not hurt. Besides, his being called the Priest of the most
high God, does not necessarily inse^ an Exercise of such a settled public
Worship as my words import, which had relation to external (...) and
Ceremonies, as the word [outward Servic^] in my Book (which the Priest left
out) do plainly evidence; so that he might well enough be called the Priest of
the most high God, and yet have no such outward Priestly Office or^ Service to
perform in any settled public Worship, for which Tithes might have been a
Compensation. And indeed, my Opponent himself, describing Mel^hizedco's
Worship, does sufficiently show it was of another kind then what my words had
relation to. For he says, page 39. His Worship was altogether spiritual,
praising God, praying for Abraham; offering no bloody Sacrifices, but ONLY
bringing forth Bread and Wine. So also says Sparrow in his Rationale of the
Common Prayer, page 338, 339. Melchizedec had no other Offering that we read
of, but Bread and Wine. Whereas it is plain my words aimed at such a settled
public Worship as co^sisted in external services. But sure he does not think
that Melchizedec did pray for Abraham and bring out Bread and Wine constantly
at Salem: For that he ever did either the one or other constantly, or any more
then that one time, is NOT EXPRESSED, not likely.

Then for his having a fixed place of Residence at Salem, which is another part
of my Opponent's Argument, upon which he grounds his Question, What is a Priest
fixed in a City for?

It is to be considered, that his Residence at Salim is not mentioned with
relation to his Priesthood, but to his Kingship; he was King of Salem, that was
Reason enough for his Residence there. So Moses calls him, Genesis 14. 18. And so
the Apostle twice together, Heb. 7. 1, 2. But neither of them called him Priest
of Salem, much less affirmed (as my Opponent does) that he had ^ Right founded
in natural Justice and Equity, to receive Tithes from all within his
Jurisdiction of Salem, for praising God, praying for Abraham, and only bringing
forth Bread and Wine.

. 11. But my Adversary, not content with Melch^zodec's being the Priest of the
most high God, will needs have him to be Abraham's Priest in ordinary too, page
33, 34 Not considering perhaps, that himself had ^ot Abraham (according to St.
Hierom's computation, as he says) twenty two Miles from Melch^zedec, a distant
somewhat of the largest for a Priest in Ord^nary; and yet he placed them as
near together as he could too. For though he says St. Ierom compu^es the plain
of Mamre, which is Hebron, where Abraham dwelt, to be but twenty two Miles
distant from Jerusalem, yet he should not be ignorant of the different
Judgments of the Ancients about the place; some taking Salem to be Jerusalem,
others not. And that Hierom there delivers the Opinion of others, not his own,
which was far otherwise, viz. that Salem and Mamre were about eighty Miles
asunder, as Seldom notes in the Review of the first Chapter of his History of
Tithes, page 452. Yet to countenance this conceit of his, that Melchizedec was
Abraham's Priest in Ordinary; he tells us what the Jews think, viz. that
Melchizedec did continue to be the Priest of Abraham's Family long after: for
when (...) Twins strugled in the Womb of Rebe^^a, it is said, (...) went to
inquire of the Lord, Genesis 25. 22. that is (s^yes he) by S^m, say the Hebrews,
or by Melchizedec, as others, page 33. 34.

For the Opinion of the Hebrews, that she inquired by Sem, he quotes Lyra: and
for the Opinion of others, that she inquired by Melchizedec, he quotes Iunius
and Tremellius upon that place, which is Genesis 25. 22.

Lyra I have not by me, but Tremellius and Iunius I have. And considering with
my self how greatly he has abused me in the mis-reciting of my words, I
thought it would not be amiss to examine his quotation, and see whither he had
dealt any fairer with them. But when I had turned to the place, and there read
in the Text, Abi^t ad consulendum Iehoram, and in the Annotation upon it, per
aliquem Prophetam, fortasse soceram, qui idem di^itur Propheta supra, 20. 7. I
must confess I was amazed, and somewhat troubled, to think I had to do with one
of so great confidence and so little honesty. For he affirms expressly that
Iunius and Tr^melli^s upon this place say, Rebe^ca went to inquire of the Lord
by Melchizedec, whereas Iunius and Trem^llius upon this place make no mention
at all of Melchizedec, but say plainly, She went to inquire of the Lord, by
some Prophet, perhaps by her Husbands Father (which was Abraham) who himself is
called a Prophet before, in C. 207. Who would have thought a man of his
Learning would have been beholding to a false Quotation! Who would have
suspected one of his Abilities would have served one such a slippery trick! Did
he think, because he had a mea^ illitterate Adversary to deal with, he might
therefore quote anything without danger of discovery? or did he hope no man of
under^tanding would take the pains to read him? O lucky man at least in this,
that he has not published his Name with his Book^ which if he had, I am
confident he would have exposed himself as fully to the scorn of all sincere
and knowing men, by this Forgery, as he fancies I have done my self by that
which he calls an absurd position. But for my part, I shall wonder the less
hereafte^ at his unfair dealing with me, whom he calls a poor Retailer and
^leaner, since I find even those men, whom I suppose he himself need not be
ashamed to Glean after, receive no better treatment at his Hands. But
concerning the Question it self, Whether Rebecca went to inquire of the Lord by
Melchizedec or some other? not only the seve^ty, and Epiphanus (whom he makes
to be misled by following their Chronology) but A^ias Montanus, in his
Chronologia sacrae Scriptura, and Hugh Broughton in his Consent of Scripture,
make Sem to be dead some Years before Rebecca's conception; whose Computations
if we may credit, we must conclude either that M^lchizedec was not S^m, or
(which is more likely) (...) Rebecca went not to inquire of (...) her Father
in-Law, Abraham, being a Prophet and at hand.

. 12. In his 37. page, he charges me with a gross mistake, in saying, I (...)
not find any one Instance (this single gift of Abraha^'s excepted) of giving or
receiving Tithes, in all that four Hundred Years between this time of Abraham
and the Levitical Priest-hood^ For he says, There is a plain Instance in holy
Jacob, Genesis 28. 22. who made a solemn Vow to give unto God the Tenth of all his
Gains.

If he would have convicted me of a mistake, he should have brought an Instance
of giving Tithes, not of vowing them only. My words have respect to the (...)
of giving; his Instance to the intention chiefly: I was not ignorant that Jacob
had made a conditional Vow to give; nor did I question his performance of his
Vow: but I observed that the Holy Ghost had buried it in silence, not
vouch^asing to record it for an Instance. And thereupon I said, I do not find
any one instance (this single Gift of ^braha^'s excepted) of giving or
receiving, much less of demanding or paying Tithes in all that space, etc.
Which words of giving or receiving, demanding or paying have a manifest
relation to the ultimate act or performance, of which the Holy Ghost has not
thought fit to leave an Instance; which silent Omission of the Holy Ghost has
no reflection on Jacob's integrity, but only argues that the thing it self was
not by God designed for our Example.

But let him call this a mistake of mine, yea, a gross mistake, if he please,
and thereupon exercise (as he does) the levity of his Wit, and ease himself of
a frothy Jest, he can not thereby hurt me, whatever he may himself. I Will
therefore take the less notice of that, and apply my self to consider Jacob's
Vow; which not being mentioned at all by the former Priest, I had no occasion
to take notice of, in my Answer to him. I find this Vow of Iac^b was made upon
an extr^ordinary occasion, as well as that Gift of Abraham. Jacob being afraid
of rough Esau, who had threatened to take away his Life, was fain to leave his
Fathers House and Country, and with his Staff only to flee to Padam Aram to his
Uncle Laban for refuge; and being on his way benighted, he lay down on the
Ground to Sleep, having no other Pillow for his Head then an heap of Stones. In
this distressed condition did the Lord God appear unto him in a Dream, and said,
I am the Lord God of Abraham thy Father, and the God of Isaac: the Land whereon
thou lie, to thee will I give it, and to thy Seed. And thy Seed shall be as
the Dust of the Earth; and thou shall spr^ad abroad to the West, and to the
East, and to the North, and to the South: and in thee and in thy Seed shall all
the Families of the Earth be bl^ssed: And behold I am with thee, and will keep
thee in all places whither thou go, and will bring thee again unto this
Land: for I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to
thee of, Genesis 28. Jacob hereupon awaking in the sense of Gods presence, and
seized with fear at so wonderful an appearance, set up his stony Pillow for a
Monumental Pillar, and calls that place the House of God. And as the Lord had
freely, unrequested, made him so gracious and so large a Promise; so he again,
in token of his thankfulness to God, freely and unrequired, did vow a Vow,
saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and
will give me Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on; so that I come again to my
Father's House in peace: then shall the Lord be my God. And this Stone which I
have set for a Pillar, shall be Gods House: And of all that thou shall give me,
I will surely give the Tenth unto thee, Genesis 28. This is the Vow, and this the
occasion of making it; which was both voluntary and conditional, Voluntary, in
being unrequired; Conditional, in depending on the performance of Gods promise
to him, as the conditional Particle [If] demonstrates. Had Tithes been then a
divine Tribute, he needed not have vowed to Give them; justice would have
obliged him to have paid them, whether he had Vowed or no. Nor had it then been
in his Power to have made his Obligation conditional (as he did) but Tithes he
must have paid, whether God had ^een with him, preserved him in his way, and
brought him back in peace, or no. This Vow of Jacob's therefore, being
spontaneous and altogether free, Contributes nothing at all to the making up of
a divine Right to Tithes.

. 13. Another passage in my Book that seems to gall him sore, is this, If
Tithes had been due to Melchizedec, yet could not the Clergy of this Age derive
any Right from him to them, in as much as they are not of his Priesthood: To
this he says, I hope T. E. will grant, that Christ was of his Priesthood. And
if he grant this, we must ask, whether or no his Apostles were not his
Successors? and then, whether we do not derive our Succession from them? page
39.

That Christ was of his Priesthood I grant, and that his Apostles were
Followers of him: But that these Priests are Followers of the Apostles, as the
Apostles were of Christ, I deny; and think it would be worth their while to
prove. He says, Melchizede^ had the same Priesthood with the Ministers of the
Gospel.

In some respects it may be called the same; but what is that to him, unless he
also were a Minister of the Gospel! He can produce (he says, page 40) the
plain words of many Fathers, affirming, that the present Ministers of the
Christian Church are of Melchizedec's Priesthood.

This is very smoothly and crustily worded to beguil an unwary Reader, and make
him believe the present Ministers have the approbation of those Fathers. What
Ministers I pray must the Word Present here be understood to relate to, the
then present, or the now present? If he intends the then present Ministers,
that lived in the several Ages of those Fathers (as he calls them) he plainly
shuffles and evades; for the question was not concerning them, but the Clergy
of this Age expressly. But if by pr^sent he means the now present Ministers,
the Clergy of this present Age, what could he have said more absurd, as well as
false, then that he can produce the plain words of St. Hierom, Chrysostom,
Augustine, Epiphanius and Theo^hilact (the latest of whom has been dead well
near a Thousand Years) affirming that the present Ministers (the Clergy of this
Age) are of Melchiz^dec's Priesthood. But seeing he leans so hard upon the
judgment of certain Fathers (as he calls them) whose plain words he says he
can produce, but does not; I will produce him the plain words of one, (I will
not say a Father, but) a great Man in the English Church, Andrew Willet, who in
his Synopsis of Popery, fifth general Controversy, page 315. says, It is
great Blasphemy to say, that every Popish Priest is after the order of
Melch^zedec. And a little after, The Scripture makes this difference between
the Priesthood of Aaron, and the Priesthood of Melchizedec, that the Priests
of the Law were many, because they were taken away by Death: but Christ's
Priesthood is eternal, because he dies not, Heb. 7. 23. But if there should
be many Priests after Melchizedec's Order, there should herein be no difference
at all. Wherefore seeing ^^lchized^c's Priesthood only rests in Christ, and
is not Translated to any other, etc. Thus Willet, and to the same purpose said
Fulk before him. Now if the Priest^ Fathers have in plain words affirmed, That
the present Ministers of the Chri^^ian Church are of Melchized^e's Priesthood;
the Priest may do well to reconcile those Fathers with these Doctors (for so
were these also st^led) who so plainly affirm that Melchizedec's Priesthood
only rests in Christ, and is not Translated to any other. But the reason I
formerly gave why the Clergy of this Age are not of Melchizedec's Priest-hoods,
seems to offend him more then all the rest. It was this, That Melchizedec was
not made a Priest after the Law of a carna^ Commandment, but after the Power of
an endless Life. But every one knows, that these men are made Priests after the
Law of a carnal Commandment. This has so nettled him, that he is out of all
patience, says, my Reason is ridiculous, that I have learnt to Cant, that I am
an idle and imp^rtinent man, that this is an impudent Slander, that T. E. can
prattle in Scripture phrase, that I am a boasting Quaker, and will not stick to
say any thing, b^ it never'so false and ^^reasonable.

This is the Language that this Learned man (who says he will not meddle with
scurrility, because Rail^ng is not Reasoning, page 12.) has upon this
occasion, for want of better Arguments, (or breeding, or both) thrust in to
help swell the number of his pages. But overlooking this, let us see what else
he has to offer that looks at all like Reason. He says, page 41. The Apostle
speaking of the Jewish Priests in that place (Heb. 7. 16.) says, They were
made Priests after the Law of a carnal Commandment, that is, according to
Moses's Law, which consisted of outward and weak Commandments, reaching only to
the purifying of the Flesh. Now (says he) what an idle and impertinent Man is
this, to say, we are made Priests according to Moses's Law, and that every one
knows this! O impudent Slander! Are we bound to all the Sacrificings, Washings,
and other Levitical Rights and Ceremonies, at our Ordination?

I will not here (as justly I might) retort his Idle and impertinent Epithets,
nor yet his impudent Slander But I will tell him, he seems very willing to
mistake, that he might excuse himself from a direct Answer. He charges me with
saying, They are made Priests according to Moses' s Law. I no wheresay so, no
where intend so: for indeed, I do not think their Ordination so fairly
grounded; since all acknowledge the Law of Moses, though now abrogated, to have
had a Divine Institution. I said, These men are made Priests after the Law of a
Carnal Commandment. Does that necessarily imply Moses's Law? May no Law, no
Commandment be called carnal, but that which did bind to Sacrificings,
Washings, and other Levitical Ceremonies? That Is strange indeed! Nay, may not
every Law, every Commandment, which is not spiritual, be properly enough called
Carnal, as Carnal is understood in opposition to Spiritual? What though I used
the Apostle's Phrase? must that Allusion tie my sense to the subject he was
upon? No such matter. He opposes the Levitical Priest^ood to Melchizedec,
aff^rming that they were made Priests after the Law of a Carnal Commandment,
but ^e after the Power of an Endless Life. I oppose the present Priest^ to
Melchizedec, showing that these are not of his Order (though for Tithes sake
they pretend it) in as much as he was made a Priest not after the Law of a
Carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an Endless Life; whereas these men
are made Priests after the Law of a Carnal Commandment: but it does not follow
that this must needs be the same Law by which the Levitical Priests were made,
unless he thinks there can be no others. By what Law then are the Popish
Priests made (out of which this Priesthood sprang?) By what Law are the Turkish
Priests made? I hope he will not say either of these are made Priests by the
Power of an Endless Life (as was Melchizedec) nor yet by the Law of Moses; and
yet by some Law or other no doubt they were made: What will he call that Law,
Spiritual or Carnal? Let him call it as he pleases: I insist not so much on the
Names, as on the Natures of things, nor regard so much Words as Matter.
Notwithstanding what he has said the Difference yet remains, the Opposition is
still as plain between Melchizedec and these Priests; He was made a Priest, not
after the Law of a Carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an Endless Life:
These are made Priests, not after the Power of an Endless Life, but after the
Law of a Carnal Commandment; which plainly shows they are not of his Order, and
so cannot derive any Right to Tithes from him, if Tithes could be proved to
have ever been due to him.

He goes on, ibid. It Is evident we are not Priests according to that Carnal,
Outward, Changeable, Levitical Law.

Neither did I say ye were: But are ye not Priests according to a carnal Law,
an outward Law, a changeable Law, though not according to that very Levitical
Law?

But (says he) we are Priests according to the Law of the Gospel, whose Eternal
Duties have in them the Power of an Endless Life.

What a quaint Device is this to avoid the force of a Text! Was not the
Scripture Phrase plain and pertinent enough? or did it not suit his purpose?
Were he indeed a Priest after Melchizedec's Order, he need not have used this
variation. Had he been made a Priest by the same Power of an Endless Life, by
which Melchizedec was, the same words would have very well served to have
expressed the same thing. But he being conscious to himself that he came to his
Priesthood by another way, boggles at the Text, and instead of the Power of
(...) Endless Life, puts in the Law of the Gospel; which the more to cover from
the Reader's Observation, he mis-cites my words also, making me say,
Melchizedec was made a Priest after the Law of an Endless Lif^; whereas my
words (agreeing with the Text) are, He was made a Priest after the Power of an
Endless Life, page 281. This Power of an Endless Life is a heavy Stone to all
these carnal man-made Priests; and therefore they struggle to get from under
the weight of it, and endeavor to put it from them, as we see in this Priest,
who thrusts this Power from himself, and places it in the Duties. He durst not
say the Power of an Endless Life bad made him a Priest: but he says, he is a
Priest according to the Law of the Gospel (in which he speaks falsely also)
whose Eternal Duties, says he, have in them the Power of an Endless Life. If he
has this Power no nearer him then in the Duty, by what Power then shall he
Perform the Duty? How vast a Difference is there between these Priests and
those whom these pretend to be Suc^essors to! Paul was an Apostle not of men,
neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, Gal. 1. 1. He did not
turn the Power off from himself to the Duties of the Gospel (as this Priest
does) but he declared he received the Gospel it self, and his Apostleship or
Ministry therein, by the Revel^tion of the Son of God (Christ, the Power of
God, 1 Cor. 1. 24.) in him, Gal. 1. 12, 15, 16.

The Priest adds, And as this Law must never change, so neither must our
Priesthood, but, like that of Melchizedec, shall endure forever.

The Law of the Gospel is indeed unchangeable, and so is Melchizedec's
Priesthood; but the changeableness of these Priests and their Priesthood is an
evident token that they are not Priests of his Order, nor made according to the
unchangeable Law of the Gospel. How many Turns and Changes has here been
amongst them within little more then the last Century! One while a Popish
Priesthood, another while a Protestant, then Popish again, anon a Protestant;
and in later times, among the Protestants by themselves, one while an Episcopal
Priesthood, by and by a Presbyterial, anon an Independent, and now an Episcopal
again. Is this the unchangeable Priesthood he talks of, that, like
Melchizedec's, shall endure forever! Methinks the remembrance of former times
should convince him of his Weakness. If this man himself was not then a
Changer, and trudged with his Lamp that way which he saw the Oil was likely to
run (which the concealing his Name gives cause to suspect) I would ask him,
where he, and the Priests whose Cause he advocates, were blessing and bringing
forth their bread and their Wine between twenty and thirty years ago, when a
Common Prayer Priest was rare to be seen.

He goes on thus, And as we bear the same Office with him (Melchizedec) and do
the like Work, we deserve the same Reward, and may expect Tithes as well as he,
page 42.

I do not find he ever expected any. However, since these Priests pretend to
bear the same Office with ^elchizedec, it will not be amiss to observe what
they themselves make his Office to be. This Priest says, p. 39. His Worship was
altogether spiritual, praising God, praying for Abraham, only bringing forth
Bread and Wine. Sparrow Bishop of Exon, in his Rationale of the Common Prayer,
says much-what the same, Melchizedec had no other Offering, that we read of,
but Bread and Wine, p. 339.

Now if this was the Office of Melchizedec, and these Priests pretend to bear
the same Office with him, how comes it to pass that they have so much other
Work to do, as Marrying, Burying, Sprinkling, Churching of Women, and much
more, which it does not appear Melchizedec did at all concern himself with?
Surely, either their Office is larger then Melchizedec's and so not the same
with his; or else, they go beyond their Office, when they intermeddle with
these matters.

But however, he says, They do the like Work as Melchizedec did. His Work was
to bring forth Bread and Wine, which he did frcely like a King, not putting
Abraham to the Charge to pay for it. But these bring forth neither Bread nor
Wine, but put the people to the Charge to buy them; and if any be left, though
the people pay for it, yet the Priests will be sure to have it. And He not only
presented Abraham with Bread and Wine, but he blessed him too, before Abraham
gave him the Tithes: but these Priests are ten sold forwarder to curse then to
bless, especially if it be in a Case of Tithes, as the numerous
Excommunications witness. Nor are they content with Cursing only, but many a
godly conscientious man's Life have they taken away by long and hard
Imprisonments, and many an honest industrous Family have they Ruined by their
frequent Rapines. Is this like Melchizedec? Surely no; it more resembles those
blind Watchmen, whom the Prophet Isaiah inveighs against, Chap. 56. who all
looked to their own way, every one for his Gain from his Quarter: And those
False Prophets, against whom the true denounced the Judgment of God, that bite
with their Teeth, and cry Peace: and he that puts not into their mouths,
they even prepare War against him, Mi^. 3. 5. in whose nature and practice
these being so apparently found, may justly, expect the same reward that those
blind Watchmen and false Prophets received.

I have now attended him through his first Period, the time before the Law, and
I hope have sati^fied the R^a^er, that nothing he has produced from thence can
warrant him any Right to Tithes. In (...) foregoing discourse upon t^is Period
I have showed, that There is no command ex^ant for the paym^nt of Tithes before
the Levitical Law; That It is not at all absurd, but altogether reasonable and
^ust, to demand and insist on a positive Precept for the payment of them; That
^t is a mere evasi^n to pre^end ther^ was (...) ^ight be a command, though not
recorded; and to allege the shortness of the Story as a reason why it was
omitted, since so many other things, of far less mo^^nt then this, are so
p^rticularly and circumstantially delivered; That It is an empty shift to say,
A command ^n Scripture for the paying of Tithes in those times, is no^ to be
exp^^^ed because the Scriptur^s were not then written; so many Co^^ands being
(...) in Scripture of el^er date then the instance of Abra^am and Jacob g^ving
and vowing Tithes. That The ^riests Plea of a (...) being Originally due to
God, is but a precavious Plea, a begging of the Question; and if considered as
a peculiar part distinct from the other nin^* is altogether false; if not so
considered, conduces not at all to his purpose; That To suppose a t^nth part,
as a tenth distinct from the rest, to b^ due to God Originally, is to clip the
Wing of his Sovereign (...), and turn him off with a part only, who is, and
ought to be acknowledged, Lord of all. That ^f it (...) posible to be (...)
Melchizedec, yet that no right could descend from him to these Priests, they
being no kin at all to him, in point of Priesthood. In fine, That The whole
fabric which this Priest has raised in this Period, how much whitewasht and
varnisht soever it may appear, is built upon a Sandy Foundation of mere
Suppositions, Conjectures, Cuesses, Probabilities, Likely-hoods, May-be's; not
having in it one solid Stone of de^^nstrative Truth ^r firm Pillar of sound
Reason to support it.

CHAP II.
HItherto no right to Tithes appears. I now follow him to his second Period,
comprehending the whole time of the Mosaic Law, under which the right of Tithes
to the Levititical Priesthood is recognized by all. But in as much as these
Priests disclaim all Right and Title by that Law, it cannot be expected this
Period should produce any thing to the advantage of their claim, though
something it may against it.

Here I must crave the Reader leave to make a short digression, to remove a
Cavil urged by the Author of the Conference, the occasion whereof was thus; At
his entrance upon the discourse of Tithes, in his Conference, page 131. he
mentioned a Book of Edward Burrough's, called, A just and righteous Plea, etc.
Out of which he collected a Quotation in these words, page 132. Tithes are now
not to be paid according to the first Covenant, neither is the first
Priesthood to be upheld that once gave and received Tithes; Now should we pay
Tithes according to the first Covenant, and uphold any part of that
Priesthood, which took Tithes, etc. then should we deny Jesus Christ to be
come in the Flesh. Hereupon, he took occasion to quarrel about the Priesthood,
ignorantly taxing E. B. with ignorance in the Nature of the first Priesthood,
and alleging that If by the first Priesthood he meant that of Aaron, then he
had presented to the King and Council notori^us falsity, affirming it to be the
first Priesthood, there b^ing before him ^ Priest to whom Levi himself paid
Tithes, Heb. 7. 9. etc. This, because I saw it to be a mere Quibble, a ^atch at
word^, not pertinet to the subject he was upon, but tending only to a Jangle, I
took no notice of in my Answer, but stepped as directly as well I could into
the matter it self of Tithes. Hereupon in his Vindication, page 2^4. he
boastingly vaunt^ and insults over me for passing by so consid^rable a passage,
as he it seems takes it to be. But I assure him I therefore passed it by,
because I looked upon it as a very inconsiderable passage, and do still. Nor
should I have thought it now deserved my notice, but that his unfair Inferences
therefrom de^erve reproof. He intimates that my silence has given the World an
occasion to look upon E. B. as a mere Cheat and Imp^stor, and says, He had not
that Inspiration, which himself and his Parishoner had been discoursing of.

Po^r weak man! He may soon at thi^ rate, give the World an occasion to look
upon himself as a Slanderer and Back-biter; but will never gain belief to his
false suggestions with any, to whom E. B. was known, whose Name is honorable
amongst the Righteous, and his Memory sweet as a precious Ointment. As to the
Cavil it self, which the Prie^^ has raised, it is altogether groundless. For
it is evident that E. B. ^id there call the L^vitical Priesthood the first
Priesthood with respect to that Priesthood that succeeded it, which is the
Gospel ministry. In which sense it is both generally understood and commonly
called the first Priesthood. And as well might the Priest blame the Apostle
for calling that Covenant which was made with the Jews, the first Covenant
(which he does (...) then once in his Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 8. 7. and
9. 1.) as find fault with E. B. for call^ng the Jewish Priesthood the first
Priesthood. There needs not much be said in this case, to show the emptiness
of this Cavil, which of it self is obvious to every Eye. But he takes notice
that E. B. was an occasion of my Convincement; and thence himself takes fresh
occasion to raise his wonder, at my not answering this passage before. He may
for that reason the rather believe, that I did not esteem it worthy of an
Answer, since if I had, he may reasonably conclude I would not have been
backward to vindicate one to whom I was so greatly obliged. It is very true
indeed, that the Lord made E. B. instrumental to the turning me from the
Darkness (wherein I once sat under the teaching of the National Ministry) unto
the true Light of Christ Jesus; which with joy of Heart, and a thankful mind, I
acknowledge, and my Soul blesses the Lord in the sense of his mercy extended to
me therein. And of that faithful Servant of God (whom the Priest in derision
calls m^ Patriarch) this certain Testimony I have to bear, That he was endued
with Power from on high, and the Spirit of the Almighty rested on him; of which
amongst many thousands I am a witness. But to proceed,

In the same place, Vindication, page 295. the Priest charges me with cunningly
passing over his Arguments, and skipping four pages at the entrance of his
discourse of Tithes.

This Accusation is utterly false, as will appear by comparing my Book with
his. He began with Tithes in his Conference at the bottom of page 131. He spent
page 132. in quibling about the first Priesthood. Then in page 133. having
disowned all Titles to Tithes by virtue of the Ceremonial Law, he started a
Question, Whether Tithes are not purely Ceremonial, etc. which he answered in
the Negative, and withal showed how far he understood them to be Ceremonial: To
all this I answered in my former Book, called Truth prevailing, bestowing two
pages thereon, page 282, 283. Then in page 134. of his Conference he drew a
comparison between the Prophets of the Levitical Priesthood, and the present
Clergy: To which I answered in page 348, 349, and 350. of my said Book. Judge
now Reader whether was skipping over four pages, and passing by his Arguments.
But of this let this suffice. I now return to the former Subject, from which
the unfair dealing of my disingenuous Adversary has occasioned this digression.

. 1. That which is chiefly to be inquired in, our passage through his second
Period, viz. the time under the Law, is, 1. Whether Tithes were a part of the
Ceremonial Law, 2. Whether they were abrogated by Christ. The Priest begins
with the last of these, and offers to prove, after his manner, that Tithes were
not abrogated by Christ, Let not the Quaker (says he) so far mistake, as to
think that the abrogation of the Levitical Law concerning Tithes, was an
abrogation of Tithes themselv^s, page 4^.

I Answer, so to think is no mistake, but a certai^ Truth. They were commanded
by that Law, and never commanded by any other: While that Law stood in force,
they were uph^^d by it: but when that L^w wa^ disa^^ulled, they fell together
with it.

He says, ibid. Our Lord abro^ated the Levitical Law concerning the modes of
Gods Worship, but he did ^ot abrogate Gods Worship.

In abrogating the Levitical Law, ^e abrogated whatsoever had dependence on
that Law, which Tithes had. The Worship of God, considered simply, had no
dependence on that Temporary Law, but was grounded upon the Law of Nature, in
the best acception thereof, and so was not subject to an abrogation: but the
modes, manners, or ways of Worship, being of the Nature of that Levitical
Polity, and Instituted by the Law thereof; were abrogated by its Repeal. Now
the parralel holds not between the Worship of God and Tithes, but between the
worship of God and the maintenanc^ of hi^ Priests or Ministers: for as the
Worship of God is grounded on the Divine Law of Nature, so the Mai^tenance of
his Ministers is founded upon a Principle of Natural justice and equity. And as
God by the Levitical Law, instituted diverse Modes, Manners, or ways of this
Worship, so by the same Law he appointed the Mode, Manner or Way of this
Mai^tenance, which was by Tithes. Sacrifice, ^urnt-offerings, Washings and
other External Observanc^^ were the modes of that Worship, that is, they were
the means or ways by which that Worship was performed: and Tithes were the
modes of that Maintenance; that is, they were the means and ways by which that
Maintenance was raised. As therefore the Worship it self was the Substance,
which was g^ounded on the Law of Nature, and the Sacrifices, and other outward
Services which were the ^^des of it, were Ceremo^ial, and as such abrogated by
Christ* ^o the Maintenance it self was the Substan^^, which was founded on
Natural justice and equity, and Tithes, which were the modes of it, were
Cere^onial* and as such by Christ abolished. Yet so, that as the Worship it
self remains though the Sacrifices which were the modes of it are abolished: So
the Maintenance it self still abides, though the Tithes, which were the m^des
of it, are abrogated: Neither let any think, that Tithes are any wh^t less
C^r^monical, because of that small mention of them in the ^tories of Jacob, so
long before the L^vitical Law was given: for many things done by those, and
other Patriarchs before them, were as certainly and plainly* in their own
Natures Cer^monial then, as they were afterward, when Commanded by Moses.
Certainly were this thing rightly understood and well considered, that Tithe is
but a mode, a way, mean or manner of Mainteance, and consequently Ceremonical,
it would greatly co^duce to the clearing this Case, and determining this
Controversy. And could men be persuaded to lay aside Passi^n* and Interest,
and come fairly and un^yass^d to the considation hereof, there ^ight yet be
hopes of a fairer Issue then the present face of things bespeaks. Doubtless the
great Ground of these men Error, who stickle so much for Tithes, is there not
distinguishing between the Maintenance it self, and the Way, Manner, M^ans, or
M^de by which that Maintenance is raised. My present Adversary, Author of the
Divine Right of Tithes, acknowledges, p 43. That all the modes and
circumstances of Gods Worship, enjoined by the Levitical Law, and proper to
that dispensation, and relating to Christ to come fell with that Polity, and
^er^ abrogated by Christ* But the main duty of Worshipping God continued in
forc^ still, saye^ he.

And so say I also* But then he falls i^to his forme^ Error concerning Tithes
with the Worship of God, to which they are by no means a suitable Parallel.
Even s^ (says he) in the Case of Tithes, they had not their Foundation upon,
nor their Original from the Levitical Law: God had a Right to them before, etc.

Thus he runs on in his old strain, repeating his former groundless,
supposition for a whole page or more, and then concludes, page 45. thus, N^w
when Christ did abrogate that Ministry and Dispensation (namely, of the Law)
there Appe^dixes must needs be abrogated with it; but the main duty (which was
so before the C^remonial Law) remains still.

The main duty does indeed remain still, which is a maintenance to Gods
Ministers; but his mistake is in making Tithes to be this main duty, whereas
Tithes being but the mode, means or way of performing the main duty of
Maintenance were really Appendixes of that Jewish Polity, and though known (and
sometimes but rarely used) before the Ceremonial Law was actually given forth,
were yet even then, in their own Nature Ceremonial, as well as those other
modes and ways of Worshipping by Sacrifice, etc. which though in frequent use
with the Patrirachs long before the Prom lugation of the Ceremonial Law, or
mention made of Tithes are yet acknowledged to be of the Nature of that
Dispensation and Polity, and by Christ to be abrogated with it.

. 2. But here I cannot omit to take notice, that in hi^ repetition of his
former fancy of a Divine Right to Tithes before the Law, be abuses the holy
Text, First, in saying, The Fathers of the Israelites had made a special V^w to
pay this Divine Tribute, meaning Tithes, hereby insinuating that Jacob
understood Tithes to be a known due or Tribute which he was before obliged to
pay; when as both his voluntary, unrequired and conditional Vow plainly speaks
the contrary, and the words of the Vow expressly are, I will surely give [he
does not say pay] the tenth unto thee. Secondly, in saying, There was no need
for God to institute Tithes anew, and that accordingly he claims them, and
supposes them to be his due by a right antec^d^nt to the Levitical Law; for
proof of which he cites (as before) Ex^d. 22. 29. where Tithes are so far from
being claimed and supposed due, that they are not so much as m^ntion^d at all.
He adds Levis. 27. 30. which thus speaks, And all the Tithe of the Land,
whether of the S^^d of the Land; or of the Fr^it of the Tree, is the Lord: it
is holy unto the Lord. This does not at all prove an antecedent Right or Claim
to Tithes distinct from the rest; for he had but a little before asserted his
Right to the whole Land, when giving a reason why he would not have any one
sell his Possession forever; he says; For the Land is mine, for y^ are
Strangers and sojourners with me, c. 25. 23. So there be claims, the whole Land
as his own; and here he first appropriates the Tithes to his ow^ use.

. 3. But the Priest hopes to Demonstrate that Tithes were not abrogated by this
comparison, The putting on (says he) a new State, does not make o^e a new man,
nor does the pulling it off again Kill ^im.

This is very true, but falsely applied: for he makes Tithes to be the man; but
what then shall be the S^it? If he would apply his comparison rightly, he
should make Mainte^ance to be as the ^an; (...) Tithes to be as the Suit; and
then he might infer aptly enough, that as the pulling off the Suit does not
kill the man, so the putting off Tithes does not destroy the maintenance. And
plainly, Tithes, though (to pursue his comparison) it was once made and worn as
a Suit, yet when it was grown old, and had done its Service, it was cast off,
and laid aside, never to be worn again.

He adds, Th^re may be many alterations in Circumstances, the Essentials still
remaining the same. I pray consider now, Is not Tyth^ a Circumstance of
M^intenance? Can any one imagine Tithe to be an Essential? Essential is that
which belongs to the being of ^ thing, without which that thing cannot be. But
that maintenance may be without Tithes, and consequently Tithes not Esse^tial
to ^aintenance, not only the lowest Degree of Reason will teach, but experience
also of former and the present Age confirm: The Apostles of our Lord had
Maintenance sufficient; yet no man (with a name) dares say, they had it by
Tithes. And in other Countries at this day among Protestants, the Clergy
receive their Maintenance by a Standing Salary from the State without any
mention of Tithes.

. 4. From the Levitical Law, he says, they may leave something to cle^r that
Title which thy have to Tithes from other Laws; and on^ of his Lessons is, That
the Levitical Law was a Pattern for Christ t^ i^itate, in his provision for
Gospel Ministers; as St. Paul teaches us, where he says, Know y^ not, that
they which Minister about holy things [i. e. the Levites] liv^ of the things of
the Temple, [i. e. Tythes] and they which wait at the Altar, [i. e. the Jewish
Pri^sts] are partakers with the Altar, [i. e. the Sacrifices and Oblations]
Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live
of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 1^, 14. which Words [Even so] do manifest (says he)
that Christ has in the main, and for the Essential part, made like Provision
for Gospel Ministers, as God the Father did for the Jewish Priesthood, page 46.

In thinking Christ took the L^vitical Law as a pattern for himself to imitate,
in his Provision for Gospel Ministers; this man very much mistakes. The very
contrary appears most plain in Sacred Story. Freely ye have rec^ived, freely
give, was our Lords Command to his Disciples when he sent them forth to preach,
Mat. 10. 8. and freely receive what is freely given by those that receive you
and your Message, was the Provision he allowed them, Luke 10. 7, 8. And a
sufficient Provision too it proved, even though they went as Lambs amongst
Wolves, Verse. 3. for when they returned he asked them, Lacked ye any thing? and
their Answers was, Nothing, Luke 22. 35. Had Christ intended to follow the
Levitical Law, and by that Pattern to bestow Tithes on his Gospel Ministers; it
cannot be doubted but he would, by a plain and positive Precept, have fixed and
settled that Maintenance on his, as his Father before had done on the Levitical
Priesthood; and not have le^t it to the uncertain construction of an Even so:
If the place it self [(...)] should be allowed to be Even so rendered, which
Baraturus by [It^] only; Hierom, Montanus and others by [Ita et] and Tompson
that Englisht Baza's Lati^e, reads it (not [Even so] from which Word Even the
Priest would hook in an Identity of Maintenance, but) so also. But suppose it
allowable to read it Even so as the Vulgar Translation has it, yet will the
particle [Even] in that place appear to every judicious and disinteressed
Reader to have relation to the matter, not the manner, livelihood it self, not
the way or means of livelihood; employing, that Christ was not less careful of
his Ministers under the Gospel, then God had been of his Priests under the Law,
which I hope it will be granted he might very well be, though he did not
appoint them the self-same Maintenance. And indeed, when this Priest says,
page 47. These words [Even so] do manifest, that Christ has in the main, and
for the essential part, made like Provision for Gospel Ministers, as God the
Father did for the Jewish Priesthood; he is not much beside the Mark, if he
rightly understand the main and essential part, which is simply a maintenance,
without respect to the mode or way, by which it should be raised.

Again, he says, This was also a Pattern for the devout Christians of Old, and
did intimate to them, that they should not do less for their Ministers then
would afford them an honorable Maintenance. It is not to be doubted the
Levitical Law, in the Ages succeeding that of the Apostles, was but too much
imitated by the Christians. He that reads the Writings of those Times, and
observes the bulk of Jewish Ceremonies, that have gradually crept into the
public Worship of Professed Christians^ will find no cause to question it. And
though the Christians in those times were very commendable for providing
honorably for Christ's Ministers; yet in recurring to the Levitical Law, then
abrogated, and fetching Examples from thence, they did not deserve
commendation. Nor is there any need for Christians now to look back to the
a^tiquated Ceremonies of the Law for Example o^ Incitement to their duty
herein, since such is the Power and Efficacy of the Gospel, that it opens the
hearts of those who receive it, to Communicate freely of their car^als, to
those from whom they receive Spirituals. Thus was it with Lydia, the
Thyatiress, when her heart was opened: She was not backward to entertain them
who were Instrumental to her Conversion, but even constrained them to come to
her House and abide there, Act. 16. 14, 15.

These men peradventure may think such a Maintenance not honorable enough. But
they should remember, that it was honorable enough for the holy Apostles, and
for our Savior himself also, who though he were Lord of all, yet did not
disdain to be thus provided for, but by his own Example laid the Foundation of
this Gospel Maintenance, as we read in Luke 8. 2, 3. where Mary Magdalen,
I^anna the Wife of Chuza, Herod's Steward, and Susanna, and many others are
remembered to have ministered to him of their Substance. Was this accepted by the
Master, and will it not content them who call themselves his Servants? They had
need then be put in mind, that the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the
Servant above his Lord. And that, It is enough for the Disciple that he is as
his Master, and the Servant as his Lord, Matthew. 8. 24, 25. And were these men
indeed what they pretend to be, they would not think slightly of that
Maintenance, which our blessed Savior was contented with. But verily, their
despising and rejecting this, and creeping to the Magistrate for another, is
Argument enough that for all their pretenses, they are not the Servants of
humble Jesus.

. 5. To show that the Levitical Law for Tithes was a pattern for the Christians
of old, he gives us a quotation out of Origin, thus, Our Lord says in the
Gospel (speaking of tything Mint, etc.) These things ought ye to have done. If
you reply, He said this to the Pharisees, not to his Disciples; then hear what
be says to his Disciples, Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Matthew. 5. Therefore that which he would have done by the Pharisees, more
abundantly would he have it done by his Disciples. -- Now how does my
Righteousness exceed that of the Pharisees, if they durst not taste of the
Fruits of the Earth, before they had separated the Priests and Levites parts;
and I devour the ^ruits of the Earth, so that the Priest knows not of it, the
Levite is a stranger to it, and God's Altar receives nothing. Herein (says the
Priest) Origin speaks my sense fully, page 47.

By this then we know fully what the Priests sense is in this case; let us see
now how much, or rather how little, this sense of his agrees with Truth. When
Christ said to the Pharisees (concerning tything Mint, etc.) These things ye
ought to have done, etc. the Law, by which Tithes were commanded to be paid,
was in force, and therefore the Pharisees in observing the Law, did but what
they ought to do. But though they were in that part so observant of the Law,
yet in other parts, more material, they were wholly negligent. Now as that
caution of our Savior to his Disciples, Except your Righteousness exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, etc. was not given with particular
relation to the Pharisees punctuality in tything Mint, etc. being spoken long
before, and upon another occasion; so neither can it with any color of reason
be supposed, that the excess or superabounding of the Disciples Righteousness
above and beyond the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, was to consist
in a more exact observance of the Ceremonies of the Law, which were then even
expiring, and the Disciples daily fitting for the manifestation of a more
glorious and lasting Administration. But the Scribes and Pharisees, who were so
exact in those smaller and lighter matters of tything Mint, etc. did break
great and weighty Commands of God, and taught men so, as appears in Matthew. 15.
6. where Christ tells them, You have mad^ the command of God (for honoring of
Parents) of no effect by your Tradition; and in Mark 7. 13. (where the same
passage is recorded) He adds, And many such like things do ye, of which there
is a large Bed-roll in the 23d of Matthew. For these Pharisaical Tythers did
shut the Kingdom of Heaven against men, neither entering themselves, nor
suffering others, They devoured Widows Houses, were full of extortion, and
while they were so exact in tything the very Potherbs, they omitted the
weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith. Now while the
Righteousness, of the Pharisees stood in a nice and exact performance of those
lesser matters: the Disciples Righteousness was to shine forth in the
performance of those weightier matters, Judgment, Mercy, Faith, etc. wherein as
they were exercised, their Righteousness would as really exceed the
Righteousness of the Pharisees, as the things themselves in which they were
conversant (viz. Judgment, Mercy, Faith, etc.) did excel those things which the
Pharisees were busied about, (to wit, tything of Mint and A^^ise) And how great
a pre-eminence and preference the one sort has of the other, may sufficiently
appear in the Verse. 23. where Judgment, Mercy and Faith are comparatively to
Tithes, called the weig^tier matters. But the disproportion is more clearly set
forth in the next Verse. where Tithes are compared to the Gnat (one of the least
of Insects) but Judgment, Mercy and Faith to the Camel (one of the greatest of
Animals) which Metaphors, drawn from the two Extremes, do evidently enough
denote the different Natures of the things there handled; one sort of which
(viz. Judgment, Mercy, etc.) is plainly Moral, the other (viz. tything of Mint,
etc.) as clearly Ceremonial. Now to su^pose Christ intended his D^sciples
should exceed the Righteousness of the Pharisees in the ceremonial and lesser
parts of the Law, in which the Pharisees were themselves but too apt to exceed;
and that he should enjoin this too on no less penalty then Exclusion from the
Kingdom of Heaven is contrary both to Reason and true spiritual Sense^ What
therefore the Pri^st quotes from Origin, and says is fully his own sense too,
may not by any means be received, at least as he understands it. For he says,
That which Christ would have done by the Pharisees, m^re abundantl) would he
have it d^ne by (...) Disciples. But who can admit this in (...) terms as it is
here laid down. Christ would have the Pharisees have kept the whole Law, even
every Ceremony and Circumstance therein commanded (which, being then in force,
they ought to have done) but would he have his Disciples do this more
abundantly, now that himself has Na^l'd them to his Cross! that were to deny
him come in the Flesh. What Origin himself therefore says, That it is the part
of a wise Interpreter to find out that things in the Law are to be Literally
observed, and what not; the same may well be said of his Writings, There is
need of great caution and sound judgment in quoting what he has written. For
though he was a Man of great Learning, yet was he too apt to run the wrong way,
for which he has been not lightly censured by many. And indeed, his aptness to
allegorize the Scriptures, makes it seem the more strange that he should take
this place literally; and yet he has even here expressed himself so darkly too,
that it would puzzle I think a wise Citator to find out who that Levite is, to
whom under the Gospel, Tithes should be paid according to the Letter of the Law.

But leaving the Priest to untye that Knot, I here present thee Reader with the
judgment of Walter Brute upon this Text, whom though I know beforehand the
Priest despises and disdains (reproachfully calling him Renegad^, Right of
Tithes, page 139.) because he strikes at their Diana Tithes; yet I make no
doubt but amongst honest men, he will at least he never the worse, if not the
better thought of. He having showed that Tithes were Ceremonial, and the Law
abrogated by which they were due to the Levites, goes on to disprove the
pretenses of those who claim a Right from those words of Christ to the
Pharisees. His words are these, Whereupon some do say, that by the Gospel we
are bound to pay Tithes, because Christ said to the ^harisees, Mat. 23. Woe he
to you Ser^bes and Pharisees, which pay your Tithes of Mint, Annise Seed, and
of Cuminin, and leave Judgment, Mercy and Truth undone. O ye blind Guides that
strain at a Gnat and swallow up a Camel. This word sounds not as a
Commandment or manner of bidding, whereby Christ did command Tithes to be
given; but it is a word of disallowing the Hypocrisy of the Pharisees, who of
Covetousness did rather weigh and esteem Tithes, because of their own singula^
Commodity, rather then other great and weighty Commandments of the Law. And me
seems that our men are in the same predicament of the Pharisees, which do
leave off all the old Law, keeping only the Commandment of Tything. It is
manifest and plain enough by the premises, and by other places of Scriptures,
that Christ was a Priest after the order of Melchized^c, of the Tribe of Iudae,
not of the Tribe of Levi; who gave no new Commandment of tything any thing to
him and to his Priests, whom he would place after him, but when his Apostles
said to him, Behold, we have left all things, and have followed thee, what then
shall we have? He did not answer them thus, Tithes shall ^e paid you, neither
did he promise them a temporal, but an everlasting reward in Heaven: For he,
both for Food, and also for Apparel, taught his Disciples not to be careful. --
And Paul, right-well remembering this Doctrine, instructs Ti^^thy, and says
thus, But we having Food, and wherewithal to be covered, let us therewith be
content, 1 Timothy 6. Thus fa^ Brute, whom Fox enrolls amongst the holy Confessors
of Jesus, Martyrol. vol. 1. page 146. Era^mus also, in his Paraphrase on Luke
11. Upon the words [ye Tithe Mint, etc.] says thus, These things which God
commanded for a time to be kept according to the Flesh, ye ought not to omit;
but those things which God would have chiefly to be done, which are perpetually
good, and acceptable to him, ought first of all to be performed. Observe here
how he accounts of Tithes; not as things perpetually good and acceptable to
God, but as things commanded for a time, to be kept according to the Flesh: To
which the Jews (Israel after the Flesh) were bound; but the Christians (Israel
after the Spirit) are free from that bond. With these take the judgment of
Andrew W^lle^ in his Syno^sis of Popery, and ^n the fifth general Controversy,
page 3^ 4. Where setting down the Jesuits Argument for the Morality of Tithes,
out of Matthew. 23. 23. He thus Answers it, We must consider in what time our
Savior Christ to spoke unto the Pharisees, for as yet neither the Law, nor the
Ceremonies thereof were fully abrogated: Christ was Circumcised, and Mary his
Mother purified according to the Law, Luk^ 2. 21, 22. Our Savior also bids
the Leper to show himself to the Priest, and offer a gift as Moses commanded,
Matthew. 8. 4. Yet none of all these Ceremonies now stand in force, though Christ
did them at that time, and bad them to be done. The same Answer may serve also
concerning his Injuction to the Pharisees as touching their Tithes. Thus he, by
which it is past doubt that, although he was a zealous Advocate for Tithes as a
Maintenance, yet he acounted them not Moral, but Ceremonial.

. 6. The Priest has yet another document from the Levitical Law, namely, That
the substance of that which was required then, is due still not by virtue of
that ^aw, but because there is an inkerent equity in the thing, page 48.

The Substance is a Maintenance in which there is an inherent equity, that the
Laborers should be rewarded, but that this Maintenance should be by Tithes,
was not the Substance in which the inherent equity stood, but a Circumstance,
Ceremony or Mode, due only by virtue of that Law while it stood, and no longer.
For though it be equal that the Labourer should be rewarded for his labor, yet
the equality of the reward stands not in Tithes, or a tenth part, which may
either exceed or ^all short of the Laborers just desert, and so not prove an
adaequate reward to his work. That the substance of that which was required in
the Law, is due still, he says, page 48. Is Origen's meaning in the af^resaid
place; and so (he says) we must interpret St. Hierom, when he says, That
which we have said of Tithes and first Fruits which were once given by the
People to the Priests and Levites, you must understand also of the Christian
People, to whom it is commanded not only to give Tithes but to sell all.

But where is there a command to Christians, either to give Tithes, or to sell
all? Hierom pressed it from Mal. 3. which had direct reference to the Jews, and
cannot possibly be made a Command to Christians. And for Christians selling
all, there is mention indeed in holy Writ of some that did so, but not that
they were commanded so to do; that was voluntary.

But the Priest explains Hierom's meaning, that is (says he page 49) so much
of the command as was Moral, so much as was grounded upon eternal Reason, ought
to stand.

That is not specifically Tithes, but a Maintenance in general. It is the
Maintenance that is Moral, and grounded upon eternal Reason; but no man
methinks th^nks should have so little a reason, as to think Tithes, as Tithes,
as a certain and definite part, are grounded upon eternal Reason. It was not an
eternal, but ^emporal Reason, (suitable to the Jewish Polity) on which Tithes
were grounded under the Law, and that was the ^^ason they did not remain, but
fell together with that Law.

He Argues further, That God is Eternally Lord of the World, and must always
be Worshipped, and always have Ministers, and these must always be Maintained
out of their Masters Portion, Page 49.

So they may, and yet not by Tithes, if God be Lord of the World: for then all
being his, neither he nor his Ministers need to be ^yed to a Tenth. Why not a
Ninth, an ^ighth, a Sixth, or any other part if he pleases? Has the Eternal
reason of ^ythes tied God who is Lord of all the World, to the Tenth part only.
Plainly these men, while they pretend to honor God as the Eternal Lord of the
World, would make him in reallity Lord but of a Tenth Part of it. That they
make his Portion, which he must take or none. And if they might be believed,
all should depend upon this Tenth; without Tithes no Maintenance, without
Maintenance no Ministers, without Ministers no Worship. This I Am sure is not
Gospel Language. But this is like his former comparison of the Oil and the
Lamp.

But whatever this Priest talks of the Law of Nature and Eternal Reason (to
beget a reverance in Peoples mind to Tithes, and make them how their Necks the
more willingly to his hard and heavy Yoke) we may see that Tithes were not
reputed of Divine Right by the Eternal moral Law, if we consider the
Alienations that have been made of them to common uses in Hen. 8. time. And
though the Priest may think to wipe off the Objection by e^claiming against
Hen. 8. and his Parliament, and by branding them with the Horrible Name of
Sacrilege, as he does in his Vindication. page 305. Yet when he shall come to
consider that those Alienations have been confirmed by Edw. 6. and Q. Eliz. and
allowed by all Succeeding Kings and Parliaments ever since; and that the
Statutes made for those Alienations, stand yet in force; I take him to be too
great a Time-server to pursue his Argument of Sacrilege, at least with his
Name to it. However, if he will charge Sacrilege on all the Princes and
Parliament, from Hen. 8. to this day, that will not remove the Objection, but
sti^l it will appear that, whatever he thinks of them, they have not thought
Tithes to be due by the Eternal moral Law. And indeed, if we look upon the
practice of the Priests themselves, we shall have reason to think that they
themselves do not really believe that Tithes are due by the Eternal moral Law
(whatever they pretend to keep simple People in awe) for do not they Alienate
Tithes themselves? Do not they pay Tenths (which are the Tithes of the Tithes)
to the Crown? See Right of Tithes, p. 231. If Tithes, as they pretend, may not
be alienate^ to Common uses; and if such alienation be Sacrilege, Why then do
they themselves alienate them? Does not this plainly show, that either they do
not believe Tithes to be due by the Eternal moral Law, or else that they herein
sin against their own Consciences and Knowledge?

. 7. But that which comes next is such a piece of Logic, as would make a
serious man smile. When the Levitical Priesthood failed (says he, page 49)
there must be another, and a better; and therefore we may claim Tithes as Gods
due, and as his Ministers Portion, etc.

What a pretty pair of Non-sequiters is here. Because there must be another and
a better Priesthood, when the Levitical failed, does it therefore follow, these
must needs be they! upon which of the premises I wonder does this conclusion
lean? that there must be another Priesthood, or that it must be a better? If it
rest on the former, that there must be another Priesthood, that no doubt there
may be, and yet not be these: if on the latter, that it must be better, then
past all doubt it cannot be these, since these are so far from being better,
that they are not a little worse. But if upon the failure of the Levitical
Priesthood, there must be another, a better, and it were possibly to suppose
these to be that, does it thence follow that these may claim Tithes? What empty
arguing is this! Right Reason would rather have inferred, that if indeed the
old Priesthood had stood, the old Maintenance by Tithes might also have
continued; but the old Priesthood being ended the old Maintenance by Tithes is
ended also. And as there was to be another Priesthood (wholly another, not the
same corrected or reformed) so there should als^ be another Maintenance (wholly
another, not the same a little variated) which should excel the old
Maintenance, as this other Priesthood was to be a better Priesthood then the
former, and that in the same Notion of meliority. This I am sure would be not
only more rational, but more agreeable also to the words of the Apostle, 2 Cor.
5. 17. Old things a^e passed away, behold all things are become Now. So also
the Divine John, Rev. 21. 5. Behold I make all things new. Which words are
there delivered with a very Remarkable Emphasis, He tha^ sat upon the Throne
said, Behold, I make all things new. And he said unto me, Write: for these
words are true and Faithful. How Unfaithful then are these Priests, who
endeavor to make the^e true words untru^, by claiming and contending for the
old legal Maintenance by Tithes, which long since is de jure passed away.

But he has yet another fetch, They need not, he says, claim them by the
Levitical Law as it is Ceremonial. What then; will they claim them by the
Levitical Law, but under some other Notion? How does he twist and twine about
to get a claim by the Levitical Law, to which alas! his dear Brother has
foreclosed his way, by saying plainly and in general terms, they derive them
not from Levi, Conference, p. 135.

. 8. And now (says the Priest to his Brother) I hope T. E. must confess, that
your second Position, viz. [That Tithes are not purely Ceremonial] is made good
also; since I have showed they were grounded on the Law of Nature, and
Primitive Revelation, relying on an Internal Rectitude in the thing it self,
and an Eternal Reason of it, and were paid by th^se Patriarchs who lived long
before the Ceremonial Law, by Virtue of the preceding Declaration of the Divine
Right unto them, page 49.

If this Faith has no better Foundation then his hope, the man is in an ill
case; for I assure him, I am so far from being brought to confess he has made
good the second Position also, that I declare, I a^ fully satisfied he has
made good neither first nor second yet. And though he enumerates many and great
matters which he pretends he has showed, yet, unless he means, that saying is
showing, ^he has not showed any one particular of those many which he speaks
of. He says, he has showed that Tithes were grounded on the Law of Nature and
Primitive Revelation: but he has no otherwise showed it then by saying so. In
page 21. he begins with it, and says, Gods right to Tithes is founded
primarily upon the Law of Nature, etc. and four or five Lines lower he adds,
Natural Reason teaches us to give God some part of his gifts back again, etc.
Then in the same page he concludes, Some part of our Substance being therefore
due to God, etc. So that at first he begs the Question, and on that precarius
bottom sets his Building. He takes for granted that which is denied, and then
cries out he has showed: and so indeed he has the weakness of his Cause or his
own inability to manage it. If to find Gods Right he would look into the Law of
Nature, he shall there find that God has a right to all, and to all alike. He
is the God of Nature, the Universal Power, by which all things were made, and
by which all things subsist. An equal Right he has, by the Law of Nature, to
all that his hands have made, or ever was brought forth by his productive FIAT.
But nothing can constitute to him a distinct and particular Right to a tenth,
or any other part, so as to make that part (per excellentiam) more peculiarly
and eminently his then the rest, but his own appropriation and assumption
thereof to himself, which cannot be proved of Tithes before the Leviti^al Law.
That a tenth part (or Tithes, which is the same) is not due by the Law of
Nature, Melan^ton affirms, saying, The Quota (the tenth part) is not Natural,
but the Aliquota (some part) that st^^ds in equity, founded on the Law of
Nature: but the Quota (or tenth part) is founded on the Ceremonial and judicial
Law, which Law, says he, are proper to Moses's Polity, and belong not to us,
seeing God has utterly Destroyed it, 1 Tom. page 303. Delibert. Christiana.

And for Tithes being founded on Primitive Revelation, he shows it much after
the same manner as he does that they are grounded on the Law of Nature^ for he
says, we ought to believe it, page 25. We may believe it, p. 26. We must
believe it, p. 27, etc. But I would know of him whence he has his Revelation
that Tithes were founded on Primitive Revelation? He is too great a s^offer at
Inspiration to pretend to know it that way. Does he read it any where in the
holy Scriptures? He should then have done well to have given us the Text. But
if it be not recorded there, Why makes he himself so over-wise? Eccles. 7. 16.
And yet, if he could prove, or I should grant, that Tithes had been Commanded
to be pai'd before Moses's time, yet would not that prove Tithes any whit less
Ceremonial, since many things that were revealed to and required of the
Patriarchs before the M^saie Law, were clearly Ceremonial, and afterward both
required by the Ceremonial Law, and Universally acknowledged to be abrogated
with it, as Bloody Sacrifices, Circumcision, etc. Yea, the distinction between
Clean and Unclean Beasts, was observed before the Flood, as appears, Genesis 7. 2.
which yet I think the Priest will not deny to be Ceremonial and ended.

^e has indeed a notable knack of s^pposing (...) he knows would be difficult
to prove. For in his p. 22. he says, Though God have a right to the tenth part
of our Subst^^ce yet, etc. And page 24. We know from the Light of Nature, that
part of our Substance is due to God: and this he repeats frequently. But what
Nature is it he talks so much of, by the Light and Reason whereof he has learnt
to make Man's part nine times as big as GODS, and yet says, God is Eternally
Lo^d of the World? Surely it is a Corrupt and selfish Nature, whose counterfeit
Light gives him so false a sight of things.

He has showed, he says, That Tithes rely on an Internal Rectitude in the
thing it self, and an Eternal Reason of it.

How can that be? He plunges himself into these absurdities by not
distinguishing between Maintenance in general, and Tithes which are but a
particular mode or way of raising Maintenance, by Confounding which, he thus
confounds his own sense. If he were pleading for a Maintenance in general, his
argument there were good and pertinent: for there is no doubt, an Internal
Rectitude in the thing it self, that he that Labors should be rewarded for his
Labor, and an Eternal Reason of it from the equity of the thing. But to
suppose an Eternal Reason that the tenth part only and no other must be this
reward, is utterly repugnant to all Reason and equity, since possibly the fifth
part may be too small, or the fifteenth too great ^ compensation for the work.
In the time of the Law by which Tithes were commanded, though there was an
Internal Rectitude for a Maintenance, and an Eternal Reason of it; yet the
providing and raising that Maintenance by the way of Tithes, did not rely on an
Internal Rectitude, but on an EXTERNAL: no^ was there then an Eternal Reason
for raising the Maintenance by that particular way of Tithes, but a temporal,
suitable t^ the Polity of that State. The Ox that trod out the Corn was not to
be muzzled, but for the Labor and Service he did he was to be fed; and this
depended on an Internal Rectitude in the thing it self: but he that should
thence in^er, that the certain quantity of Meal which should be given to the
Ox, or the Specific kinds of Food he should eat, did rely also on an Internal
Rectitude in the things themselves, would hereby sufficiently convince the
World, that he himself had but too much need to have his own Understanding
rectified. From what has been said, the Reader I presume may collect, that my
Opponent has much mistaken the matter, in making Tithes, (which is not the
Substance, the Maintenance it self but a Circumstance of the quantity of
Maintenance) to rely on an Internal Rectitude in the thing it self, and an
Eternal Reason of it.

He adds, that he has showed Tithes were paid by those Patriarchs who lived
long before the Ceremonial Law, by Virtue of the Preceding Declarations of the
Divine Right unto them. Indeed the man is much to be blamed. He seems to have
abandoned all Regard to Truth and Modesty, and to be resolved to say anything
that may suit his purpose. Where has he ^hewed that the Patriarchs before the
Ceremonial Law did pay Tithes? Or how indeed is it possible he should show
this? when as before that Law, Tithes are but twice mentioned at all in holy
Writ, and in each place expressly said to be given, without any word of payment.
But that he should not only say they paid what the holy Text says plainly they
gave, but also affirm they paid it, by Virtue of the Preceding D^cla^ations of
the Divine Right unto them, whenas no such Preceding Declarations, or any
Declaration at all of the Divine Right, appears in the Divine Reco^d, but the
H. G. has been altogether silent therein, and not thought fit to leave any
monument or Footstep of a Divine Right to Tithes in those Times, is an arrogant
and presumptious piece of Confidence.

He confesses, page 50. That all things done by the Patriarchs were not eternal
Duties, instancing in Circumcision, which, he says, was not grounded on the
Law of nature, nor imposed for any eternal Reason or internal R^ctitude in the
things. But if Tithes, as Tithe, that is, as it is a certain and determinate
quantity, not the aliquot^, b^t the quota, not the Maintenance simply, but a
proportion of Maintenance, is not grounded on the Law of Nature (as Melancton
is before remembered to observe) nor was inj^yned for any eternal (but
temporary) Reason, or internal (but external) Rectitude in the thing (which
whether it was or no, let the judicious Reader, from what has been said judge)
then surely there is no more gr^und for Tithes to stand and remain upon now,
then for Circumcision. And that Tithes and Circumcision were a like Ceremonial
Epiphanius intim^tes, when lib. 1. ord. 8. he gives Tenths for one of his
Instances of Shadows contained in the Law, making them equal with Circumcision.
And O^c^lampadius on Ez^k. 44. ranks Sacrifices, first Fruits and Tithes
altogether, and calls them expressly Cerem^nial. He instances also in bloody
Sacrifices, which, he says, ibid. were purely Ceremonial, and cease when that
La^ ceas^th. And yet these very bl^^dy Sacrifices, which he acknowledges
ceremonial and ceast, were a great, if not the greatest part of the Maint^nance
of the Priest^ under the Law: For the Priests themselves had not the Tithes,
but the Title of the Tithes, that is the hundred part, which the Levit^s paid
them out of the Tithes which they re^eived. From which instance it is evident,
that although Maintenance it self be Moral, and grounded on the Law of Nature,
yet the ^ode or manner of that Maintenance may be Ceremonial, yea, purely
Ceremonial, as he acknowledges those bloody Sac^ifices to have been which are
ceast.

He says, ibid. he might add, that The Proph^ts (who are not wont to reprove
the People for ^mission of things purely Ceremonial) declaim against the Jews
for ^etaining their Tithes, for which he cites M^l. 3. 10. But he might see (if
he pleased) in the eighth Verse where the Reproof is, that the Prophet joining
Tithes and Offerings together, reproves the Jews alike for the omission of
each, whence I may better argue, that Tithes are of the same nature with those
Jewish Offerings, which I think the Priest will not deny were ceremonial and
ceast. And does not the same Prophet, Chap. 1. ver. 7, 8. reprove the Jewish
Priests for offering polluted (i. e. common) Bread, and for offering the Blind,
the Lam^ and the Sick for Sacrifices? What else were these things ^ut
Ceremonial, purely Ceremonial? And yet this Priest, that he might still keep
Tithes on foot, says, The Prophets were not wont to reprove the People for
omission of things purely Ceremonial.

He adds, ibib. that Nehemiah calls his care in this (viz. Tithes) a good deed,
desiring God to rememb^r him for it, Nehem. 13. 14. It was no doubt a good deed
in Nchemia^h to take ca^^ that Tithes should be duly paid according to the Law
which required them, which in his time was in full force. But what is this to
the purpose: Does this argue that Tithes were not Ceremonial, or that it is a
good Deed to pay them now, when the Law that required them has been so long
abolished? Was nothing Ceremonial that Nchemiah took care of? No man with a
name I think will affirm it.

But Tithes, he says, page 51. in all the new. Testament are not reckoned ^p
among things purely Ceremonial, or declared to be repealed, as Circumcision,
Sacrifices, Washing, Jewish difference of Meats, and Jewish Feasts, etc. are.
Th^se (he says) are repealed by ^am^, but so are not Tithes, as being a thing
that never were purely Ceremonial, page 51.

There was no need that Tithes should be repealed by Name. It was sufficient
that the Law by which alone they were due, was repealed; which that it was, the
Autho^ to the Hebrews plainly shows, Chap. 7. For having said, Ver. 5. That
they that are of the Sons of Levi, who receive the Office of the Priesthood,
have a Commandment to take Tithes of the People according to the Law; and
having next showed that that Priesthood, which had a Law to take Tithes by,
was at an end, he t^ence concludes plainly and positively, verse. 12. that The
Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law.
Here now is a plain repeal of that Law by which Tithes were given, as well as
of that Priesthood to which they were given. And Tithes standing by this Law,
and the reason of them depending o^ the I^wish Polity; the repeal of this Law
took away the right of Tithes, as the removing that Polity did the Reason of
them.

That Tithes are indeed Ceremonial, and were so reputed by men of Note in
several Ages, cannot reasonably be doubted by any who are acquainted with
Books. Take a few of many Evidences that might be brought to prove it.

Epiphaniu^ ranks Circumcision, Tithes and Offerings at Jerusalem altogether,
making the payment of Tithes as much a part of the Ceremonial Law, as the other
two. His words (speaking of some who kept the Feast of Easter on the fourteenth
Moon, according to the Jewish Law for the Passover, fearing lest otherwise they
might incur the Curse of that Law) are these. If they avoid one Curse, they
fall under another. For such shall be also found accursed a^ are not
Circumcised, such accursed as do not pay Tithes, and they also are accursed
that do not Offer at Jerusalem. H^res. 50. (see Selden's History of Tithes,
Review, c. 4. page 461.) As if he had said, If they have regard to the
Ceremonial Law, then have they as much reason to be Circumcised, to pay Tithes,
and to offer at Jerusalem, as to observe Easter, according to that Law. But if
they are not bound to Circumcision, Tything and Offering at Jerusalem, then
neither are they bound to keep that Feast on the fourteenth Moon, since all
these things are alike Ceremonial. This I take to be the fai^ sense of
Epiphanius his Argument; which plainly shows, both that Tithes were not paid in
his time (which was about the Year 380.) and also that he esteemed Tithes to be
of the same Nature with Circumcision and Jewish Offerings, to have had their
dependence on the same Law, and to have stood and fallen together: for he
compares Tithes to Circumcision and Jewish Offerings, which are undoubtedly
abrogated. And thus Seldom understood him.

Oecolampadius on Ezekiel. 44. calls Tithes expressly Ceremonial. His words are,
Priests, that is Christians, should not be greedy of filthy Lucre, neither
shall they have their lot upon this Earth, but a free Inheritance in Heaven,
and the Lord himself will be their reward and inheritance; what shall be
wanting to them whose own God is, the very fountain of good things So they
shall be free in their minds; nevertheless to them that serve at the Altar, it
is given to live of the Altar, and they may eat of the Sacrifices, receive
first Fruits, receive Tithes. These things are Ceremonial; but. Paul shows
thereby that it is lawful to receive Food and Raiment, for God adds a
Blessing to his Ministers that do well. They did receive therefore of the
Sacrifices, i. e. The Apostles have spiritu^l joy of these who Sacrifice
themselves to God, and the growth of the Church is their Glory; their first
Born and other things are blessed. Thus he.

Walter Brute (who, in the Reign of K. Richard the second, about the Year 1400.
was Persecuted for his Testimony against Popery) plainly calls the payment of
Tithes a Ceremony. His words (speaking of the ceasing of Shadows and
Ceremonies, and of the ending of the Aaronical Priest^hood) are these,
Whereupon I marvel that your learned men do say, that Christian Folk are bound
to this small Ceremony of the payment of Tithes, and care nothing at all for
other as well the great as the small Ceremonies of the Law. And a little after
(having showed that Circumcision was one of the greater Ceremonies of the Law,
and yet that Paul told the Galatians, Whosoever was Circumcised was bound to
keep the whole Law) he says, In like manner we may reason, If we be bound to
Tything, we are Debter^, and bound to keep all the whole Law. For to say that
men are bound to one Ceremony of the Law, and not to others, is no reasonable
thing. Either therefore we are bound to them all, or to none. Also, that by the
same old Law, men are not bound to pay Tithes, it may be showed by many
Reasons, which we need not any more to multiply and increase, because the
things that be said are sufficient. For he had said a pretty deal before upon
this Subject, showing the end both of that Priesthood to whom, and of that
service for which Tithes were appointed. Forasmuch (says he) as the labor of
those Sacrifices did cease at the coming of Christ, how should those things be
demanded, which were ordained for that labor? And seeing (adds he) that the
first Fruits were not demanded of Christians, which first Fruits were then (in
the time of the Law) rather and sooner demanded then the Tithes: why must the
Tithes be demanded, except it be therefore peradventure, because that the
Tithes be more worth in value then the first Fruits. In the end he concludes,
Wherefore seeing that neither Christ, nor any of the Apostles, commanded to pay
Tithes; it is manifest and plain, neither by the Law of Moses, nor by Christ's
Law, Christian People are bound to pay Tithes: but by the Tradition of Men,
they are bound, Martyrol. vol. 1. page 446, 447.

The Bohemians also not long after, in their 15th Article against the Popish
Clergy, say thu^, They receive Tithes of men, and will of right have them, and
preach and say that men are bound to pay them Tithes, and therein they say
falsely. For they cannot prove by the New Testament, that our Lord Jesus Christ
commanded it, and his Disciples warned no man to do so, neither did themselves
receive them. But although in the Old Testament it were commanded to give
Tithes, yet it cannot thereby be proved that Christian men are bound thereto.
For this precept of the old Law had an end in the first Year of our Lord Jesus
Christ, like as the Precept of Circumcision. Wherefore well-beloved, consider,
and see how your Bishops seduce you, and shut your Eyes with things that have
no proof Christ says in the eleaventh of Luke, Give Alms of those things that
remain, but he said not, Give the Tenth of the Goods which ye possess, but give
Alms, etc.

William Fulk, in his Annotations on the Rhemists Translation of the Bible, in
Answer to those Jesuits, who, with this Priest, would needs have Tithes to be
due by the Moral Law, says thus (. 4. on Heb. 7.) The payment of Tithes, as it
was a Ceremonial duty, is abrogated with other Ceremonies. But as it is a
necessary Maintenance of them that serve in the Church it MAY be retained, or
ANY OTHER stipend appointed, that may be sufficient for their Maintenance, be
it MORE or LESS then the tenth part. But that there is any Sacrificing
Priesthood, to whom it is due in the New Testament, the old payment of Tithes
does not prove: Neither did Christ himself, our high Priest, ever make claim
unto them: nor his Apostles, the Ministers of the Church, but only to a
sufficient living by the Gospel, to be allowed of their temporal Goods, to whom
they ministered spiritual Goods, 1 Cor. 9. 14. Gal. 6. 6. Thus he (a man of no
small note in the English Church in Q. Elizabeth's time) by which it is evident
that he accounted Tithes a part of the Ceremonial Law, abrogated by Christ. And
although he thought they might be retained as a necessary Maintenance of them
that serve in the Church, yet he lays no more or greater stress on Tithes,
then on any other sufficient stipend, whether it were more or less then the
tenth part, which is directly contrary to this Priests Assertion, of Tithes
being due by the eternal moral Law, which the Jesuits maintained and Fulk
denied.

Of the same judgment with Fulk was Andrew Willet (a man of great account in
the English Church in K. James his time) He, in his Synopsis Papismi, fifth
general Controversy, page 313. says in the name of the English Church, We
also acknowledge (as Bellarmine seems to grant, Chap. 25.) that to pay
precisely the tenth, is not now commanded by the Law of God* as though that
order could not be changed by any human Law, as the Canonists hold, but men
necessarily were bound to pay Tithes. And a little after, Though (says he) the
Law of Tenths be not now necessary, as it was Ceremonious: but it is lawful
either to keep that, or ANY OTHER Constitution for the sufficient Maintenance
of the Church, whether it be MORE or LESS then the tenth part: yet we doubt not
to say, that this provision for the Church-Maintenance by paying of Tithes, is
the most safe, ibid. Here he plainly calls the Law of Tithes Ceremonial,
acknowledging that men are not necessarily bound by the Law of God to pay
Tithes now: and although he accounts the paying of Tithes, grounded upon human
Laws, the safest provision for the Church-maintenance; yet he holds it equally
lawful (with respect to the Law of God) to appoint any other sufficient
Maintenance, although it be not precisely the tenth, but either more or less
then the tenth part. Which is utterly destructive of the morality of Tithes.
And indeed, he makes Ministers Maintenance in general to be grounded in Equity
upon the Moral Law: but Tithes to depend upon positive Laws, and he shows he
understood the Moguntine Synod so. But for the Levitical Law of Tything, he
calls it plainly a politic Constitution of that Country. His own words are,
The Levitical Priesthood being one whole Tribe, it was thought reasonable that
the tenth part of their Brethrens Goods should be allotted to them; which being
a judicial and politic Constitution of that Country, does neither necessarily
bind Christians now, neither is forbidden, but left in that respect
indifferent. And a little after, Although it be a wise and politic
Constitution, that the People should pay their Tithes, and MAY conveniently be
retained, yet it is not now of necessity imposed upon Christians, as though no
other provision for the Church could serve but that, page 314.

Much more might be alleged out of these men's Writings, to this purpose: but
this in this place may suffice to show, that the judgment of the Church of
England in those times, was quite another thing in this case, then it is now
represented by this Priest to be. But leaving these Testimonies to the Reader's
consideration, return we to the Author of the Right of Tithes.

. 9. He comes now to conclude his second Period, in the close of which he again
repeats his so often reiterated Suppositions. I conclude, says he, page 51. that
part of our Substance being due to God by the Natural and Divine Law. (For he
will yet allow God to have right but to a part: and it were worth inquiry how
God who is Eternally Lord of the World, page 49. came to be disseized of his
right to the whole, and who it was that so compassionate to make him a Title to
some part again) And the Inspired Patriarchs (says he) being taught by
Revelation. (Of which Revelation (say I) there is no Revelation, but a bold
presumption of his own) That the tenth (says he) was his part, and the Priests
of God were his Receivers (which if it were true (say I) had been Title
sufficient for the Levitical Priests, without a particular Law on purpose to
make them due) God himself (adds he) having approved also this payment (which
(say I) was not a payment, but a free and voluntary Gift) by a Renewed claim
(says he) (though never claimed before, say I) and an express assignation
(says he) of his Right under the Levitical Law to the Priests for the time
being (but not to any other Priests (say I) without a new assignation) and the
same God (says he) having the same Right still to his part (and the same Lord
of all, say I, having the same Right still to all) and the same occasion (says
he) to use it for the Maintenance of his Ministers at this day (not so, say I,
for he neither has such a Tribe to maintain, nor such Service to employ them
in at this day as then.) Hence (says he) I suppose it will follow, That
(unless an express repeal can be showed) the Gospel Ministers in Gods Name, may
justly claim Tithes as due to them still, and that by a Divine Right too.

What a Series of premises has he drawn his Discourse through, to Issue it at
last in a Suppositive Conclusion! But it is the less to be wondered at, since
his premises are mostly Suppositive also, leaning on conjecture and relying at
best but on probability. But in this last Clause I must needs say he has
expressed himself with more Caution and less Confidence then usually: for he
speaks with a Reserve [unless an express repeal can be shewed] to which I
return him a twofold Answer. 1. That an express repeal is not of absolute
necessity, and that for two reasons, 1. Because, the Right which he pretends,
and insists so much on, antecedent to the Levitical Law, is not grounded upon
an express Command; and what is not expressly commanded, needs not be expressly
repealed. And therefore he might very well allow me the same Liberty (if I
either needed or listed to use it) of arguing a Repeal form Suppostitions,
Guesses, Conjectures and Maybe's, which himself uses to prove a Right. And not
only so, but I might also urge Argumentum ad hominem, and put him shrewdly to
it, by asking him, Where he reads that Tithes are not repealed; and telling him
(as he does me, page 31.) That he cannot prove Tithes are not repealed, and I
can make it appear very probable they are. But having Noted this as a weakness
in him, I will not Answer him after this manner, because I would not be like
unto him. 2. Because the express Assignation of the Right of Tithes under the
Levitical Law, was (as himself words it, page 51.) to the Priests for the time
being; and common Reason and experience tell us that when a Deed or Assig^ment
is made to a man for his life, there is no need, upon the Death of the Assign,
of a new deed to declare the old one void, the Death of him sufficiently
declaring that, to the Term of whose Life the Assignment was at first
restrained. Now the Assignation of Tithes to the Priests under the Levitical
Law, was for and during the life of that Priesthood (if I may so express it)
and had that Assignment been made void while that Priesthood lived, there had
then indeed been need of an express Repeal. But seeing it was not made void in
the life tim^ of that Priesthood, but continued in force as long as that
Priesthood lived, the Death or Dissolution of that Priesthood did vocate the
Assignation in course. And there is no more Reason to expect an express Repeal
of it, then there would be, if the Parliament should make a Law to continue for
three years, to expect that, at the three years end, they should make another
Law on purpose to declare the first void.

Thus it appears that an express Repeal of Tithes by name was not of absolute
necessity, in relation to either Claim. Not in relation to the Ant^-Levitical
Claim, that Claim it self not being grounded upon any express Command: nor with
respect to the Assignation he speaks of under the Levitical Law, that
Assignation being at first limited to a certain time, to the P^iests for the
time being, as himself expresses it, page 51. Yet Secondly, to put it out of
all doubt that Tithes are indeed ended with that legal Priesthood, the holy
Apostle, by the Divine Spirit, has most plainly and expressly affirmed, That
the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the
Law, Heb. 7. 12. Here is an express Repeal of the Law, by which the Assignation
of Tithes to that Priesthood was made.

Thus have I brought him to the end of his second Period, and in the way have
made it evident that Tithes were not founded on the Law of Nature, but on the
Levit^cal, Ceremonial Law; that they had not an inherent equity in them, nor
did rely on an internal Rectitude, or eternal Reason, but on an external
Rectitude and temporal Reason, suitable to the Polity of that State. That as
the Sacrifices and other Ceremonies of the Law, were not the Worship of God it
self, which was founded upon the Law of Nature; but ^odes and Circumstances of
performing that Worship, proper to that Dispensation, which fell with that
Polity, and were abrogated by Christ: So Tithes were not the Maintenance it
self, which was founded upon the Law of Nature; but a Circumstance of the
quantity or proportion of maintenance, a Mode, Manner, Means, or Way, by which
the Maintenance was therein provided and raised, which being proper to that
dispensation, fell together with the other Ceremonies of that Polity, and were
abrogated with them by Christ; That Tithes are not Essential to Maintenance,
but that Maintenance has been and is without them; that Christ did not make
the Levitical Law a Pattern for himself to imitate in providing for Gospel
Ministers; that the Righteousness of the Disciples exceeding that of the
Scribes and Pharis^es, had not relation to tything, but to the weightier
matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith; that Tithes being assigned by
the Levitical Law, to the Priests for the time being (ie. for the time of that
Priesthood's continuance only) the dissolution of that Priesthood has vocated
the Assignments, and put an and to Tythe^.

Thus far then my way is cleared, and nothing lest unremov'd, on which, with
any color of Reason, a Claim to Tithes may be Grounded.

CHAP III.
. 1. I Now go on to his third and last Period, the Times of the Gospel. He
begins it with a Concession of mine, That a Maintenance in general to the
Ministers of the Gospel is just, reasonable, and established by a Divine
Authority.

With this grant he is greatly pleased, and hopes from hence to scre^ a Right
to Tithes; but he is as greatly mistaken also, for Tithes I am sure can never
be squc^s'd out of that Concession. He attempts it thus, Let him (says he,
page 52.) but stand to this grant, and then it will follow, That the Ministers
of the Gospel may claim a Maintenance in general, jure divino, for that
Maintenance which is established by Divine Authority is due jure divino.

This might very well have been spared, being no more then is contained in the
Grant it self: I expect his Inference, which such an one as it is, here
follows, And why then (says he) should not that Maintenance still be so due,
which God directed before the Law, approved under the Law, and never repea^ed
after the Law? page 52.

Pro thesaur^ carbones! I expected he would have drawn up some notable
Conclusion from my Concession; but instead thereof lo a Petition! Petitio
Principij, a begging of the Question, namely, that Tithes were directed by God
before the Law, and never repealed after the Law (for their being approved
under the Law, conduces nothing to their continuance under the Gospel) He would
very fain all along have it granted, that Tithes were grounded on the Law of
Nature, that the tenth part was always Gods particular part, as he is
eternally Lord of the World, and that the Patriarchs before the Law were by
special ^^velation commanded to pay Tithes, but this cannot be granted. He
knows the Proverb, Win it and wear it. If he can prove it, let him; if not, he
must be content to forego it. And for the repeal of Tithes after the Law, it is
before Demonstratively Argued both from the Dissolution of the Priesthood to
which the expiration of the Term for which, and the express repeal of the Law
by which they were granted.

He adds, ibid. If the Divine Authority has established a Maintenance, that
supposes it was such a Maintenance as was due before, according to T. E. page
318.

I deny that the establishing a Maintenance does suppose there was a
Maintenance due before, but it does not infer a parity of Maintenance. It does
not follow, that because there was a Maintenance due before, therefore the
Maintenance thus established must needs be the same, or such a Maintenance as
was before due. Neither is this according to me, as he says, but according to
himself, and his perversion of my words, page 318. Where noting my opponent of
instability in his Position, I observe that he uses the words [Create and
Establish] promiscuously, as if they were synonimous. And to show their
different acceptions, I tell him, That if he will say, Temporal Authority has
created ('it is his own words) a Right to Tithes, he thereby cuts off all
pretentions to any Right antecedent to that Creation. If he will say, that
temporal Authority has only established a temporal Right to Tithes, that
supposes a temporal Right to them before.

Observe, I did not say, that supposes such a temporal Right to them as was
before; but that supposes a temporal Right to them before. So here when I say,
Divine Authority has established a maintenance in general, etc. the word
[ESTABLISH] does not suppose it to be such a Maintenance as was due before, but
supposes only that there was a Maintenance in general due before, which is far
enough from restrayining it to a particular kind of Maintenance. Thus he at
once abuses me and his Reader, and makes good the saying, Posito uno Errore,
sequuntur Mill. For upon this false and weak Supposition that the establishing
of a Maintenance supposes it to be such a Maintenance as was due before, he
bestirs himself to prove that Tithes were due before. In order whereunto, after
his wonted manner, supplying his Defects with Confidence, he peremptorily
affirms, page 53. that the Maintnance paid to Gods Ministers before the Law and
under it, was Tithes. The payment of Tithes under the Law is not questionable,
as well as not imitable. But for the time before the Law, I desire him to be
less peremptory, and more Demonstrative. If he please, I would gladly know who
those Ministers were to whom Tithes as a Maintenance were paid before the Law;
seeing the Scripture remembers Mel^hizedec only to have received Tithes, and
that but once, nor then as a PAYMENT, but a GIFT. And when he is upon this
Subject, he may seasonably explain his next Sentence also, which is this, The
Priesthood of Melchizedec, and of Levi, both were so maintained, namely, by
Tithes. The instance of Levi is clear, but not to this purpose. But that the
Priesthood of Melchi^edec was maintained by Tithes will be hard I think for
him to prove. Melchizedec himself, as I noted before, never received Tithes but
once, that we read of, and then he was at a considerable charge too (for it
cannot be thought so great a Troop as Abraham led with him, three hundred and
eighteen of his own Domestics, besides his Confederates Aner, Escol and Mamre,
could be refresht with Bread and Wine, for a small matter) which expense
deducted out of the Tithe he received, unlikely it is the remainder should be
enough to maintain him all the time of his Priesthood, if he, who was a King,
and by the Apostles comparison, Heb. 7. greater then Abraham had needed such a
Maintenance. And for Jacob, though it is not to be doubted but he performed his
Vow, yet after what manner he performed it, is not agreed on; some thinking he
paid his Tithes in kind to they know not whom (of which number this Priest is
one, page 38.) Others with greater probability and better Authority, that he
offered them by way of Sacrifice immediately to God. However it was,
Melchizedec could not have them, if we understand him to be Sem, since most
agree that S^m was buried long before. So that the holy Text affords no
countenance at all to this over-bold Assertion, that Melchizedec's Priesthood
was maintained by Tithes.

. 2. He charges me page 53. with striving to pervert two Texts (1 Cor. 9. and
Gal. 6. 6.) by two limitations. First, in saying, The Apostle's intent in those
Scriptures is not so much to set forth what the Maintenance is, as who they are
from whom it is to be received, namely such as receive their Ministry, such as
believe them to be true Ministers, such as are taught by them, etc. This, he
saves, is a notorious falsehood, for in 1 Cor. 9. St. Paul is all along speaking
of the Ministers Right to be maintained.

This is far enough from proving my words a notorious falsehood, namely, that
his intent is not so much to set forth what the Maintenance is, as who they are
from whom it is to be received: for his speaking of the Ministers Right to be
maintained, is not a setting forth what the maintenance is. But he would
persuade his Reader that the Apostles drift was chiefly to set forth what the
Maintenance is: for says he, He shows what Maintenance was due to the Jewish
^inisters, affirming that Christ had ordained [even so] that we should l^^e of
the Gospel, that is, the Rights of God under the Gospel, and the
acknowledgments made to him for the Mercy therein revealed. The things of the
Christian Temple and Altar were to be our Maintenance. And is not this to say
what the Maintenance is? not a word in all this, who should pay it.

This yet even as he has worded it, though he has added his own divination to
the Text, does not so much express what the Maintenance is, as from whom to be
received. He says, The Apostle shows what Maintenance was due to the Jewish
Ministers, affirming, that Christ had ordained [even so] that we should live of
the Gospel.

What [Even so] as the Jewish Priests lived under the Law! What! just the very
same Maintenance as they had in every respect! Not so, I trow, then this does
not express what the Maintenance is, although it does that there is a
Maintenance. But the Priest explains his [even so] that is, says he, the
Rights of God under the Gospel; What are they? Has not God a Right to ALL under
the Gospel, as well as he had under the Law and before it? How then does this
express what the Maintenance is? unless he means that he would have all?
Besides, he adds another branch of this Maintenance, viz. Acknowledgments made
to God for the mercy revealed in the Gospel, and these he seems to make
distinct from the Rights of God: for First, he reckons the Rights of God, and
then these acknowledgments made to him. But what are these? are they not
voluntary, arbitrary, uncertain? And is this to set forth a certain
Maintenance? How does this man darken Counsel by words without Understanding?
Job 38. 2.

But while he charges me with notorious falsehood in saying, the Apostles intent
in this place is not so much to set forth what the Maintenance is, as who they
are from whom it is to be received, which is indeed a plain Truth; is not he
himself guilty of the notorious falsehood he labors so much to fasten on me? in
saying here, Not a word in all this who should pay it; when as from the very
entrance of his Discourse upon this Subject, the Apostle labors to convince
the believing Corinthians, that it was from THEM he might r^ceive Maintenance.
And he grounded his Argument on this especially, that THEY had been taught by
him, and had received his Ministry. Are not YOU my Work in the Lord? says he,
Verse. 1. If I be not an Apostle unto others, yet doubtless I am to YOU: for the
Seal of my Apostleship are YE in the Lord, Verse. 2. Then besides the instances
he uses of a Soldier, a Planter, a Shepherd, he Argues plainly from THEIR
having received first of him, Verse. 11. If we have sown unto YOU Spiritual
things, is it a great thing if we shall rea^ YOUR Carnal things and Verse. 12.
If others he partakers of this Power over YOU, are not we rather? From all
which it is most apparent that he makes his labor amongst THEM and THEIR
receiving his Ministry, the Ground and Reason of his Demand. Is not his
Expostulation with THEM particularly, who had received the Gospe^ through his
Ministry? says he not expressly, is it a great thing if we shall reap YOUR
Carnal^? YOURS, who are my work in the Lord; YOURS, who are the Seal of my
Apostleship in the Lord; YOURS, unto whom I have already sowed Spiritual
things; And is there not a word in all this who should pay, or who they are
from whom the Maintenance should be received. Was this man well advised to Tax
me with a notorious falsehood, for but saying, The intent of the Apostle is not
so much to set forth what the Maintenance is, as who they are from whom it is
to be received? (by which words [not so much] it appears I did not wholly
exclude the Maintenance, but showed that the Maintenance was not in this place
so particularly and plainly described as the Maintainers) and yet himself not
blush to say, The^e is not a word in all this (...) should pay it: Let him show
me from this text if he can, as plainly and particularly what the Maintenance
is, as I have done him, who they are from whom it is to be received. Then in
the instances of the O^ the Soldier, the Shepherd, and Vinedresser, he abuses
me not a little. Can these, says he, (as St. Paul brings them in) belong to
those who ^ay the Maintenance? Does the Ox pay his Master Maintenance? Or the
Soldier give his Prince a St^pend?

Can he (say I) believe that this was my meaning? Or do my words admit such a
construction? Does not my application of each of those instances convict him
evidently of dishonest dealing? Do I not say expressly, the Ox was to be fed by
him whose Corn he trod out, page 284. Is this to make the Ox pay his Master
Maintenance? Do I not make the Soldier maintainable by him for whose defense
he fights? page 285. Is this to make the Soldier give his Prince a Stipend?
Say I not most plainly, He that plants a Vineyard may eat of the Fruit, but it
must be the Fruit of the Vineyard which he has planted; And that he that feeds
a Flock may eat of the Milk, but it must be the Milk of the Flock which he
feeds? ibid. And does not the Apostle say the same? Is not this the free and
unconstrained sense of the place? With what Face then then can this Man calm an
Abuser of Scripture, and affirm that all the Instances do show the contrary to
what I would squeez out of them? Have men that have no Names, no Foreheads
neither! The Ox (he says) must not be starved, who is willing to work, though
he be not actually employed by him that feeds him, page 55.

Who said he must? Was it likely I would have the Ox starved, when I said
expressly, The Ox was to be fed? Is feeding the way to starve him? Does not this
unjust man know fulwell, that the Question was not whether the Ox should be fed
or no; but who in equity are bound to feed him, they by whom he is employed,
they for whom he labors, they whose Corn ^e treads out; or they who do not
employ him at all, they for whom he never labors, they whose C^rn he does not
^read out, nor can, and whose business or service he is not at all fit for?
This was the plain case, as my words manifest, The Ox (said I, page 284.) that
trod out the Corn (in the time of ^he Law) was not to be mu^zled, but was to be
fed by him whose Corn he trod out: but it was not agreeable to the equity of
that Law, that while the Ox trod out Corn for one man, another should be bound
to keep him, that had been unreasonable. Now how unrighteous is this man, from
hence to insinuate that I would have the Ox starved? and how impertinent, to
argue that the Ox must not be starved, though he be not actually employed by
him that feeds him? thereby fallaciously intimating* that the controversy
rested upon that point, whether the Ox should be fed, though by him for whom he
labored, any longer then he was in actual employment, which was no part at all
of the Controversy; but whether while he was employed in one man's service,
while he was treading out Corn for one man, another, for whom he did no
service, should be bound to keep him. This I said was unreasonable, and not
agreeable to equity. The same I now again affirm, and dare expose it to the
strongest assault my Opponent is able to make against it. Now for the latter
place, Gal. 6. The Priest says, S. Paul tells them, they must give the
Ministers a part of all their good things; and is not that (says he) a
declaring what the Maintenance is? By this he would again insinuate that I had
altogether denied there was any kind of character or description at all of the
Maintenance in these Texts, which is very unworthily done of him: for he knows
fulwell my words are not positive, but comparative. I do not say the Apostle
does not at all set forth what the Maintenance is, but that the intent of the
Apostle in those Scriptures, is not so much to set forth what the Maintenance
is, as who they are from whom it is to be received. And that the Maintenance it
self is not so much set forth, not so plainly, fully, particularly and
positively declared and described in these Texts, as the maintainers, the
Persons from whom it is to be received, I have already showed on the former
Scripture, and shall do now on this also. Let him (says the Apostle) that is
taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches, in all good things.
Here now is most plainly and fully declared who it is that is thus to
communicate, who it is from whom the Maintenance is to be received, namely, he
that is taught in the word: but what the Maintenance is to be is not so
plainly, s^ fully, so particularly set forth; but in a general term, In all
good things. No quantity expressed, whether a tenth, a fifth, a fifteenth, or a
twentieth part, but lest to the free will of the giver, which renders the
proportion uncertain. In which respect, the Maintenance here is not so plainly,
particularly and certainly expressed, as it is from whom it should come, which is
positively and certainly bounded and limited to him that is taught in the word.

. 3. He confesses, page 55. (for he cannot avoid it) that the Apostle says
indeed, He that is taught in the word must give this; but that (says he) is to
distinguish Christians from Heathens, of which the World was then full. The
Heathen (he acknowledges) was not bound to maintain the Gospel Ministers, but
the Catehumen, the Christian who was or might be taught, if his own Laziness,
or Pride, or Obstinacy hindered not.

Is this according to the Text? Does the Apostle say, Let him that is, or might
be taught, not if his own Laziness, or Pride, or Obstinacy hindered,
c^mmunicate, etc? He who was so careful to Preach the Gospel of Christ without
charge, 1 Cor. 9. 18. He that would not reap Carnals, but where he had before
sown Spirituals, nor there neither always; He who was so wary whom he received
of, that he would not use the just power he had of receiving Maintenance from
them who were his own work in the Lord, and the very seal of his Apostleship;
can it be thought that he would be maintained by the Lazy, the Proud, the
Obstinate! May it be supposed that he, who says, Let them that are taught in
the word communicate, etc. would have them also communicate, who are not
taught, but are hindered from being taught by their own Laziness, or Pride, or
Obstinacy! If all such should be drawn in to maintain the Gospel Ministers, who
then should be left out! Upon what reason then were the Heathens exempted?
might not they have been taught, if their own Laziness, Pride, or Obstinacy had
not hindered? So that, although the Priest says, The Heathen was not bound to
maintain the Gospel Ministers; yet according as he has glost the Text, and by
the same reason upon which he would bring in such as might be taught, but are
not; the very Heathen is liable to be brought in also to this Communication for
the Ministers Maintenance, because, though he is not, he might be taught if his
own Laziness, Pride or Obstinacy did not hinder. This is indeed a notable way
to advance the Priests Maintenance: but neither is this way agreeable to
natural Reason or Gospel Truth, nor are they Ministers of the Gospel, who can
receive, much less exact a Maintenance after this manner.

He says, ibid. That still this (speaking of Gal. 6. 6.) proves not T. E.'s
foolish inference, That none must contribute to a Ministers Maintenance, but
those that are taught by him actually. What quirk he couches under the word
[actually] I know not. Sure I am, he found it not in any inference of mine.
However, if he intend no more by being actually taught then the Apostle
expresses, [Let him that is taught, etc.] I shall not think much of his calling
me Fool, having so good and so wise a Man as the Apostle Paul to bear me
company in this Reproach. And indeed, I had rather be thought a Fool, for
sticking to the Apostle's sense, then found a Knave by perverting ^is sense, to
uphold a selfish interest. But if the Priest had been desirous of an Inference
of mine to consute, he needed not have formed an Inference for me: for in page
286. of my Book, he might have found a pai^ together, very pertinent to this
purpose, as having respect not to this Text only, but that of 1 Cor. 9. also,
in these words, All therefore that can be inferred from these Instances will
amount to no more then this, First, That a Gospel Minister may expect and
receive a Gospel Maintenance from such as receive his Ministry. 2dly. That a
Gospel Minister oug^t not to expect any Maintenance from those that do not
receive his Ministry. This is plain and full, and as I take it, close to the
Point; and it may be he takes it so too, which made him not willing to
undertake it, but fairly pass it by.

He adds, ibid. That these places say nothing against a Gospel-Minister's
receiving Maintenance from all professed Christians.

This is somewhat like his saying before that I could not make it appear
Abraham did not pay Tithes. If from these places he would derive his Claim, it
will not be enough, that they speak not against what he claims, but it is
requisite they should speak for it, and that plainly too. But these places are
so far from speaking for such a Latitude as he aim at, of scraping Maintenance
from all, taught or untaught, that ^o but bear the Name of Christians, that
they speak against it. The instances of the Ox, the Soldier, the ^lanter, the
Shepherd, do sufficiently show, that as Maintenance is due to those that
labor, fight, take pains and care for others, so its due from them for whose
sak^s the labor, hazard, pains and care is undergone and to whose benefit it
redounds. And in the two last instan^es of the Planter and Shepherd (which may
explain the other two, being of like application) the Apostle sends the Planter
for Fruit directly to the Vineyard of his own planting; and the Shepherd for
Milk, to the Flock of his own feeding. The Shepherd was not to go to another
Flock, and say, These are Sheep too, and therefore I Will Milk them, I Will Fleece
them: but he was to consider, whether he had fed them, and if he had not fed
them, he had no reason to expect Milk from them. For if Paul had not sowed unto
the Corinthians spiritual things, it had then been a great matter for him to
have reaped their carnal things. But he grounds the reasonableness and equity
of his Right to their carnal things, upon the labor he had bestowed on them,
and benefit they had received by him in spiritual things. And in his other
Epistle to the Galatians, he plainly shows that as he that teaches was to be
communicated to, so the Communication was to be from him that was taught. And
as this was the Doctrine, such also was the Practice of the Apostle. He was not
forward to pick up a Maintenance from every one that professed Christianity, as
appears in the case of Lydia, who was fain to use more for^ible Arguments, then
her bare profession of Christianity, but to get him to her House, beseeching
him, and those that were with him, if they judged her faithful to the Lord, to
come into her House, and abide there, Acts 16. 15. Neither were the Disciples,
when they were sent forth to Preach permitted by their Master to receive so
much a^ Food from any but those that received their Message, Luke 10. 8, 10,
11. So that all along the New Testament, wheresoever there is mention of
Ministers Maintenance, it is with relation to them that own the Ministry.

But this the Priest does by no means like, well knowing the loss that he and
his Brethren would sustain, if none should be bound to maintain them, but such
as own their Ministry; and therefore he uses all his, endeavor to avoid the
force of this Argument. He would put it by, first, by urging, page 56. that
according to the Quakers Principles, the Christians of Old were all immediately
taught by inward Revelation; And if so (says he) what need any Gospel Ministry
at all? What need of outward Means? What need had they ^o have any Teachers of
the Word? Or with what equity could this Teacher require Maintenance of them,
that had no occasion for his teaching at all?

If the Christians of Old were all immediately taugh^ by inward Revelation, yet
it does not thereon follow, that there was no need of any Gospel Ministry at
all, as he supposes. For if the Christians of old were all immediately taught
by inward Revelation; yet a time there was when they were not so taught, but
were unconverted to the Faith of Christ. The Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, Chap. 5. Verse. 8. tells them, Ye are now Light in the Lord. But
withal he adds, Ye were sometime Darkness. Now how came these Ephesians to be
changed from Darkness to Light? Was it not by the means of a Gospel Ministry?
Does not the same Apostle speaking of the Ministry committed to him, Acts 26.
16, 17, 18. say expressly that he was made a Minister, to open the Eyes of the
Gentiles, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan
unto God? Thus the Ephesians, who were sometimes Darkness, came to be Light in
the Lord, having their Eyes opened, and being by this Ministry turned from the
Darkness to the Lig^t. Nor was it thu^ with the Ephesians only, but with both
Jews and Gentiles in general^ The work of the Gospel Ministry was to turn both
Ie^s and Gentiles from the Darkness and Unbelief of Judaism and Gentilism to
the Light and Faith of Christ Jesus. Now if after they were so turned from the
Darkness to the Light, and from the Unbelief to the Faith, they were
immediately taught by inward Revelation; yet it cannot possibly be supposed
they were so taught before they were so turned, while they were in the
Darknes^, and in the Unbelief. So that there was need of that Ministry to turn
them from Darkness to the Light, and from Unbelief to the Faith, in order to
bring them to that inward Revelation by which they might be taught. Hence it
appears, that if what he asserts to be according to the Quakers Principles
should be granted, viz. That the Christians of old were all immediately taught
by inward Revelation, yet his inference from thence of no need of a Gospel
Ministry at all, is fals^, since there was need of a Gospel Ministry to bring
them to that State wherein they might be so taught. And though this work of
gathering People out of the Jewish and Heathenish States to the Christian
Faith, of turning them from the Darkness (in which they could not see) to the
Light of the Gospel (by which they might see the Divine Mysterie^ of the
heavenly Kingdom) was the first and chief work of the Ministry; yet was it not
the only end or service to which that Ministry was appointed, and for which it
was endued with Power from on High. For when Christ ascended up on High, and
led Captivity Captive, he gave Gifts unto men, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ,
Ephesians. 4. So that the work of the Ministry was not only to bring to the Faith,
but to build up the Saints in the Faith, whereunto they were brought by it:
which twice in one Epistle the Apostle Paul affirms, 2 Cor. 10. 8. and 13. 10.
And very Serviceable to the Saints was the Ministry of that day, even to them
who knew the Truth and were established in it, them that had received the
anointing, had it abiding in them, and were taught by it, by exhorting them to
keep to it, and to abide in it; by putting them frequently in Remembrance of
their duty, and stirring up their pure minds thereto, in which they were
helpers of the Saints joy. Here then the Priest is found in an Error, in
infering a Conclusion which does not follow from his own premises. For if it
were granted him that the Christians of old were all immediately taught by
inward Revelation; yet it does not thence follow, that there was no need of any
Gospel Ministry at all; since it is evident a Gospel Ministry was altogether
needful to gather them to the true Faith, and direct them to the inward
teaching; and very useful and serviceable to confirm and build up in the Faith,
even those who are come to the anointing in themselves, and were taught by it.

But seeing the Priest upon a false hope that he had gotten an advantage,
adventures so far as to argue equity, a thing rare to be found amongst them;
and upon a wrong conclusion asks, With what equity could this Teacher require
Maintenance of them, that had no occasion for his Teachi^g at all? I will
assure both him and his Brethren (in the name of all my fellow Quakers, as he
calls them, the meanest of which (that is truly such) I heartily embrace as my
fellow) that the Quakers, as they have no good Opinion of his or his Brethren's
reaching, so they have no desire to be taught by them, nor have any occasion
for their teaching at all, being far better taught without them. And hereupon I
ask him in his own words, With what equity be and his fellow Priests can
require Maintenance of them, that have no occasion for their teaching at all?

His second shift to void the force of those Text^ which restrain the Ministers
Maintenance to them that receive and own the Ministry, and to justify the
Priests practice of extorting Tithes from those that are not taught by them, is
an exact Parallel Case, as he calls it, which he thus brings in, page 57.
Suppose a pious man* says he, an hundred Years ago did endow a Free School
with 20 l. per annum, to be raised out of the profits of a parcel of Ground,
worth 200 l. per annum, (that is, the tenth part of the profits) on condition
that all the Boys in such a Town should be taught, gratis. Now suppose there
be a Master legally invested in this School, resident at it, and ready to ^each
all the Boys of that Town, if they will come, it being the same trouble to him
to teach 10. as 20. but it may be not above 10. of 20. Boys within that Town
will come to be taught, the rest are Truants, and do not come. If T. E. himself
were the Heir or Tenant to this 200 l. per annum, would he thin^ it just or
reasonable to stop 10 l. of the 20 l. because half the Boys do not co^^^ to be
taught. This (he says) is the very case between the present Clergy and the
Quakers.

But he mistakes in this as well as the rest. His Parallel will not hold
between the Quakers and the Boys; for the Boys in this case, whether they
come to School or stay away, are not concerned in the Maintenance of the
Master, but the Quakers whether they hear the Priest or stay away are concerned
(more then they should ^e) in the Maintenance of the Priest. The Schoolmaster
has no advantage at all from the Boys, if they come to be taught, for he
receives his stipend from another hand, without any dependence on the Boys.
And if the Boys come not to be taught, they suffer nothing, they lose nothing,
for as they receive nothing, they pay nothing. But the Case is far otherwise
between the Priest and the Quakers. For the Priest comes for his Mainten^nce to
the Quakers, and has his dependence on their labor, and whether the Quakers
come to hear or no, to be sure he make them pay, that is, he tears away their
Substance from them. See now the difference between the Boys and the Quakers;
the Boys pay nothing though they are taught, but the Quakers must pay though
they are not taught. The Boys are taught for nothing: the Quakers pay for
nothing. Is this his exact Parallel, his very Case! If he would have made the
Boys Case Parallel with the Quakers, he should have supposed the Masters
stipend was to be raised out of the Boys earnings, as the Priests Maintenance
is extorted out of the Quakers labors; and then, if the Boys had found the
Master as incapable of teaching Grammar, as the Quakers have found the Priests
incapable of Preaching the Gospel; or if the Boys had found the Master had
taught false Latin, as the Quakers have found by sad experience, the Priests
have taught false Doctrine, I think the Boys would have been much more
commendable for seeking out an abler Teacher, then the Master could have been
excusable for taking away the Poor Boys Money, when he neither did, nor could
do them any good. I might here show the disparity and unaptness of his
Comparison in many other particulars also, both as to the Donation, the
certainty of stipend, etc. But this which is said will I doubt not sufficiently
manifest, that instead of showing the fallacy of my arguing (which by this
Parallel he undertook to do) he has but showed his own weakness.

. 4. In his 10th Section, page 58. He charges me thus, T. E's second device to
take off his former grant of a general Maintenance established by Divine
Authority, is page 286. That Christ has expressly s^t down what this Gospel
Maintenance is, viz. only Meat and Drink, Mat. 10. 10. Luke 10. 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor.
9. 4. Upon which he thus comments, Tru^y this seems somewhat strange, says
he, that T. E. should first say, Divine Authority has only established a
maintenance in general, and in the next page but one, affirm, That the same
Authority had particularly expressed what this maintenance must be. If (says he)
Christ have allotted the particular maintenance, then he has not left it ^o
generals; if he have established it only i^ general, then has he not expressed
the particulars. One of these (adds he) must be false, for indeed there is a^
manifest contradiction.

In his Parallel but now I noted him of Weakness, but here I cannot excuse him
from Wickedness in thrusting in words as mine, which he certainly knows are not
mine, that he might thereby pervert my meaning. Disingenuity is too mild a word
to express such dealing as this is by; this is plain dishones^y. Truly (says
he) this seems somewhat strange, that T. E. should first say, Divine Authority
had only established a maintenance in general, and in the next page but one,
affirm, that the same Authority has particularly expressed what this
maintenance must be. Here he affirms, that in one page I say, Divine Authority
had only established a Maintenance in general, and that in the next page but
one I affirm, the same Authority has particularly expressed what this
Maintenance must be; where the words [only] in the first place, and
[particularly] in the second, are not my words, but his own, thrust in on
purpose to abuse me, and render my sayings absurd and contradictory. In the
first of those places, page 284. he refers to, my words are plainly thus. That
a Maintenance in general to the ^^inisters of the Gospel, is Just, Reasonable,
and established by a Divine Authority, I grant. Here Is no such word as [only]
and yet he affirms, that I here say, Divine Authority had only established a
Maintenance in general. In the other place, page 286. My words are, But what
this Gospel Maintenance is, is expressly set down by Christ himself. Here Is not
the word [particularly] and yet he says, I here affirm, That the same
Authority has particularly expressed what this Maintenance is. And the better
to persuade the Reader that ^ had so written as he reports me, when he first
repeats my saying that Christ has expressly set down what this Maintenance is,
he adds in the same Character [viz. only meat and drink] as if he had taken
these words also out of my Book together with the other; and then says, Truly,
this seems somewhat strange. Does it so more shame for him that made it seem
so. Truly it would seem the more strange to me also, that he should deal so
unjustly by me, had he not served me in the like manner more then once before.
Nor can it be supposed this happened by chance, since he insists deliberately
on it, and argues from it. For he says, If Christ have allotted the particular
maintenance, then he has not left it to generals; if he have established it
only in general, then he has not expressed the particulars. And he improves
his argument to this conclusion, One of these must be false, for indeed there
is a manifest Contradiction. But does he not know which of them is false? I
will tell him then, It Is that which he has falsified, to make the
contradiction. But till he had thus corrupted them, there was neither falsehood
nor contradiction in them, nor any thing else that might seem strange. For, if
the first part had been a Position, as it was but a Concession, yet I hope it
had been no Contradiction to say, first, That a Maintenance in general is
established by a Divine Authority; and afterward, That Christ has expressly
set down what this Maintenance is.

But he goes on upon this willful mistake, that I say, The Maintenance is only
Meat and Drink. And having first bestowed his usual Livery of folly upon me, he
yields, page 60. that in those Texts which I cited out of St. Matthew, and St.
Luke, the Maintenance set down is Meat and Drink. When the Apostles (says he)
went to the prejudiced and unbelieving Jews with the first news of the Gospel,
meat and drink was as much as they could expect; and Christ bids them to take
that and be contented. But this he says was upon a particular occasion, and to
apply these Rules to all Ministers, or to the general Commission he gave them
afterward, is the most rididulous and absurd thing imaginable.

Though the Disciples were then sent but into the Cities of Judea, yet the
Service they went upon was the same then as after, viz. Preaching the Gospel.
And if the Jews, amongst whom they then went, were prejudiced and unbelieving,
both Jews and Gentiles, amongst whom they went afterward, were prejudiced and
unbelieving also. So that to urge this as a reason why meat and drink was as
much as they could expect, and therefore that they were to take that and be
contented, is weak arguing; for it supposes they were to be content with that,
because they could get no more, whereas they were not to take so much as that,
unless it were freely given, and by them that were worthy; he who opened the
hearts of any to give that, could have enlarged their hearts to give much more,
had he pleased. But if to apply the Maintenance in these places expressed, to the
general Commission given afterward be absurd (as he says) where shall we find
any other Maintenance to apply to that Commission, since he that gave the
Commission mentions no other Maintenance but this?

But he says, page 60. When Christ bids his Apostles to take Meat and Drink,
and be content, he does no where forbid them to receive more, if good men
freely gave it to them.

I do not say he did. But the Question is not what freedom they might use in
receiving what good men freely gave them: But what was due unto them for their
Service, and what they might justly expect. Which although my injurious
Opponent would in my Name limit to Meat and Drink only; yet as I used not those
terms [Only Meat and Drink] so neither do I think the intent of our Savior was
to tie up his Ministers to Meat and Drink only, in the strict and literal sense
of the words, but by the phrase of eating and drinking to intimate the
necessary Conveniences of Life. And so the Apostle Paul seems to understand it,
when speaking of Maintenance, with reference to these Texts, as his Phrase
gives ground to believe, he says, Have w^ not power to eat and to drink, 1 C.
r. 9. 14. and in another place, Having Food and Raiment let us be therewith
content, 1 Ti^. 6. 8. Which Phrase [Food and Rayment] is commonly understood to
express the necessaries of man's Life. What therefore he urges hereupon (viz.
that If Christ had determined Meat and Drink for the ONLY Gospel-maintenance,
then the Apostles had been great Sinners in receiving the price of Possessions
sold and dedicated, and that they must have returned them back again, as must
also St. Paul have done the wages he took of other Churches, and those liberal
presents he received from the Philippians) is all grounded on a mistake that I
restrain the Gospel-maintenance to Meat and Drink only, as if it were not
lawful for a Gospel-Minister to receive any thing but Meat and Drink only,
though never so freely offered by such as receive his Ministry, and reap the
benefit of it. Whereas he that shall impartially read what I have there
written, and not strain my words to a Construction which the scope and drift of
them cannot fairly bear, may clearly see, that I do not strictly tie the
Maintenance to Meat and Drink only, since I there qu^te and apply the words of
the Apostle, Having Food and Raiment (which is more then Meat and Drink only)
let us therewith be content. Besides, the scope of my Argument in that place
was not to show what freedom a Gospel-Minister may have, or how far it may
become him to use that libe^ty, in receiving what is freely and voluntarily
given by those that own and embrace his Message: but what he may justly look
for, and expect to receive as his Right, and from whom. Now we know there is a
great difference between expecting or looking for a thing as a just due, and
receiving or accepting a thing as a free gift or benevolence: Which distinction
the Priest not observing, has argued thus loosly and at random, urging the
free Gifts and voluntary Presents made to the Apostle by some Churches whom he
had Planted, Watered, and bestowed much of his labor upon, as Examples and
Presidents for himself and his Brethren of the Clergy to demand, require,
exact, extort and by force take from People now their Goods and Substance, not
only against the Owners will, but even from such as they have neither Planted,
Watered, nor Labored for; such as receive not, nor own their Ministry.

Here the other Priest in his Vindication, page 301. has a particular Crochet,
from my saying, What this Gospel-Maintenance is, is expressly set down by Christ
himself, when he said to his Disciples, Eat such things as are set before you.
Eat and Drink such things as they give* etc. he infers, According to this Rule
Tithes are a Gospel-maintenance, which have been expressly set before us,
expressly given us. A pretty quirk! Because those things which were freely,
cheerfully and without any constraint, set before the Apostles or given to
them, were the proper Maintenance appointed for them; therefore Tithes, which
poor men full sore against their wills (as well as beyond there abilities) are
compelled, by the three Corded Whip of treble damages, to set out for the
Priests, is a Gospel-Maintenance also. Is it not a sign they have an ill cause
to manage, who are fain to make use of such pitiful shifts as these? But if
he can satisfy himself that Tithes are a Gospel-Maintenance because set before
them, (although they who so set them are constrained thereto) yet what will he
say to the case of those others, who preferring their Christian freedom before
outward Liberty, and an undefiled Conscience before all Worldly privileges and
advantages, cannot by any terrors be induced to set the Tithes before the
Priests, or give it to them (as well knowing that neither are those Priests the
Ministers of Christ, nor Tithes a Gospel-maintenance) but for their faithful
Testimony against them, have their Bodies shut up in nasty Holes and stinking
Dungeons, and their Goods made Havoc of by the Priests means, and forcibly
taken from them? Will he call this a Gospel-maintenance also; Such a
Maintenance may please such a Ministry; but they who know the Gospel,
understand better, and cannot be so deluded. But the Priest adds, That if
Tithes were not Melchizedec's due before such time as Abraham gave him them;
yet when they were so given him, they were without all dispute, which (says
he) will sufficiently make good our Title to Tithes (could we lay no other
claim unto them) wherefore it was (says he) that I said before, That if they
were not due by a divine appointment, yet are they now due by a voluntary
dedication of them.

That those Tithes which Abraham gave Melchizedec were Melchizedec's after
Abraham had given him them, is indeed without dispute; but for the Priest
thence to infer, That that will sufficiently make good their claim to Tithes,
is an absurd and very irrational Inference. Though that gift of Abraham's did
entitle Melchizedec to the things thereby given; yet it did not entitle him to
any thing else, either from Abraham or any other person. So that if the Priest
had any right to claim from Melchizedec, yet could he not thereby extend his
claim any further then to those particular Spoils which Abraham gave
Melchizedec. For if Melchizedec himself could not by virtue of that Gift claim
any thing else, much less then can any other. And though the Priest finding
Ethelwolf's Donation not so credible as he hoped it would have been, would now
make as if in his former words, Confer. page 146. [viz. That if Tithes were not
due by a divine appointment, they are now due by a voluntary dedication of
them] he had reference to this Gift of Abraham's, yet is it but a mere shift
and evasion: for it is manifest that by the Civil Powers and Nursing Fathers of
the Church, he had direct relation to Ethelwolf and others who lived near his
time. But men who account their Tongues their own, will take the liberty to say
any thing.

. 5. In his 11th Section, he undertakes to show, That our Lord Jesus and his
Apostles have sufficiently established Tithes for the Maintenance of the
Gospel Ministers; and that they may be proved also out of the New Testament to
be due Jure divino, page 61.

This indeed is somewhat to the purpose. If he prove this, the Controversy is
ended. But if he has no better Evidence to prove Tithes due jure divino under
the Gospel, then he has offered to prove them so due before the Levetical Law,
he will fall very much short of his undertaking. Let us see however what he has
to offer in this place, where his greatest strength may be expected.

His first medium to prove that our Lord Jesus and his Apostles have
sufficiently established Tithes for the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers, is
this, That there is no Repeal of Tithes in all the New Testament.

This is no more then he has said before over and over, and which I have
already discovered the weakness and emptiness of, having plainly showed, that
there was no necessity of an express Repeal of Tithes by name, either in
relation to the Claim made to them from a pretended Right before the Law, that
pretended Right not being grounded upon an express Command* or with respect to
the Assignation of them to the Levitical Priesthood by the Levitical Law, that
Assignation being but temporary, and limited to the continuance of that
Priesthood, made (as this Priest says expressly, page 51.) to the Priests for
the time being; and so to expire in course with that Priesthood. And yet, to
put the matter out of all doubt that Tithes are ended with that Priesthood
where the Apostle mentions the change of the Priesthood, in the very same
place he affirms, that the Law is changed also, which he argues as a necessary
Inference from the change of the Priesthood. For the Priesthood being changed
(says he, Heb. 7. 12.) there is made of necessity a change also of the Law.
And that he speaks there with relation to the Law of Tithes, as well as the
other parts of the Levitical Law, is most clear from Ver. 5. where he says,
And ^erily they that are of the Sons of Levi, who receive the Office of the
Priesthood, have a Commandment to take the Tithes of the People according to
the La^, etc. But now, the Sons of Levi being discharged from the Office of the
Priesthood, and that Priesthood, which stood in that Tribe of Levi, being
changed, that Law also is changed, according to which those Sons of Levi, who
executed the Office of that Priesthood, had a Commandment to take Tithes of
the People. I appeal to every judicious Reader, whether this be not the free
and natural sense of the Apostles words. And may not this be called A Repeal of
Tithes? Then neither may the other be called a Repeal of the Priesthood: for
neither here, nor elsewhere, that I remember, is it said in so many Syllables,
The Priesthood is repealed. Yet as there is enough said here, to warrant a
Conclusion that the Priesthood is ended, though the word [Repeal] be not used;
so is there in like manner enough said here, to warrant a Conclusion that
Tithes are ended also, though the word [Repeal] is not used.

He adds under this Head, That Our Savior did not revoke Tithes, so far as
they were Moral, and a necessary provision for his Ministers; so far as they
were founded on the Law of Nature, and Primitive Revelation, and grounded on an
eternal Reason, page 62.

All this is but a new begging of the old Question. I deny that Tithes were
Moral, founded on the Law of Nature, or grounded on an eternal Reason. This is
true of Maintenance in general, but it is not true of the Modes and
Circumstances of Maintenance, whereof Tithe is one. For Tithe (as I have said
before) is a mode or way of raising Maintenance, a Circumstance of the quantity
or proportion of Maintenance. And though it be a dictate of the Law of Nature
and eternal Reason that there should be a Maintenance, that the Labourer should
be rewarded; yet does not the Law of Nature prescribe the certain quantity or
proportion of Maintenance, nor the way or m^ans by which it must be raised.
These depend not on an eternal, but on a temporal Reason, variable according to
the diversity of times, places and occasions.

He adds further, If Tithes had been the only thing of this kind to be
abolished, it seems necessary there should have been an express Revocation of
them, which we are sure there is not; and therefore expressa nocent, non
expressa non nocent.

Tithes were not the only thing of this kind to be abolished: for all the other
Ceremonies of the Law were abolished as well as Tithes; and yet, as necessary
as it seems to him, he shall not find an express Revocation of the one half of
them. Will he thence infer that they are not all revoked, or that those remain
still in force, of which there is not an express Revocation! He understands
better I hope. But if he will admit other Ceremonies of the Law to be
abolished; notwithstanding there appears no express Revocation of them, he
cannot with Reason insist that Tithes are therefore not abolished, because no
express Revocation of them appears. But how strangely partial is he, and
misguided by a selfish Interest, who would have Tithes due without an express
Command, but will not allow them to be ended without an express revocation! His
Rule, expressa nocent non expressa non nocent, is so far from confirming him,
that it utterly overthrows his Cause, and rases the conjectural and suppository
Foundation of a Right to Tithes before the Law. For there is his Non expressa
(things not expre^^) which do not at all hurt me, nor help him. And for his
expressa nocent, I have already found him enough expressed, even in point of
Repeal and Revocation, in those words of the Apostle Paul [The Priesthood
being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law] Heb. 7. 12.

He concludes this first part of his proof thus. We may reasonably believe,
That Jesus intended they should remain of Divine Right as they had been reput^d
always before.

Is this cogent? Nay, is it indeed urgent or persw^sive? How does he prove that
Tithes had always before been reputed of Divine Right? Without b^gging the
Question he can do nothing. But why should we reasonably believe Jesus intended
Tithes should remain of Divine Right? Because he took away the Law, by which
they were due, and the Priesthood to which they were due? Were these arguments
of his intention that Tithes should remain! With much more reason may we
believe that Jesus intended they should not remain, seeing he (who knew as well
as this Priest, that the Assignation of them was made but to the Priests for
the time being; and that therefore, without a new Institution, they would be
void in course at the dissolution of that Priesthood) did not think fit,
either by himself or his Apostles, to give so much as an intimation, either by
word or practice, that Tithes should remain for the Maintenance of Gospel
Ministers. Had Christ intended a continuance of Tithes, it is not to be doubted
but he would have signified his intention. But seeing no such thing is expressed,
the Priest must remember his own Axiom [non expressa non nocent. i. e. things
not expressed, do not hurt] and be content.

. 6. Thus I have gone through the several parts of his first Medium, in which
there is no strength at all to prove his Position, that our Lord Je^us and his
Apostles have sufficiently established Tithes for the Maintenance of the Gospel
Ministers. I come now to his second, which runs thus, But this is not all, for
there are positive Laws which do fairly intimate, that Tithes were to be the
Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers, when the Church was settled, page 62.

'Twas well what he said before was not all, for if it had, he had as good have
said nothing. And truly I somewhat Question whether what he says now will be
much more to the purpose. (...) here are positive Laws, he says, which do
fairly intimate, etc.

Are intimations the proper Results of positive Laws? If the Laws are positive,
methinks they should declare positively, not only hint things by intimation.
But waving that, (and his other less positive proofs, such as our Savior's
affirming, Tithes ought to be paid, in the Time of the Law, when all men grant
they were due, etc. which, he says, plead only a probability, and which I deny
to plead so much as a probability) I hasten after him to those two plain places
(as he calls them) which I take to be the positive Laws mentioned before,
which, he says, do fairly intimate, that Tithes were to be the maintenance of
the Gospel Ministers, when the Church was settled. The first of these two plain
places, is That (he says) of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 9. 14. affirming, That like as
the Jewish Priests and Levites lived of the Tithes and Oblations under the Law,
even so there was a special Ordinance of Christ, that they who preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel: that is, says he, of those good things which
should be dedicated and offered in gratitude for the Gospel, p. 63.

How hard is this poor man put to it, to piece up something that might look a
little like a proof. This is at least the third time, that he has been driven
to his [Even so] and yet he is even at a loss still. For supposing the partcle
(...) to be necessarily rendered [Even so] as it is, what can be thence
inferred? That Gospel Ministers should live of the Gospel Even so, as the
Jewish Priests and Levites lived of the Tithes and Oblations under the Law?
What, just as they lived? exactly after the same manner? Why then the Ministers
of the Gospel should not have the Tithes, but the Tithes of the Tithes, that
is, but the hundredth part; for even so the Jewish Priests bad, the Levites had
the Tithes, and paid this hundredth part, or Tithe of Tithe to the Priests, and
the rest of the Priest Maintenance was made up by Oblations. So that if the
Priests now will needs as Gospel Ministers be maintained, and live even just so
as the Jewish Priests lived, they must introduce the Jewish Oblation^ again,
the Burnt-Offerings and Bloody Sacrifices, as in the time of the Law, and so
deny the one Offering, and become Debtors to the whole Law. This looks
strangely; and yet I see not how it can be avoided, if they will strain the
Particle [Even] to an exact parity of Maintenance between Jewish Priests and
Gospel Ministers, and if they do not strain it to such a parity, they cannot
squcese Tithes out of it; for then they that preach the Gospel may live of the
Gospel, as well as the Jewish Priests and Levites lived of the things of the
Temple, and of the Altar, and yet not by Tithes. And indeed, notwithstanding
his [Even so] that he says to explain what it is to live of the Gospel, that
is (says he) of th^se good things which should be dedicated and offered in
gratitude for the Gospel, is fa^ enough from proving it must be Tithes: for
this shows the Maintenance was to be what Believers were willing freely to
give, which might as well be a S^xth, or a Twelfth, a Fifth, or a Fifteenth
part, as a Tenth, according as their ability would permit, or the occasion
should require. And if it were in the Donors choi^e what part to give, that
leaves no place for a Divine Right to Tithes. Thus then we see this first of
his plain places, and positive Laws, is so far from affording a positive proof
that Tithes were to be the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers, that it does
not so much as fairly intimate it.

But to help out the matter he adds page 64. That the blessed Jesus who
ordained this, did incline the hearts of pious Christians to dedicate Tithes
and other Oblations made in gratitude for the Gospel.

This I shall have occasion to take further notice of, when I shall come anon
to examine his Dedications, Donations and Charters. In this place let it
susfice, that what he takes for granted, I deny, and expect proof of. The World
is not ignorant what heaps of Oblations and Dedications have been made, under
pretense of gratitude for the Gospel, by many whose hearts the Blessed Jesus
did never incline thereto.

I come now to his second plain place or positive Law, as he calls it, which he
thus brings in, Le^t any should say, This Text supposes something will be
given, but does not enjoin the Christians to give, ^e have another Law directed
to the People, containing both their duty and the Ministers Right, Ga^. 6. 6.
Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that teaches in all
good things.

His former Text, he says, supposes something will be given, and this en^oyns
something shall be given, but neither one nor ^other expresses what part. What
proof then can either of these places afford that Tithes, or the tenth part,
was to be the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers, and that our Lord Jesus and
his Apostles have sufficiently established Tithes for the Maintenance of the
Gospel Ministers, whenas neither of these places mention Tithes or any certain
quantity! He that is taught in the word is to Communicate unto him that
teaches in all good things. That he does as really, though not so largely, who
gives but an hundredth part, as he that gives a tenth. And on the other hand,
if he that is to be the receiver may take the liberty of fixing the quantity,
he may if he please, make it a third part or a half, as well as a tenth. We see
then no certain Conclusion can be drawn from these Texts as to the proportion
or quantity of Maintenance, that being left wholly free, and at the disposal of
the Giver. Consequently Tithes, which are a certain quantity cannot be proved
by these Scriptures to be established by our Lord Jesus and his Apostles for
the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers. Thus these two plain places and
positive Laws (as the Priest calls them) are plain and positive enough against
him and his Brethren, to prove, that they ought not to exact Maintenance from
those that deny their Ministry: but will not prove what he would have, viz.
Tithes for the Gospel Maintenance, either positively, or by fair intimation.

To back his insufficient proofs, he ru^s over again his overworn Stories of
the Antiquity of the tenth part, how it was made known by God to be his part by
Revelation, and learned by the Heathens by Primitive Tradition, and much more
of the same Rank. In all which his Conclusions, are no more forcible then that
in all reason it ought to be that part; and there is no reason to (...), but
that this is the share or portion of Gospel Ministers, page 66.

But this being so groundless, and having been so often Answered, I think it
not worth my while to stay upon; but proceed to an Objection he makes, page 67.
There is (says he) but one Objection against this, viz. That Tithes are not
mentioned in the Gospel or Epistles to be the very part.

If there were no other Objection but this, yet this is such an one as he can
never be able to remove. A grand Objection indeed, st^ongely enforced against
himself by the Maxim urged by himself, (page 62.) Non expressa non nocent,
Those things which are not expressed do not hurt This shuts out all his
Conjectures, and Suppositions, and restrains him closely to what is expressed.
But seeing (by his own confession, page 67.) Tithes are not expressed, not
mentioned in the New Testament to be the Gospel-Maintenance, how rash and
over-confident was he in the entrance of his 11th Section to assert (page 61)
That our Lord Jesus and his Apostles have sufficiently established Tithes for
the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers, and that they may be proved also out
of the New Testament to be due, jure divino! Will he undertake to prove that
out of the New Testament, which he confesses is not mentioned in the
New Testament, and yet at the same time tell us, Non expressa non nocent! What
man of reason, modesty or name would not be ashamed of this! But besides this
which he has brought, there are other Objections against Tithes being the
Maintenance of Gospel Ministers, namely, That Tithes or a tenth part is a
Ceremony, Mode, or Circumstance of Maintenance, and as such was a part of the
Ceremonial Law, which being abrogated by Christ, was not fit to be received
amongst Christians; That a Maintenance by Tithes, or any other certain, fixed
and determinate quantity, is not agreeable with the Nature of the Gospel, which
as it self is free, so ought the Maintenance also to be; this being one of the
Believers Privileges under the Gospel: The Law was a State of Bondage; the
Gospel is a State of Liberty. The Law represented the condition of Servants;
the Gospel that of Sons. The Law treated those that were under it, as Children
in Nonage under Tutors and Governors; the Gospel treats them that receive it,
as men arr^ved to an adult age. Besides, under the Gospel, Tithes are not an
equal way of Maintenance, in respect either of the Giver, or of the Receiver,
or of the Service.

Many other Objections might also be urged against Tithes being a
Gospel-Maintenance, but these may serve to convince the Priest, that he was too
hasty in concluding there is but this one Objection which he has brought. But
leaving these, at least at present, let us see how he attempts to remove that
one Objection which himself has urged, viz. That Tithes are not mentioned in
the Gospel or Epistles to be the very part. To this, says he, I reply, There
are very good Reasons why Tithes are not mentioned in the New Testament, by
name; His first reason is, To avoid all occasion of scandal to the Jews, whose
Priests were then in Possession of them.

There is no weight at all in this reason; for we see that in that very Epistle
which was written to the Hebrew^ or Jews themselves, the Apostle tells them
expressly (and argues it forcibly and undeniably) that the Jewish Priesthood,
and the Law by which they took Tithes, together with that Covenant, and the
whole Jewish Polity, were abrogated and ended by Christ. And he that had
written all this so Plain, so Full, so Home, needed he avoid mentioning Tithes
as a GospelMaintenance, for fear of giving Offense to the Jews! What can be
more irrational! What could have been said more Offensive to the Jews then he
in that Epistle writ! Besides, whatsoever was written by the Evangelists or
Apostles, whether it were Historical or Epistolary, it was written for, and
dedicated to the Believers in Christ Jesus; not to Unconverted Jews, but to
those who were turned from Iudais^^ to the Christian Faith; which whosoever
truly was, must needs be brought from off the Jewish Priests, and see the end
of that Priesthood, by the Springing up of a New one. It cannot then with
Reason be supposed, that they who believed the Jewish Priesthood ended, and
Consequently that Tithes were no longer due unto it, would in zeal to that
Priesthood have taken Offense at the mentioning of Tithes for a
Gospel-Maintenance, or that the holy Penmen did for that Reason omit the
mention of them. But further, If it might with any show of Reason be allowed
that in not mentioning Tithes as a Gospel-Maintenance, Regard was had to the
Jews: Yet what Relation at all could this Reason have to the Gentiles, unto
whom the far greater part of the Epistles were written? Will he supose the
Gentiles would have been Offended at the Trasferring of Tithes from the Jewish
Priests to the Gospel Ministers? That indeed may well be supposed; but not upon
the score on which he grounds his Reason. They might justly indeed have been
scandalized, had the Jewish Ceremonial Maintenance by Tithes been introduced
among Christians; but not out of any love or zeal for the Jewish Priests, of
whom they had not so great esteem, and to whom they bear not so much good Will.
Neither is this all, but the emptiness and lightness of this Reason will more
fully yet appear to him that shall consider, that some of the Apostles lived to
see the Jewish Priests actually dispossessed of Tithes, and that Nation dispersed
and scattered, the Synagogue not only dead, but buried, and the whole Jewish
Polity destroyed, and yet after all this, no claim put in to Tithes, no
exortation to pay them, no mention of them as a Gospel-Maintenance. If
therefore one should suppose the Apostles forbore to claim Tithes as the
Gospel-Maintenance, while the Jewish Priests were possessed of them, and that
Polity had yet some show of standing, in condescension to the Jews, and to
avoid all occasion of scandal to them; yet surely he must abandon all Reason,
and utterly renounce his Understanding, that can believe they forbore upon this
Reason to claim Tithes afterward also, when they had seen the Temple raised to
the Ground, the Jewish Priests actually dispossessed, and that whole Polity
totally subverted. If Tithes had been intended for the Gospel Ministers
Maintenance, and in tenderness to the Jews, (as he fancies) had been suffered a
while to run in their old Channel, till the whole Jewish Polity had been
D^stroyed, yet what show of Reason can be given, why those Apostles that lived
to see the whole Jewish Polity Destroyed, did not then turn Tithes into their
New and proper Channel, and expressly declare, That Tithes were the Maintenance
established by Christ for the Gospel Ministers?

His second Reason why Tithes are not mentioned in the New Testament to be the
Maintenance of Gospel Ministers is this, There was not any need for Jesus to
make any new Law for Tithes, since they were sufficiently declared to be due to
God before, by Revelation, and Example, by Reason and God's own choice; by the
grounds on which they were given, and the ends for which they were employed,
page 68.

If his Particle [before] refers to his second Period, the time of the
Levitical Law, he then speaks to no purpose at all, that Law being ended, and
any Title thereby disclaimed by the present Clergy. And if it relate to his
first Period, the time before the Levitical Law, I have then already refuted
this Reason of his over and over; and doubtless were he not at ^ great strait,
he would not thus nauseat his Reader with Tautologies. That Tithes were due to
God before the Levitical Law, and sufficiently declared so to be by Revelation,
Example, Reason, etc. he has begged a Concession of beyond all degrees of
Modesty, but not offered one solid Reason to prove. Of the ground on which they
were given, and the end for which they were employed before the Law, there is
nothing expressed, and he knows who said, Non expressa non nocent, i. e. Things
not expressed, hurt not.

His third Reason why Tithes are not mentioned in the New Testament to be the
Maintenance of Gospel Ministers is, Because the devotion of the Christians in
those days was so great, that they gave more then a tenth freely, Selling all
and following Christ, and bestowing on the Apostles more then they were in a
condition to receive, page 69.

That the Christians in those days gave more then a tenth, is more then he can
prove. For though some of them sold their Possessions, and laid the price
thereof at the Apostles Feet, yet was not that given to the Apostles for their
proper use, but deposited as in a common stock or treasury, for the common
supply and maintenance of them all, while they lived together in that
Community, which was not long. But what part soever it was that they gave, it
is enough for my purpose that it was a Gift, a free Gift. And if our Lord Jesus
did not think fit to make any new determination of the tenth part by Name, page
69. after that the old determination thereof under the Law was determined and
ended by hi^ Death; but committed his Ministers to the Christians devotion for
Maintenance, how comes this Priest so confidently to affirm, page 61. That our
Lord Jesus and his Apostles have sufficiently established Tithes for the
Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers? How strangely does he contradict himself
herein, when in one place he is positive that our Lord Jesus and his Apostles
have sufficiently established Tithes for the Maintenance of the Gospel
Ministers, page 61. in the other as express, That our Lord and his Apostles did
not make a new determination of the tenth part by name, page 69. and urges
Reasons to prove that they neither did nor needed make any new Law for Tithes;
as first, The great devotion of Christians in those days, page 69. Secondly,
The expectation our Lord Jesus might have, that the joyful Message of his
Gospel should be so thankfully received, that those to whom it was sent, should
do as much freely to the gratifying his Messengers, as the servile Jews did by
the compulsion of a positive Law, page 70. Thirdly, The foresight our Lord
Jesus had, that his Grace would open the Hearts of Kings and Princes, and other
devout persons to give more then a tenth part of their good things, to those in
his Name and for his sake, who were sent to Preach the Gospel. Fourthly, That
since such times were coming, our Lord might probably on purpose decline
determining the proportion too expressly, that Christians might have the
opportunity of a voluntary Charity. Fifthly, That this was more agreeable to
the freedom and ingenuity of Sons, which Christians are compared to. Sixthly,
That positive Laws were likely to be made when the decays of Piety and Charity
did require them, page 71. These are the Reasons he offers for proof that our
Lord Jesus and his Apostles did not make a new determination of the tenth part
by name, and that in the very same Section, wherein he so confidently affirmed,
That our Lord Jesus and his Apostles have sufficiently established Tithes for
the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers. If they have established Tithes, they
have then established a tenth part by name; for Tithes are denominated, or take
their Name, from the number Tenth. (Decimae a decimo) But that neither Christ
nor his Apostles have established a tenth part by Name, and consequently have
not established Tithes for the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers, the Reasons
before recited, which the Priest himself has given, do plainly enough prove.
For besides the great and prompt devotion of Christians in those days, our
Lord Jesus (he says) might expect that the joyful Message of his Gospel should
be so thankfully received, that those to whom it was sent should do as much
freely to the gratifying his Messengers, as the servile Jews did by the
compulsion of a positive Law.

So then it seems our Lord Jesus did not think fit to compel Christians by a
positive Law to pay Tithes, but left the gratifying his Messengers to that
freedom, which he foresaw his Grace would open their Hearts to: for to maintain
Christ's Ministers by the compulsion of a positive Law, was (as the Priest
rightly observes) suitable to the s^rvile state of the Jews, which Christians,
who are compared to Son^, ought not to be subjected to, but le^t to the
exercise of a voluntary Charity, which is more agreeable to the freedom and
ingenuity of Sons. Therefore he says, Since such times were coming, our Lord
might probably on purpose decline determining the proportion too expressly. In
all which he has notably argued against himself, and sufficiently proved that
the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministry ought to be by free gift, voluntary
Charity, uncompelled, that the compulsion of positive Law in this case, is a
badge of Jewish servility not agreeable to the Christian State, which stands in
and acts from the freedom and ingenuity of Sons, and that therefore our Lord
Jesus and his Apostles did not make any new Law for Tithes, did not make any
new determination of a tenth part by name, and that our Lord might probably on
purpose decline determining the proportion too expressly. But what now is become
of his first Assertion, That our Lord Jesus and his Apostles have sufficiently
established Tithes for the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers? Did Christ
establish Tithes, and yet on purpose decline determining the proportion
expressly? Is not Tithe or a tenth part an express determination of the
proportion? What manif^st contradiction has this overhasty man run himself
into! Again, if (as he says, page 68) There was no need for Jesus to make any
new Law for Tithes. If our Lord and his Apostles did not make a new
determination of a tenth part by name, page 69. If our Lord might probably on
purpose decline determining the proportion too expressly, that Christians might
have the opportunity of a voluntary Charity, page 70. If he expected they to
whom his Gospel was sent, should do as much freely to the gratifying his
Messengers, as the servile Jews did by the compulsion of a positive Law. And if
this free, gratuitous and voluntary Charity was more agreeable to the freedom
and ingenuity of Sons, which Christians are compared to, then the servile
compulsion of a positive Law. And if positive Laws were likely to be made when
the decays of Piety and Charity did require them, page 71. which could not be
in the Apostles days, when the devotion of Christians was so great, that they
gave (as the Priest says) more then a tenth freely, and bestowed on the
Apostles more then they were in a condition to receive, page 69. I say, if all
this may serve to ^rove that our Lord Jesus and his Apostles left the (...) of
the Gospel Ministers to the free and (...) Charity of Christians, foreseeing
that his (...) would open their Hearts thereto, page 70. and (...) made no
positive La^ to compel them to the (...) servility of paying Tithes, what then
becomes of those positive Laws he speaks of, page 62. which he says do fairly
intimate, that Tithes were (...) Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers, when the
Church was settled? Is there any thing in this but ^^^^radiction and confusion?

He has yet one Reason more why Tithes are not mentioned in the New Testament
to be the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers, and that is, That the State of
the Church in those days was such, that Believers, though they were willing,
could not have opportunity to pay Tithes regularly; nor could the
Gospel Ministers receive them, page 71.

Had he assigned this for a general Reason, why Tithes should not be paid at
all under the Gospel, he had said something to the purpose. But in restrayning
his Reason to the State of the Church in those days only, he falls short.
Besides, how knows he that Believers then were willing to have paid, and Gospel
Ministers to have received Tithes, had opportunity served? I believe the
contrary, and have many Reasons inducing me thereunto; but since he affirms it,
let him prove it. However, if Tithes (as he dreams) were to be the Maintenance
of the Gospel Ministers, when the Church was settled, the want of opportunity
for the paying and receiving them regularly at that instant, could be no good
Reason why they were wholly passed over in silence, and no mention made of them
to that purpose in all the New Testament, unless he would suppose that all that
was mentioned in the New Testament had Relation to the then present State of
the Church, and nothing to the future. But if some things relating to the
future State of the Church are mentioned in the New Testament, then surely so
might Tithes have been also, had they been intended for a Gospel Ministry's
Maintenance, when the Church was settled.

He adds, That as it was no prejudice to the Jewish Priests, that there was
little or no Tithes paid, during their Forefathers wandering in the Wilderness;
no more is it to us, that they were not paid regularly in the Times of
Persecution, page 71.

That could be no prejudice to the Jewish Priests, because Tithes were not due
to them, or required to be paid, till their wandering in the Wilderness was
over, and they settled in the Land of Canaan; and an express command there was
for the payment of Tithes to them when they were so settled. But these Priests
can produce no Command for the payment of Tithes to them either before the
times of Persecution, in those times, nor after them. It is not then a
nonpayment of Tithes regularly in the times of Persecution that prejudices
these Priests: but that which prejudices their Claim is, That Tithes were never
du^ to them at all; they have no Command, nor ever had, to claim Tithes by.

Yet he says, Our Lord Jesus and the Apostles said so much in the
New Testament, that the Primitive Christians understood them to intend Tithes
for the Gospel-Maintenance, page 71.

How knows he this, seeing the Scripture is silent of it? Had the Primitive
Christians understood Tithes to be intended by Christ for the Maintenance of
his Ministers, no doubt they would have paid them: for they knew full well that
Saying of our Lord, He that knows his Masters Will, and does it not, shall be
beaten with many stripes. Their non-payment of Tithes, therefore is a
sufficient Argument that they did not understand Tithes to be appointed by
Christ for the Maintenance of his Ministers.

He adds, That they (to wit our Lord Jesus and the Apostles) said enough to
show, that the Ancient Divine Right to the tenth part should be continued.

I wish he had quoted his Text for this, that I might have known whence he had
it: for I have read the New Testament more then once, and yet I Solemnly
profess, I never read this there.

But says he, page 7^. It was neither necessary, nor convenient they should
speak more plainly in this matter: This being sufficient to establish the
Divine Right of Tithes under the Gospel, etc.

This! Which? What means he here by This? Did the not mentioning Tithes at all
in the New Testament for a Gospel Maintenance, establish (thinks he) the Divine
Right of Tithes under the Gospel? Or did our Lord and his Apostles not making a
new Determination of the tenth part by name, do this? Or did his purposely
declining to determine the proportion too expressly? Or what else may we suppose
his [This] can relate to, which may be thought sufficient to establish the
Divine Right of Tithes under the Gospel. Certainly either he is very Dark, or I
am very D^ll: for in good earnest, I do not understand, what to refer his
Particle [This] unto. But whatever it is, I perceive he would have it
sufficient, not only to establish a Divine Right of Tithes under the Gospel,
but also, to teach us that Tithes being Originally due to God, and by Christ
assigned to the Gospel Ministers, are now due to them, jure divino, page 72.

This is much to the same purpose, as if he should have said that Tithes being
due, jure divino, are due, jure divino. If ever Popery should prevail here, and
this man turn Friar, it is fit he should be of the Mendicant Order, he is so
ready at begging. Two Questions has he very confidently begged in these two
Lines. First, That Tithes are Originally due to God, which that they are as
Tithes, as a tenth part distinct from the other nine, or more peculiarly then
the rest, I have before more then once denied and disproved. Secondly, That
Christ has assigned Ty^^es to the Gospel Ministers. Has he so? and yet Tithes
not mentioned in the Gospel or Epistles to be the very part, p. 07. Tithes not
mentioned in the New Testament, by name, ibid. That methinks is strange. What!
an Assignation ple^ded, wherein the thing pretended to be assigned, is not so
much as named, nor the certain quantity described! Who ever heard of such an
Assignation before? But how does it appear there is such an assignation? for we
have hitherto but his bare word for it. Before, when he spoke of the Levitical
Priest-hood's Right to Tithes (of which no Body doubted) he was very forward to
produce an express assignation, and a Text withal to attest it. But now, when
he speaks of the Gospel Ministers Right to Tithes, (which needs the clearest
proof, and plainest demonstration) his assignation and evidence are both to
seek. Is this to show that our Lord Jesus and his Apostles have sufficiently
established Tithes for the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers? Is this to show
that Tithes may be proved out of the New Testament to be due, jure divino? page
61. Is this to prove the Divine Right of Tithes sufficiently established under
the Gospel, (page 72.) to say that Tithes being originally due to God, and by
Christ assigned to the Gospel Ministers, are now due to them, jure divino? Can
any one doubt but that if Tithes were indeed assigned to the Ministers of the
Gospel, they were then unquestionably due to them jure divino? Or can it be
imagined, that I or any man else would grant the first of these, and deny the
latter Was the Question wheth^^, If Christ had assigned Tithes to the
Gospel Ministers, Tithes would thereby have been due to them? Or was it not,
Whether Christ had indeed assigned Tithes to the Gospel Ministers or no? This
belonged to him to prove; and does he think to carry it without proof, by a sly
supposing it? He deceives himself. He says of me, page ^. I write to please an
illiterate Sect; and I may gull the unlearned Quakers into a Belief, etc. But I
wonder what learned Sect he wrote to please, and what sort of Readers he hoped
to meet with, or what scantling of Understanding (as his phrase is) he suited
his Discourse to, when he said, Tithes being Originally due to God, and by
Christ assigned to the Gospel Ministers, are now due to them, jure divino! Did
he hope to persuade his Reader by begging instead of proving, and by taking
that for granted which indeed the main Question in Controversy, and which
requires the most evident Demonstration? He might perhaps by this means gull
some hasty heedless Reader; but ^en of Sense and Understanding are not
satisfied with such put-off's. Fair Words may please Fools, but Wise men look
for fair Proofs. Would he think I dealt fairly with him, if I should say, that
he being a Deceiver is not a Minister of Christ? The Conclusion is true, if it
be drawn from a true Proposition. It is clear enough, that he is not a Minister
of Christ, if he be a Deceiver; but whether he be a Deceiver or no, is the
Question, on the proof of which, the Truth of the Conclusion depends. Now if
instead of proving this Proposition [That he is a Deceiver] I should take it
for granted, and without more ado infer from thence, that he is no Minister of
Christ, I should do by him just as he has done by his Reader. He says, Tithes
being by Christ assigned to the Gospel Ministers, are now due to them by Divine
Right. The Conclusion here is undoubtedly true, if the Proposition be true from
which it is drawn. No man in his wits will deny, that Tithes are due to Gospel
Ministers, if Christ have assigned Tithes to them: But that is the Question in
Controversy; that is the Proposition to be proved, on the proof of which the
Truth of the Conclusion depends. Now instead of proving this Proposition [That
Christ has assigned Tithes to the Gospel-Ministers] he takes it for granted,
and with no more ado infers from thence, that Tithes are now due to
Gospel Ministers, jure divino. Is this like a Disputant? Does this become a man
of his high pretenses to Schollarship and Learning? Let the intelligent Reader
judge.

. 7. I am now come to the end of his 11th Section, in which he undertook to
show, That our Lord Jesus and his Apostles have sufficiently established Tithes
for the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers; and that they may be proved out of
the New Testament to be due, jure divino. Before I proceed to his next Section,
I desire the Reader to observe, First, that my Opponent has fallen so far short
of proving the establishment of Tithes by Christ and his Apostles for the
Maintenance of Gospel Ministers, that he has plainly acknowledged Tithes are
not so much (...) named in the New Testament, page 67. (as indeed they are not,
with relation to Gospel Ministers) Secondly, That though he says, there are
positive Laws, page 62. yet he dares not say, those Laws speak positively, but
only that they do fairly intimate that Tithes were to be the Maintenance of the
Gospel Ministers, page 63. And to take off the force of his positive Laws more
fully, and show how little positive they were with respect to Tithes, he
himself proves at large, that Jesus did not make any new Law for Tithes, page
68, 69. and gives among others, this Reason for it, That Jesus might expect his
Messengers should be gratified freely. Nay, so eager he is to show why Jesus
made no new Law for Tithes, that no considering how destructive it would prove
to his former talk of positive Laws, page 62, 63, 64. he fairly argues the
compulsion of a positive Law to be Jewish and Servile; and voluntary charity to
be more ag^eeable to the freedom and ingenuity of Sons, which Christians are
compared to, page 70, 7^. Thirdly, That those two Texts, those two Plain
places, as he calls them, Cor. 9. ^4. and Gal. 6. 6. make no mention at all of
Tithes or any certain part. They show that some Maintenance is due, they show
to whom it is due, and from whom, but they show not the quantity of that
Maintenance, and Consequently, do not prove Tithes to be it. Besides, he says,
page 69. Our Lord and his Apostles did not make a new Determination of the
tenth part by name; and page 70. Our Lord ^ight probably on purpose decline
determining the proportion too expressly, etc. Now Tithes being an express
Determination of the tenth part by name, it is evident even from his own
Positions, that Tithes or a tenth part was not Determined by our Lord and his
Apostles, to be the Maintenance of Gospel Ministers. Fourthly, That although my
Opponent begins this Section with a great deal of confidence, and seeming
Resol^tion, undertaking to show, that our Lord Jesus and his Apostles have
sufficiently established Tithes for the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers,
and that they may be proved out of the New Testament to be due, jure divino.
Yet in the Prosecution of this Argument he flags and sinks; he is not positive
and plain, but delivers himself doubtfully and fearfully. (We may reasonably
believe, says he, that Jesus intended they should remain of Divine Right, page
62.) and in the close of the Section miserably begs the Question, that Christ
has assigned Tithes to the Gospel Ministers, and on that precarious bottom
would set the Divine Right of Tithes. Thus far then we have gone, and find no
firm Foundation for a Divine Right to Tithes under the Gospel. No Institution
of them; No New Determination of them; No Establishment of them; No Mention of
them in all the New Testament, as a Maintenance for Gospel Ministers.

Now Reader, in the close of this Section take the Judgment of two eminent
Divines (so called) of the Church of England, and see how contrary this Priest
is to them. The first is Fulk in Q. Elizabeth's time, The other Willet in K.
James his time. Fulk on Heb. 7.. 4. having showed that the payment of Tithes,
as it was a Ceremonial duty, is abrogated with other Ceremonies by the death of
Christ, and that any other sufficient Stipend, whether it be more or less then
a tenth part, may be appointed as well as Tithes, adds, But that there is any
Sacrificing Priesthood, to whom it (namely Tithes) is due in the New
Testament, the old payment of Tithes does not prove. Neither did Christ himself
our high Priest, ever make claim unto them: nor his Apostles the Ministers of
the Church, but only to a sufficient living by the Gospel, to be allowed of
their temporal Goods, to whom they ministered spiritual Goods, 1. Cor. 9. 14.
Gal. 6. 6. Thus he, by which we may see he was far enough from thinking what
this Priest affirms, viz. That Christ and his Apostles have sufficiently
established Tithes for the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers, and that they
may be proved out of the New Testament to be due jure divino, and that Christ
has assigned Tithes to the Gospel Ministers, etc. seeing he says plainly both
that the old Ceremonial payment of them is abrogated, and no new claim made
either by Christ or his Apostles to Tithes, but only to a sufficient living by
the Gospel, and that too to be allowed of their temporal Goods, to whom they
ministered spiritual Goods. And he quotes the very same Texts to prove the
Apostles did not claim Tithes, but only a sufficient Maintenance, which this
Priest has brought to prove, that that Maintenance ought to be Tithes, namely,
1 Cor. 9. 14. Gal. 6. 6.

Willet in his Synopsis of Popery, fifth general Controversy, page 315.
repeating a Canon of the Council of Orleans, thus, As it is in the will of the
giver to give what pleases him, so if he find him stubborn and froward which
receives it, it is in his power to revoke the gift; says thereupon, We see
then that the Word of God has laid no such necessity upon Tithes, for then
this Council would not have permitted such Liberty. And a little after, setting
down the fifteenth Article of the Bohemians against Tithes, he adds, Therefore
Tithes are not necessarily due by the Word of God. And a few lines lower, This
(says he) may further appear by the practice of other Churches, that the
payment of Tithes (though of all other most fit) is not imposed as a necessary
Law. Then instancing several Churches other ways maintained, he adds, I
allege not the practice of these Churches, as allowing the same (for I prefer
the condition of those Churches, which yet do enjoy the ancient provision of
the Ministry by Tithes) but only to show, that the ^^stom ^f Tything is not
imposed by any necessity. And speaking of Melchizede^'s Priest-stood, he says,
Wherefore seeing Melchizedec's Priesthood only rests in Christ, and is not
translated to any other, and that the^e is now no Sacrifice le^t but Spiritual,
of Praise and Thanksgiving, Heb. 13. ^5. it follows that by reason of any such
external Priesthood ^r Sacrifice, Tithes are not now due unto the Church,
neither in any such regard ought to be challenged. Again, page 316. If there
were any such Priesthood, and Tithes in that Right did appertain to the
Church; it is most like that our Savior Christ and his Apostles would have
challenged them: But there is no one precept in the New Testament concerning
paying of Tithes, but only for a sufficient Maintenance for the Ministers of
the Gospel. Judge now, Reader, whether this man thought (as the Priest does)
That our Lord Jesus and his Apostles have sufficiently established Tithes for
the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers; That Christ has assigned Tithes to
the Gospel Ministers; and that they may be proved out of the New Testament to
be due jure divino. But leaving these Testimonies to the Reader's censure, I
proceed now to examine his Right to Tithes by Donation, and voluntary
Dedication, which in his next Section he makes way for, but does not directly
enter upon, being diverted by a passage or two in my Book, which it seems lay
in his way.

. 8. First he falls with great anger upon me; for saying in page 287. of my
Book, called, Truth Prevailing, Though Christ d^ny Tithes, yet if men will
grant them, it will serve the Priests turn. This he calls a most malicious
Inference, page 72.

But who sees not the Truth of it? Care they (I speak of the generality of
them) how they come by them, so they can get them? Regard they whether they
have them from God or Man? If some among them do, yet that this Priest does
not, no man that indifferently reads his Book, can doubt. But he thinks to
pinch me closer upon this point; I know, says he to his dear Brother, you
never said nor thought that Christ denied Tithes, and since the Quaker affirms,
that Christ does deny them, let him produce the place of Scripture where Christ
does deny Tithes to be given or granted to Gospel Ministers, or else he is a
manifest Slanderer of Christ in this Suggestion, page 73.

I should not have thought this passage worth Transcribing, but to detect his
weakness, and show him how severely he jerks himself, while he thinks to lash
me. If I do not produce the place of Scripture where Christ does deny Tithes to
be given to Gospel Ministers, he Brands me for a manifest Slanderer of Christ.
He himself says, Our Lord Jesus and his Apostles have sufficiently established
Tithes for the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers, page 61. yet produces no
place of Scripture where our Lord Jesus and his Apostles have sufficiently
established Tithes for the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers, but on the
contrary confesses, Tithes are not mentioned in the Gospel or Epistles to be
the very part, page 67. and that Tithes are not mentioned in the New Testament
by name, ibid. Nor only so, but affirms Our Lord and his Apostles did not make
a new determination of the tenth part by name, page 69. and that Our Lord (...)
probably on purpose decline determining the pr^portion too expressly, page 70.
Now after all this, (...) that can so freely stigmatize me for a manifest
Slanderer of Christ, what will he think fit to call himself? what badge will
himself vouchsafe to wear? He says, Christ has assigned Tithes to the Gospel
Ministers, page 72. but himself has not assigned any place of Scripture for
the proof thereof. Shall I take the liberty to say by Retortion, Let him
produce the place of Scripture where Christ has assigned Tithes to the
Gospel Ministers, or else he is a manifest Slanderer of Christ in this
suggestion?

The next occasion he takes to fall upon me, is for taking King Ethelwolf's for
the oldest Charter. And here (according to his usual Incivility) he liberally
bestows upon me the liveries of folly and falsehood. You did (says he to his
Brother, page 73.) prov^ this voluntar^ Dedication (with respect to this
Nation) by King Eth^lwolf's Charter. Not because that was the first or oldest
Donation of Tithes, as T. E. foolishly and falsely suggests, page 299.

To the same purpose, page 74. And because the Quaker dreading all higher
antiquity, and omitting al^ inquiry into preceding Church History, does
cunningly suppose Tithes no older amongst Christians then thi^ Charter, etc.

This is his charge; how justly grounded will appear by comparing it with that
part of my ^ook, out of which he seems to draw it. My words are these, page
299. If he had any Charter or settlement of Tithes of Older Date then that of
Ethelwolf (which was about the Year 855.) he should have produced it, and
probably so he would. However, since he did ^ot, I have no reason to think he
has any elder. Where now is my folly, where my falsehood in this? (...) I
foolish in thinking he would have produced an older Charter if he could, when
his business was to clear the Donation from all suspicion of Pop^ry, and his
interest led him, in order thereto, to produce the most ancient Charter he
could find? Or was I false in saying, I had no reason to think he had any elder
Charter, since he, whose main concern it was, did not bring forth an older? Or
was it an argument I dreaded all higher Antiquity, because I only refuted the
highest Antiquity he brought, and did not make it my busine^s to seek out for
him an higher Antiquity then he could find for himself? Belonged it to me to
search into preceding Church -- History to help him to a more authentic
Charter? What VVeak, what Childish, what Trifling work is this! Let him not lay
his Brother's Weakness at my Door; but let him take his Brother to Task, and
teach him to manage his Cause more warily hereafter.

CHAP IV.
HE now purposes a Method, in which he promises to proceed in his following
Discourse. First, he says, He will look back into the Ages before K.
Ethelwolf, and show by what Authority and presidents he made this Donation.
Secondly, He will consider the Donation it self, and the State of those Times
in which it was made. Thirdly. He will note how it has been confirmed since.
And then, Fourthly, Wipe off T. E's particular blots thrown upon this sacred
Maintenance, page 74.

In this Method I intend to follow him, with what brevity I can, not insisting
on every particular which might be spoken to in this part of his Discourse;
because the human Right necessarily depending on the Divine, and the Divine
Right hitherto remaining altogether unproved, what can be urged in Defense of
the Human Right will have the less weight, and need the less Answer.

1. He begins with the Apostles Times, and says, page 75. The Apostles having
given a general Rule for the Faithful to Communicate unto their Teachers in all
good things, the Primitive Christians did always make liberal Oblations to
their Pastors, not only of Houses and Lands, as we read in holy Scriptures, but
also of many and other things, which being Collected every Lord' s-Day, was
delivered to the Bishop, says Justin Martyr.

Should I now take the liberty to deal by him, as he in his 10th Section (page
5^.) dealt by me, I might here help him to as soul a contradiction, as he did
there make for me. I did but grant my Adversa^ies Position, that a Main^enance
in general to the Ministers of the Gospel is -- established by Divine
Authority, page 284. and after said, What this Maintenance is, is expressly set
down by Christ himself, page 286. He thrusts the word [Only] into my Grant, and
reports me to say, Divine Authority had only established a Maintenance in
general, and thereupon infers, if he have established it only in general, then
has he not expressed the particulars; not sticking at a downright forgery,
that he might ^ender me contradictory to my self. Now if I would be so unworthy
and dishonest as to imitate him herein, how strange a contradiction might here
be made by adding the word only to his g^neral Rule, and making him say here,
The Apostles had given only a general Rule for the Faithful to Communicate,
etc. when as he had said expressly but a little before, The Apostles had
established Tithes (which is a particular quantity) for the Maintenance of the
Gospel Ministers, page 61. But his unfair dealing by me shall not, I hope, make
me forget how to behave my self toward him. Nor would I in this place have
mentioned this (having noted it before) but to s^t more clearly before his Eye
the Crimson die of his own Crim^. But leaving this, let us enquire what Truth
there is in his Allegation. Upon this general Rule of the Apostle, he says,
The Primitive Christians did always make liberal Oblations to their Pas^ors,
not only of Houses and Lands, as we read in holy Scripture, but also of Money
and other things.

In what part of holy Scripture did he eve^ ^ead that the Christians gave
Houses and Lands to their Pastors? That Text had been worth quoting. St. Luke
indeed, in his History of the Acts of the Apostles, does mention some that sold
their Houses and Lands, and brought the prices thereof, and laid them down at
the Apostles Feet. But he cannot be supposed to refer to this for two Reasons.
1. Because he makes this Ob^ation of Houses and Land^ by the Christians to
their Pastors, to be the effect of that general Rule given by the Apostle to
the Faithful to Communicate unto their Teachers in all good things, mentioned
in the Epistle to the Galatians, whereas thi^ selling of Possessions, and
living in a Community, was not only long before that Epistile was written, but
sometime also before he that writ it was himself converted to the Christian
Faith; and therefore could not be done in Observance of that general Rule. 2.
Because in that History of the Apostles Acts, St. Luke does not say, that any
made Oblations of ^ouses and Lands; but the clean contrary, viz. that as many
as were Possessors of Lands or Houses sold them, and brought the prices of the
things that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet, Acts 4. 34. to
the end. So that here was not an Offering of Houses and Lands, but of Money,
which the Priest mentions besides, as distinct from the Oblations of Houses and
Lands, and as leaning upon another Authority: for he refers the Oblatio^ of
Houses and Lands to the proof of holy Scripture; but the Oblation of Money and
other things to the Testimony of Justin Martyr. The Apostles (he says) having
given a general Rule for ^he Fait^^ul to communicate unto their Teachers in all
good things, the Primitive Christians did always make liberal Oblations to
their Pastors, not only of Houses and Lands as we read in holy Scripture, but
also of Money and other things; which being Collected every Lords Day was
delivered to the Bishop, says Justin Martyr. Here its plain he makes the
Oblations of Houses and Lands distinct from that of Money and other things. The
former, he says, we read in holy Scripture, the latter he tells us Justin
Martyr says. If he has read in holy Scripture this Oblation of Houses and
Lands, I desire he would direct to the place, that I may read it also. But if
be no where reads this in holy Scripture, but adds this amplification as a
Flourish to his D^scourse, he is the more to be blamed in this, and the less to
be credited in the rest. How lean a Case does he advocate, that needs the help
of such sorry shifts!

Besides, he abuses his Reader in his application as well as in his allegation;
for he intimates as if those liberal Oblations had been made by the Primitive
Christians to their Pastors for their proper use and Maintenance; whereas it is
evident in holy Scripture that they who sold their Possessions, and laid the
prices at the Apostles feet, did deposit that money in a common Stock or
Treasury, for the Maintenance of all such as were gathered into that Community;
out of which Stock Distribution was made unto every man according as he had
need, Acts 4. 35. So that those Oblations were not made as a peculiar
Maintenance for the Apostles or Pastors, but for the common Maintenance of all
the Faithful, as well hearers as teachers, in that place. And when afterward
the inconvenience of that Way appearing, they came to make Weekly and Monthly
Contributions, the Mo^ey so collected was not appropriated to the use of the
Apostles, Pastors or Teachers, but both intended for, and employed to the
Relief of the poor Saints in general, as may be seen in diverse places of
Scripture, particularly in 1 Cor. 16. where concerning the collection for the
Saints, the Apostle advises, that upon the first day of the week, every one
should lay by him in store, as God had prospered him, Promising withal, that
when he came to them, whomsoever they by their Letters should approve, he would
send to carry this Gift of theirs to Jerusalem; yea, and to go himself with it,
if need require. And in his second Epistle to the same Church, Chap. 9. he
reminds them of this Charitable Work, which in general terms, he calls a
Ministering to the Saints; and though he exhorts them to liberality and bounty,
yet so far is he from prescribing any certain quantity, that he leaves all to
this absolute liberty, Every man according as he purposes in his heart, so let
him give, Verse. 7. and in the 9th Verse. alluding to the words of the Psalmist,
he plainly shows this charitable contribution was for the Relief of the Poor;
He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the Poor, etc. And that these
contributions were for the Poor, he speaks expressly, Romans 15. 25, 26. But now I
go unto Jerusalem, to Minister unto the Saints; for it has pleased them of
Macedonia and Achaia, to make a certain Con^ribution for the poor Saints which
are at Jerusalem. It was not therefore fairly done of the Priest to persuade
his Reader, that these weekly Collections made by the Christians for the Relief
of their Poor Brethren, were Oblations or Offerings to their Pastors and
Teachers for their peculiar use, as he seems to do: Which yet if they had been,
it would not in any measure have proved Tithes, since no certain quantity is
expressed, much less a tenth; nor any forced Maintenance, they being altogether
free and voluntary.

. 2. But he is willing to hasten from Scripture-evidence, finding nothing there
that may serve his purpose; therefore he says, page 75. Not to expaliate into
the whole Maintenance of the Christian Bishops and Priests in the first Ages,
he will come to enquire whether they had nothing in that Maintenance Answering
to Tithes; yea, Whether they had not Tithes given them by a voluntary Devotion.

For this he offers the Testimony of Irenaus, thu^, page 76. We ought to offer
to God the first Fruits of his Creatures, as Moses says, Thou shall not appear
before the Lord empty: for not all kind of Oblations are abrogated; there were
Olations among them, and there are Oblations among (...).

And a little after, thus, As the Jews gave their tenths, so the Christians
gave all they had freely and cheerfully to the Lords uses, not giving less then
they, as having a greater hope.

In the first of these places no mention at all is made of Tithes, but of first
Fruits, and that with respect to the Law of Moses, not binding to Christians.
In the latter it is evident the Christians did not give Tithes, or any thing
answering Tithes: for the words are express, they gave all they had freely and
cheerfully to the Lords uses. So that neither of these places serve his end.

But because he here (and elsewhere in Ancient Writers) reads the word first
fruits, he would persuade his Reader that first Fruits and Tithes are all one,
the same thing under diverse Names; and that the very first Christians dedicated
their first Fr^its of all the Earth's productions to God, page 77.

^ere this true, that the very first Christians dedicated their first Fruits of
all the Earths productions to God, m^t^ings some mention of it should have been
in holy S^ripture. But neither any hint at all do I there find that they did
so, nor any exhortation to them, in any of the Epistles so to do. Since
therefore no proof of thi^ can be drawn from Scripture, and that ^renaeus and
others that writ after him, speak o^ the time^ in which they lived, I conclude
the Priest was somewhat mistaken in fathering thi^ dedication of first Fruits
upon the very first Christians.

Then for ^is other conceit, That first Fruits and Tyt^es si^nifi^ the same
thing, the evidence he offer^ are, The Apostolical Canons, which (he says,
page 77.) were the Decrees of diverse Christian Synods made in the times of
Persecution, and of great Authority in the C^ristian Church.

But doubtless were he not at a very low Ebb, he would never have mentioned the
Apostolical Canons (as they are called) which though to credit his Cause, he
pretends to have been of great authority in the Christian Church, yet he must
not be the man he would willingly pass for in point of Knowledge and Reading,
i^ he be now to learn that many learned and knowing Men have long since
exploded and rejected them, a^ Suppositions and false. Perkins against Coccius,
in his Pr^blem of the Church of Rome, page 7. says, The Book of the Canons of
the Apostles is said to be Apocryphal, and quotes Isidor^ affirming the same.
The first that mentioned them, he says, was Epiphanius (who wrote about the
Year ^80.) and in the sixth Council of Constantinople they were condemned.
Seldom also in his History of Tithes, ^. 4. page 43. calls them plainly
counterfeit Canons; and in his Review on that Chapter, shows more at large that
they are so.

. 3. The Priest quotes here a Sentence out of Origin, wherein first Fruits are
mentioned, but not a word of Tithes; yet in his application of it, page 79. he
makes Origin conclude from hence, that the Law of Tithes and first Fruits ought
to stand in force among Christians; but therein he wrongs Origin, whose words
are, Haec diximus asserentes modatum de primitijs frugum vel pecorum debere
etiam secundum literam stare, i. e. These things we have said, affirming that
the Commandment concerning the first Fruits of Fruits and of Cattle ought to
stand even according to the Letter. These are Origen's words, into which the
Priest (for his own end) has slyly thrust the word [Tythes] and made him say
the Law of Tithes and first Fruits ought to stand. What credit is to be given
to such a Man!

Nor deals he much better with Cyprian whom he quotes next, after this manner,
To him (says he, page 79.) we may add St. Cyprian, who lived about forty years
after, who commending the Nobleness of the first Christians, blames those, who
did not give the Tithes out of their Inheritance, which (says the Priest)
Cyprian would not have done, but that he believed Christ intended Tithes for
the Maintenance of a Gospel Ministry.

He that shall fairly consu't the place, will easily see that the Priest has
quite missed Cyprians meaning^ for he does not blame them for not giving
Tithes; but comparing the Oblations of the Primitive Christians, with those of
the time wherein he lived, he shows the decay of Devotion to be such, that they
did not then give so much as the tenth part of what the first Christians gave.
His words, as I find them in Selden's Review, c. 4. are, Do^^s tunc et fun los
renundabant, et the sauros sibi in calo repomentes, distribuenda in usus
indigentium praetia Apostolis offerebaut. At nunc patrimonio nec decimas damus;
et cum vend^re jubeat Dominus, emimus potius et augemus, i. e. Then they sold
Houses and Farms, and laying up Treasures for themselv^s in Heaven, they
offered the Prices to the Apostles, to be distributed for the uses of the Poor.
But now we do not give so much as the Tenths of our Patrimony; and whereas the
Lord commands to sell, we rather buy and increase. Whence it is plain,
Cyprian does not either require Tithes, or blame them that did not give Tithes.
But uses the word Decimas rhetorically to persuade the Christians of his time
to greater Liberality and Charity, by the example of the first Christians, to
whose free bounty, what these gave would not (if compared) be so much as a
tenth part. And thus Seldom, in the place forequoted understood him. But no
more reason is there to suppose Cyprian did here blame the Christians for not
giving Tithes out of their Patrimonies, then there would be to imagine he
blamed them for increasing their Estates by purchase, which the Christian
Religion does in no wise prohibit Christians by just and lawful means to do.
And for that Book it self of Cyprians, de Vnit^te Ecclesiae, out of which the
Priest makes this quotation for Tithes, although it be not wholly rejected, yet
is it suspected to have been corrupted in more places then o^e. Perkins against
Coccius says expressly of it, Cypriano liber de unitate Ecclesia corruptus est
ad stabiliendum Primatum Petri, Problem. page 14. i. e. Cyprians Book of the
Unity of the Church is corrupted to establish the Primacy of Peter; of which he
gives diverse instances.

The Priest goes on, To this (says he, of Cyprian) we may add the Testimony of
that ancient Book which ^ears the Name of ^lements Constitutions. What would
not he stick to add, how adulterate s^ev^r, that might seem to add some fresh
color to his decayed and dying Cause. T^ese Constitutions which bear the Name
of Clement, are less Authentic (if less can be) then those forementioned
Canons which are called Apostolical. Perkins in his Problem against Coccius,
page 8. proves from Eus^bius, ^uffi^us and others, that There are many things
(...) under the Name of Clement Romanus; of which having given diver^
instances, he adds, The eight Books also of Apostolical Constitutions, written
by the same Clement, des^rve no greater credit. And for Selden's Opinion of
them, take it in his own words, For Constituti^ns of the Church; if you could
believe thos^ suppos^d to be made by the Apostles, and to be Collected by Pope
Clement, the first, you might be sure both of payment in the Apostles times, as
also of an express Opinion as ancient for the right of Tenths. -- But ^o man
that willingly and most grossly deceives not himself, can believe that this
Constitution, or diverse others there, are of any time near the Age of the
Apostles, but many hundred Years after. The little worth, and l^ss Truth, of
the whole Volumn is enough discovered by diverse of the learned: and it was long
since branded for a Counterf^it in an ^e^umenical Cou^cil, Synod. 6. in Trullo.
Thus he, in his History of Tithes, c. 4. page 42. and much more to the same
purpose, in his Review of that Chapter, but this I take to be sufficient to
detect the falsness of those Constitutions, and my Opponents weakness in urging
them.

His next Author is Ambrose, out of whose Sermons 33. and 34. he takes two
quotation^. The first thus, It is not sufficient for us to bear the Name of
Christians, if we do not the works of Christians; now the Lord Commands us to
pay our Tithes yearly of all our Fruits and Cattle, page 80.

The Particle [now] in this quotation is not in Ambros^, but added by the
Priest. The other quotation is long, but to the same purpose, and that which
seems most material ^n it is the latter clause, that of all the Substance which
God gives a man, he ^ath reserved the tenth part to himself, and therefore it
is not lawful for a man to retain it.

Here he says, The Lord Commands us to pay Tithes yearly, and that he has
reserved the tenth of all to himself; but the Text he offers in proof thereof,
he fetches from the Levitical Law, which neither is obliging to Christians, nor
do the Priests themselves claim by it; nay, they renounce it, as may be seen
both in the Conference, page 133. and in the Right of Tithes, page 46. What
ava^^ these Testimonies then to their Cause, which are drawn from that Law
which they themselves disclaim; were it never so undoubted that the quotation^
themselves were genuine; which yet there is very great cause to question. For
what likelihood is there that Ambrose, or any other of those Ancient Writers,
could so far forget himself, as from a particular Precept given to the People
of the Jews to infer, that God has Comm^n^ed Christians to pay Tithes yearly,
etc? But that the Writings of those Fathers (as they are called) have been
corrupted in general, men co^versant in History are not ignorant; and in
particulary Ambrose his Sermons ar^ by Perkins accounted Spurious, or
Counterfeit. Problem^. page 20.

Next to Ambrose he brings Epiphanius, page 81. saying, The Scripture exhorts
the People that out of their just Labors they should give to the Priests for
their Maintenace, First Fruits, Oblations, and other things.

To this a twofold Answer is to be given. 1. That here is no mention of Tithes;
and though the Priest, for want of better proof, would fain have first fruits
understood for Tithes, yet so contrary is it to all reason, that no man of
Judgment can be in danger to be so misled. 2. When he says, the Scripture
exhorts the People to give the Priest^ First Fruits for their Maintenance,
since we are certain no Scripture of the New Testament does so exhort, he must
necessarily be understood to speak this with relation to the Levitical Law,
which as it was designed for, and given to, so it did particularly concern the
Jewish Nation, not the Christians. And that the Payment of Tithes were not in
use in Epiphanius his time, nor accounted necessary, Seldom proves from
Epiphanius his own words (in Here Is. 50.) The whole Passage, as it lies in
Selden's History of Tithes, Review. c. 4. page 461. take as follows; When he
(viz. Epiphaniu^) tells us (says Seldom) of the Tessuresde^atitae, or those
which thought the holy Easter must be kept on the 14th Moon, according to the
Law given to the Jews for their Passover, and that because they apprehended
that the keeping it otherwise was subject to the course of the Law; he says,
that (...), that is, they do all things, or agree generally with the Church,
saying that they were too much herein addicted to the Jewish Custom. And in his
Argument against them, he shows, that the Course has not reference only to the
Passover, but also to Circumcision to Tithes ((...)) to Offerings. Wherefore
(as he goes on) if they escape one curse, by keeping their Easter according to
the Law of the Passover, they thrust themselves into many other. For (says he)
they shall find them also accursed that are not Circumcised, and them cursed
that pay not Tithes, and them cursed that Offer not at Jerusalem. Let any man
now (says Seldom) consider if this Bishop, that was least unacquainted with
the Customs of the Christian-Church, understood not clearly that no necessary
or known use of payment was among Christians in his time, of Tithes, no more
then o^ Circumcision, or Offering at Jerusalem. Does he not plainly reckon it
as a thing not only not in Christian use, but even equals it with what was
certainly abrogated? Is not his Objection shortly thus? Why do you not observe
Circumcision and Tything, and Offerings also at Jerusalem, which are all
subject to the like Curse? And because some kind of Offerings indeed were in
use among Christians, therefore in the Objection he providently ties them to
Jerusalem. But of Tything he speaks as generally as of Circumcision. Thus far
Seld^n of Epiphanius. By which the Reader may judge, Whether Christians paid
Tithes in Epiphanius his time, or whether Epiphaniu^ accounted the Payment of
Tithes a Christian duty, who so plainly equals Tithes with Circumcision and
Jewish Offerings, which are most certainly abrogated.

To ^piphanius the Priest joins Chrysostom, whom he reports to speak after
this manner, It is lawful and fitting for Christians to pay Tithes, and that
Melchizedec was our Tutor in this matter, page 81.

Does this sound at all like Chrysostom? Is it likely he would say Melchizedec
was our Tutor in paying Tithes? Did Melchizedec then pay Tithes? To whom I
wonder? Or did he teach that Tithes are to be paid? Wh^re I pray? That
Golden-mouthed Doctor (as his name imports) understood the Text and himself
better then to have let fall such an expression. But his Writings have run the
same fate with others of those earlier time^, being in many places partly
through inadvertency, partly through design, corrupted. And Perkins out of
Sixtus Senensis the Library Keeper, reckons above a hundred homilies that bear
the name of Chrysostom, which yet are reputed Spurious. Problem, page ^4. etc.
And Seldom, in his History of Tithes, C. 5. page 56. giving the Opinions of the
Fat^ers of that Age, says Chrysostom, persuading even Laborers and Artificers
to give bou^tifully their Offerings to the Church for holy uses, according to
the Apostolical Ordinance in the Churches of Co^inth and Galatia; brings the
Jewish liberality in the payment of their Tenths for Example (beneath which he
would not have Christians determine their Charity) adding, that he speaks these
things not as commanding or forbidding that they should give more, yet as
thinking it fit that they should not give l^ss then a tenth part. Whence it is
plain that Tithes were not yet generally paid nor held du^; but the Mi^isters
and the Poor were alike maintained by the free Gifts and Voluntary Oblation, of
the People, which through the coldness of Devotion, falling short of answering
the necessary ends, as formerly, gave occasion to these men to excite their
Charity, and provoke them to more liberality by the Example of the Jews, who
paid the tenth of their increase. Hence it is, that in some of their Writings
the word [Decimae] sometimes occurs. And from their frequent Inculcation of
this, as a Provocation to the Christians to equal at least, if not exceed, in
charity and bounty the Jews, an Opinion about this time, Ignorance and
Superstition Cooperating the^e to, began in some places to enter the Church,
Tha^ Tithes were due. But then they were claimed and received in the name of
the Poor, and the claim derived from the Mosaical Law, as Seldom proves at
large, C. 5. But for the first four hundred years after Christ Seldom is
positive. No use of Tithes occurs till about the end of this four hundred
years, are his words, C. 4. page 35. And again, Till toward the end of the
first four hundred years, no payment of them can be proved to have been in use,
ibid.

The Priest's next quotation is of Hierom, whom he makes to say, That as a
Priest or Levite, he himself lived upon Tithes and Oblations, page 81.

In this he deals not well with his Reader: for he gives not Hierom's own words
fairly, but taking a piece only, represents his sense far otherwise then it is.
Hierom's words are these, Si ego pars Domin^ sum, et faniculus hareditatis
ejus, nec accipio partem inter caeteras tribus, sed QVASI Levita et Sacerd^s
vivo de decimis, et altari serviens altaris oblation^ sustent^r, habens victu^
et vestitum, his contentus ere, et ^^^dam crucemnudus sequ^r. i. e. If I am the
Lords part, and a cord of his Inheritance, and receive n^ sh^^^ amongst the
rest of the Tribes, but live LIKE AS ^ Levite and a Priest of the Tithes, and
serving at the Altar am sustained by the Offering of the Al^ar, having Food and
Raiment, with those will I be content, and naked fo^^ow the naked Cross. Its
plain that Hier^m here alludes to the Jewish Priests and their Maintenance, and
therefore uses the word Tithes as suiting his comparison of a Levite. But it
does no more follow from hence that Hierom really lived upon Tithes, then it
does that he was really a Levite, of a certain Tribe, and neither had nor might
have any Patrimonial Estate amongst his Brethren; all which might with like
reason be inferred from these words, by him that would take them literally and
strictly, not comparatively and with allusion. And it may be observed, that
though in the first part of his Sentence, pursuing his Simile of a Levite
having no part among the other Tribes, he mention^ Tithes which was the Levites
Maintenance, yet in the latter part, he has a plain reference to the words of
the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 6. 8. Having Food and Raiment, let us therewith be
content. Another quotation he gives out of Hierom upon Matthew. 22. where he
says, Hierom call^ Tithes the things that be Gods.

But that Homily upon Matthew is rejected by Perkins in page 23. of his
Problem, and ranked amongst several other Works, which he says, by the common
judgment of all men ar^ falsely ascribed to Hierom.

His next Author is Augustine, who, he says, page 82. intimates it was no new
Custom nor Opinion to pay Tithes as Gods due.

His words as he cites them are, For our Forefathers therefore abounded in all
^lenty, (...) they gave God his Tithe, and Caesar his Tribute.

That Tithes were not paid in the Apostles times, is both evident from
Scripture, and granted by the Priest: That Tithes were not paid in the first
two Hundred Years after Christ, may be fairly Collected from Tertullian, who
speaking of the Christian Monthly Contributions in his time, says, Modicam
unusquisque stipem menstrua die, velcum velit, et si modo velit, and si modo
possit, appo^it: Nam nemo compellitur, sed sponte confert. i. e. Every one
lays down a small piece of Money on the Monthly day, or when he will, and if
so be he be willing, and if so be he be able: For no man is compelled, but
bestows freely, Apol. c. 39. Then for the next fifty Years, those words of
Cyprian (cited but misapplied by the Priest) if the place be not depraved) show
that Tithes were not then paid. For he noting the coldness of their Charity
then, compared with the liberality of the first Christians, says, They then
sold Houses and Lands, and brought the Prices to the Apostles to be disposed
for the use of the Poor: but now we do not give so much as the Tenths; which
plainly shows that Tenths or Tithes were not paid in his time.

And about the Year 380. What Epiphaniu^ writes of the Tessaresdecaticae, cited
but now out of Seldom, puts it out of doubt that Tithes were not paid in his
time, at least in the Greek Eastern Church. And if Tithes were not paid in
Epiphanius his time, certainly the Custom of paying them, and Opinion of their
being due (if any such Custom or Opinion had been general) in Augustin's time
(who was Born before Epiphanius died) must needs be somewhat new. But if Andr^w
Willet's judgment be of any force with the Priest, he is very plain and
positive as to this Case. In Au^ustin's time (says he) it was no general Law
nor Custom in the Church, that Tithes should be paid, Synop. Papism. 5. genesis
Controv. page 314. And yet there is ground to suppose, that in Augustin's time,
in some places, and at some times, some Persons did give Tithes; but not that
there was any general, settled or constant payment of them.

He adds another quotation from Augustin's Sermon de Tempore, 219. thus, Tithes
are required as due Debt, and he that will not give them invades another man's
right -- Whatsoever art sustaineth thee, it is Gods: and he requires Tithes
out of whatsoever thou live by.

He gives us more of him, but this the most material, and says, The whole
Sermon is most worthy to be read -- being an evid^nt proof of the Ancients
Opinion that Tithes were of divine Right.

Whether that Sermon were Augustin's or no, is a great Question. Seldom (a
curious searcher into antiquity) susp^cts it, his words of it are, About
Harvest he made it, if it be his; for it has been doubt^d whether it be his or
no. And in the Margin he says, The very words of this Sermon are in that
counterfeit Treatise falsely attributed to St. Augustine, and inscribed De
Rectitudine Catholicae conversationis, History of Tithes, c. 5. page 54. Which
Treatise Perkins places amongst those Writings of his, which by the common
judgment of all men are reputed spurious or counterfeit. But be it true or
false, the Priest has not given his quotation out of it fairly; but has
omitted those Text, which show whence he derived the claim to Tithes, namely
from Malachy 3. and other Texts of the Old Testament relating to Tithes and
first Fruit, among the Jews, but not obliging Christians, yea, disclaimed by
this very Priest, page 46. and has also left out several passages, which show
that Tithes were then claimed not for the Priests, but the Poor. Decima Tributa
sunt egentium Auimarum: read ergo Tributa Pauperibus. i. e. Tithes are the
Tributes of needy Souls: therefore pay the Poor their Tributes. And in that
very place from which the Priest gives us these words [Tythes are required as
due debt, and he that will not give them invades another man's right] and there
leaves off with a -- it follows thus, Et quaenti pa^peres in locis ubi ipse
habitat, illo decimas non dante, fame mortui fuerint, tantoru^ homicidiorum
reus ante tribunal eterni Iudicis apparebit, quiae Domino Pauperibus delegatum
suis usibus res^rvavit. i. e. And look how many Poor, in the places where he
lives, shall perish through Hunger, by reason of his not giving Tithes, of so
many Murders shall h^ be found guilty before the Tribunal of the eternal Judge,
because he has kept to his own use that which was appointed by the Lord for
the Poor. From these passages, it is manifest both whence the Opinion of the
Right of Tithes, then entering the Church, was taken, (viz. the Levitical Law)
and to whom they were then supposed to be due, viz. the Poor. And he might also
(had it suited his interest) have added another passage in the same place,
which gives a taste of the state of those times (if the Sermon be allowed
genuin) in point of Doctrine. The words are these, Qui ergo sibi aut premium
comparare, aut pec^atoru^^ desider at indulgentiam promereri, reddat Decima^.
i. e. He therefore that desires either to purchase a reward to himself, or to
merit Pardon of his Sins, let him pay Tithe. By which the Reader may observe,
how far the Mystery of Iniquity had by that time wrought, and to what pass the
State of Christianity was then come, when Tithes began to be preached up, and
paid.

The Priest says he could further prove the Opinion of the Ancients, that
Tithes were of divine right, by many more instances. But (says he) I will end
these Testimonies of single Eminent Fathers, with that of Prosper of Aquitain,
who speaking to the Ciergy of his Days, says, We do willingly receive the
daily Oblations and Tithes of the Faithful, and shall we lay aside the care of
the Flock? page 83.

That Tithes by the private devotion of some began to be given in Augustin's
time, is already noted; and that such Gifts were more frequent in Prosper's
time (which was about fifty Years after) is not unli^e^y. Nor need we question,
but the Clergy then did willingly (as he says) receive them, especially if we
consider how much even in those times, they were departed from the purity and
soundness of the Gospel. Of which occasion will offer to speak at large
hereafter. At present therefore take only a touch out of Prosper himself in his
Book, De promissionibus et praedictionibus Dei. Orationibus sanctorum (says
he) me expiari ob omina peccato posse confido. i. e. I firmly believe that by
the Prayers of the Saints, I may be purged from all Sin.

But this saying of Prosper, That the Priests did willingly receive what the
People offered, although it may prove that Tithes were sometimes given; yet it
cannot prove any general or constant payment of Tithes.

I have no^ gone through the Testimonies he has brought of which some are
reputed false and co^nterfeit, as the Apostolical Canons, Clements
Constitutions, and the Sermons attributed to Ambrose. Some suspected, as that
of Augustine De tempore. Some not fairly cited, as Origin, Cyprian, and Hierom.
Some Misapplyed, as Justin Martyr, Irenaeur, and Epiphani^^. Some speak of
Tithes by way of comparison only, and with allusion to the Jewish State. Some
mention Tithes by way of provocation to stir up the People to greater Charity
and Liberality. Some about four hundred Years after Christ, Preach up Tithes to
be due, but to the Poor; and enforce the Claim from the Mosaical Law, and other
Writings of the Old Testament. But none of them, (I except those Spurious
Constitutions and Canons) say, That Christ Appointed, Established, Confirmed
Tithes, or that the Apostles either in^oyn'd or approved the payment of them,
or that they were at all paid in the first Ages of Christianity. So that
hitherto we have found no Divine Right to Tyth^s under the Gospel, unless any
will so far deceive themselves as to acknowledge that for a Divine Right now in
force which depended on the Levitical Law, and by its abrogation ceased.

. 4. At the close of his Testimonies, the Priest says, Now I hope the Quaker
will not say all these were Papists; or that the Church was Popish as early as
Irenaeus and Origin: and if not, then he must recant his false Assertion, that
Tithes came in with Popery, page 84.

That which in my former Book, I said of Tithes having their institution from
Popery, was with relation to that Chart^r of Ethelwolf, which the Priest
grounded their Dedication on, and to the Definition of Popery which he then
gave, of which more hereafter. However, I see no necessity either: to affirm,
the Church was Popish as early as Irenaeus and Origin, or to recant what I have
said in my former Book concern^ng the institution of T^thes. For he has not
proved, and I deny, that Tithes were instituted, required or paid in the times
of Irenaeus or Origin, or well-nigh two hundred Years after. But of the times
in and about which Tithes began to be thought due, and as so paid (which Seldom
is positive, was not till about the end of the fourth Century, and the
beginning of the fifth) and of the State of the Church then, and some what
earlier also, not to speak my own Sense, I will give the Reader a short View,
and submit it to his judgment.

About the Year of Christ two hundred (as early as Origin) Prayers, Offerings
and Sacrifices for the Dead began to be in use in the Church. Tertullian, who
lived in that time, mentions these things in his Book De Corona Militis, and
says, They sprang from Tradition.

As early also was the Opinion of Purgatory received in the Church, and
believed. Both Tertullian and Origin held it, as Perkins confesses, Problem
page 175.

Much about the same time crept in the Opinion of the Intercession of Saints
departed this life, from which sprang the Custom of Praying to Saints. And
though for some time this was disputed amongst the Learned of those times, yet
toward the latter end of the fourth Century (much about the same time that
Tithes began to be thought due) this Custom of Praying to Saints grew in use in
the Church. And Perkins acknowledges, that the Ancients, especially after the
year four hundred, did not only sin, but were guilty of Sacrilege; for they
some itmes place (saye^ he) their Hope, Faith and Confidence in the Saints; of
which he gives diverse instances, page 93.

Relics began to be had in veneration, and to be carried up and down, and
flocked after about the Year three hundred, idem. p. 81.

The going on Pilgrimage came in fashion about the Year three hundred and
twenty, and prevailed so fast, that about the end of that Century, it was made
a part of the Worship of God, idem. page 119.

The use of Chrisme was instituted by Pope Sylvester, about the Year 330.

Extreme Vn^^on was Decreed by Pope Innocen^ the first, in the Year 402.

Monkish Life began about the Year 260. idem* page 226.

The Caelibate, or single Life of Priests, began to be Preached up, by or before
the Year 300. And about the Year 380. it was commanded by the public ^udgment
of the Church, and a Vow of perpetual chastity declared necessary, and
enjoined, idem. page 192.

By these few instances the Reader may give a guess at the State of the Church
in those days, wherein Tithes began to get up. How much worse it grew
afterward in the following ages, when Tithes came to be settled and
established by Laws, I shall have further ^ccasion anon to show. In the mean
time I proceed to examine the Authorities the Priest urges from the Decrees of
Councils.

. 5. As an Introduction to his Con^iliary Testimonies, he gives his Reader a
Note, pa^. 8^. First, (says he) Let it be noted, That (...) be certain Tithes
were paid from the earlie^^ da^es (...) Christianity; yet it wa^ not for a long
time direct^y i^joyned by a^y human Law, either Ecclesiastical or Civil: which
shows the first Christians (...), they were obliged to pay them by the Law of
God, page* 84

This is a Note worth the noting. He says, It is certain Tithes were paid from
the earliest days of Christianity. The earliest days of Ch^istianity! Why did
he not say, pag^ 67. O^e Reason why Tithes are not mentio^ed in the New^
Testament by nam^ is, To avoid all occasion of Scand^l to the Jews, whose
Priests were then in Possession of them? Would the (...) have been offended at
the mention of T^thes in the New Testament, which they were not like to see and
would they not have bee^ offended at seeing Tithes paid by the Christians to
their Ministers? Did he not there say, Ma^y things were suffered a while to run
in their o^d chan^el, till the whole Jewish Polity was Destroyed? And will he
now make Tithes to be turned out of their old Channel, and to ^un in a new one
from the earliest days of Christianity, before the ^hole Jewish Po^ity was
Destroyed? Did he not there say, It would have been used as a prejudice to the
young beginnings of the Gospel, if the Preachers had presently claimed the
Maintenance, which others were legally in^tated in? And will he here say, The
Chris^ia^s did pay to their Preachers the Maintenance which others were legally
instated in, and that from the earliest days of Christianity? Did he not say,
^^g. 71. The State of the Church in the Apostles days was such, that
Believers, though they were willing, could not have opportunity to pay Tithes
regularly; nor could the Gospel-Minist^rs receive them? And will he here say,
Tithes were paid from the earliest days of Christianity? And that this is
certain too? Certainly this des^rves to be [nigro carbone notatum] Noted with a
black Cole. He had forgot perhaps, that his Brother Priest (whom he defends)
had said in his Conference, page 157. I confess the Apostles had not the Tithes
in their days -- the Levites themselves were in Possession of them, which they
kept, during the continuance of their Nation and Temple^ Besides, you ought to
consider, that Tithes, or any other fixed Maintenance, was utterly inconsistent
with their unfixed State of Life; being to Preach the Gospel in all Nations,
they became an improper* Maintenance for them; and besides, you are to
consider, that the Apostles needed them not, for as they had their Gifts, so
their Maintenance by a Miraculous Pr^vidence.

Here one of the Priests says, Tithes, or any other Maintenance, was improper
for the Apostles, and utterly inconsistent with their State^ That the Apostles
neither needed Tithes, nor had Tithes, nor could have had them if they would,
because the Levites Possessed and kept Tithes, during the continuance of their
Nation and Temple, which was not utterly Destroyed till about thirty seven
Years after Christ's Death. The other Priest says, It is certain Tithes were
paid from the earliest days of Christianity. Is not this pretty? How justly
might I here re^ort what he most unjustly threw at me, page 59. One of these
must be false, for ind^^d there is a manifes^ co^tradiction. Let them lay their
heads together again and see if they can reconcile it.

But it seems however, this early payment of Tyth^s was not for a long time
directly enjoined; which was seasonably noted by him to excuse himself from
giving some early constitution either Ecclesiastical or ^ivil for the so early
payment of them. But this Non-Injunction, he says, shows The first Christians
believed they were obliged to pay them by the Law of God.

He Is very much out. For, First, That the first Christians paid Tithes at all,
is not only denied, but learnedly disproved, and Tithes proved not only
improper for, but utterly inconsistent with the Apostolical State, by his own
dear Brother the other Priest in his Conference, page 57. And Secondly, If
Tithes had been as certainly paid in the next Ages to the Apostles, as it is
certain they were not paid in the Apostles Time, yet would not such a practice
any more have proved that the Christians believed they were obliged to pay them
by the Law of God, then it would have proved the Christians in Tertullian's
time, who Prayed and Sacrificed for the Dead, without the Injunction of any
Human Law, either Ecclesiastical or Civil, for a long time, did believe they
were obliged so to Pray and so to Sacrifice, by the Law of God; which that they
were far enough from Be^ieving Tertullian sufficiently shows, when speaking of
those things, he says, If thou demandest the Laws of these and other such like
Disciplines, thou will find none in the Scriptures. Thou will find Tradition
pretended for the Author, Custom for the Confirmer, and Faith for the Observer.
lib de c^^on. mil.

He adds, ibid. That acco^ding to S. Augustine'^ Rule, viz. [That such things
as were Universally observed, and owed not their beginning to any Council, were
to be thoug^t to have been ordained by the Apostles] Tithes and first Fruits
must at least be of Apostoli^al institution.

This is grounded on a Supposition (at which he is very notable) that Tithes
and first Fruits were Vniversaly paid. I deny it, both as to time and place.
Let him first prove that, and then he may expect ^ further Answer. Now to his
Councils.

. 6. In his first Regiment of Councils, that which leads the Van, page 85. is
the Counterfeit Canons falsely ascribed to the Apostles; of which enough has
been said before to det^ct them, and shame ^him for urging them. Next comes up
the Council of Gangra held about the Year 324. in the seventh and eighth Canons
of which, Tithes (he says) are called [(...)] which he Englishes (but ill)
E^c^esiastical Tribute of Fruits. But bearing with the Translation, let him
show (if he can) that Tithes are mentioned, by name, in any Canon of that
Council. If not, Why abuses he his Reader in saying, Tithes are there called
Ecclesiastical Tribute of Fruits? A like falsehood he imposes on his Reader in
his next quotation of the Council of Anti^^h, held in the Year 341. (as he
says, but in the Year 345. says Burdegalens^s) in the twenty fourth and
twenty fifth Canons, of which he reads (he says) The profits of the Church, or
the Fruits of the Fields.

But what is that to the proof of Tithes? Could the Church have no Profits or
Fruits of the Fields but it must needs be Tithes? If Tithes had been named
(...) that Council, why did he not show that? But if they were not named there,
why does he play upon his Reader, and endeavor to persuade him they we^e? Is
he not ashamed to say, he finds many Ancient Councils suppose Tythe^ to have
been paid, and ^rdering how Tithes should be distributed by the Bishops, and
yet cannot show out of those ancient Councils (as he calls them) that Tithes
were so much as once named in them?

To these Councils (for credit sake, and to increase the number) he adds the
Canonical Epistle (as he calls it) of St. Cyrill of Alexandria to Domnus,
where, he says, he finds, mention of Ecclesiastical Revenues.

What then, is nothing an Ecclesiastical Revenue but Tithes? If he had found
that Revenue there called Tithes, he had t^en found something to his purpose;
but as it is, it helps him not at all. See now what his great boast of MANY
Ancient Councils, which suppose Tithes to have been paid, etc. is come to. The
first has long since been branded for a Counterfeit, the two next have not a
word of Tithes, the fourth and last is not the Decree of a Council, but the
Epistle of a single Person, and that says nothing of Tithes neit^er. And yet,
such is the immodest Confidence of the man, that he does not stick to say, page
86. In the forecited places it appears, that Tithes and First Fruits were
given to the Church long before the Year of Christ 324. So indeed I think they
had need to have been, if they had been paid (as he boldly says, it is certain
they were) from the earliest days of Christ^anity, page 84. But as that is
very fairly disproved, by his own dear Brother, in his Friendly Conference,
page 157. So this remains yet to be proved by himself, or any other, that like
himself, has so much confidence and (...) little credit, as to undertake it.

But how comes it we have no more of these antien^ Councils produced? Why
brought he not forth the Council of Caesaria (holden about the Year 200.) which
Burdegalensis calls the first Council after the Apo^^les times? why past ^e
over the several Councils of Carthage, held about the Years 236. and 253? Why
slipped he those ^olden at Antioch about the Year 270? Why mentioned he not the
Council of Sinuessa in Campania, nor the first of Ancyra, held about the Year
2^0? Why took he no notice of the Council holden at (Cirtes) in N^midia, about
the Year 304? Of the second of Ancyra, about the Year 309? Or of the
Neo-Caesarian, about the Year 313? And (to pass by the Roman and Elibertine
Councils under Sylvester) how came he to omit that great and universal Council
(as some call it) holden at N^ce, about the Year 320? Were some of these
Councils rejected? so were some of them he urged. Was there no mention of
Tithes in these? no more was there in those he alleged. And does it not look
strangely that so many Councils, held in s^veral parts of the World, should not
have a word of Tithes; and yet this man should talk of Tithes being certainly
paid from the earliest days of Christianity^ Pray hear what Seldom says upon
this subject, chap. 4. of his H^story of Tithes, page 43. speaking of the
Opinion of them that would have Tithes to be an Ordinance of the Apostles, Had
it been (says he) the Apostles Ordinance, or the use of the Church in the
Primitive times, Origin, Tertullian and Cypria^ (having such occasion to
mention it) could not have be^n so silent of it. And is it likely (adds he)
that all the old Councils from thence, till near s^x Hundred Years after Christ
(which, being authentic beyond exception, have special Canons for the Lands
and ^oods poss^st by the Church, the Offerings, Revenu^s, and such more) could
have omitted the name of Ten^hs, if either such use or Apostolical Law had
preceded? They (says he) talk of (...), the Goods of the Chu^^h, (...), (...)
Offerings of first Fruits; but have not a word any where of the tenth part. And
(adds he) (...) those counterfeit Canons also (meaning those called the
Apostles Canons) one is inde^d of first Fruits (although, touching them by that
Name, certainly no Law was made under the Apostles) but no words of Tenths,
Thus he.

. 7. Thus far of those Councils which he supposes suppose Tithes to have been
paid. Come we now to those other which, he says, directlye join them, of which
the first he gives is, The Decree of a Roman Council in the Year 374.
commanding, That Ty^^s and first Fruits should be paid by the Christians, and
they which withold them should be anathematized, page 86.

This is the first of his direct Injunctions for the payment of Tithes; and he
had no sooner set down this, but he began to bethink himself, that this
Council, if it came to be examined, would scarce stand the trial, and therefore
without more ado, in the very next words he says, But there is some question
whether this Council be genuin or no; I shall therefore (says he) ^mit this,
and all those other Councils which suppose them, but do not enjoin them, page
86.

The Proverb says, we may judge of a Man by the Company he keeps. But if we
should judge of his Cause, by the Evidences he brings to prove it, what may the
Cause be thought to be, when the Witnesses are Counterfeits, Cheats, corrupted
and fals^? What shameful work is this?

But now he comes to one which he calls a positiv^ Ecclesiastical Law, and the
first too; and yet that was not made till the Year 5^0. as he says, but Seldom
places it in the Year 586. It is the Council of Matiscon (a Bishopric in the
Diocese of Lions) which he says, page 87. speaks thus, The divine Laws taking
care of the Priests and Ministers of the Churches, for their Inheritance, have
enjoined all the People to pay the Tyth^^ of their Fruits to holy places, that
being hindered by no labor, they may more duly attend spiritual Ministries,
which Laws the whole company of Christians have for a long time kept inviolate.

T^us far his English differs little from the Latin, as Seldom has it, saving
that where his English is, That being hindered by no labor: The Latin^ adds,
per res illegitimas, i. e. by Unlawful things. But in the latter part of his
quotation, which contains the Decree it self, there is no correspondence
between the Latin and his English; so great a Liberty of variation does he
take. The Latin in Selden's (History of Tithes, c. 5.. 5.) goes on thus, Vnd^
statuimus ut Decimas Ecclesiasticas ^mnis Populus inferat, quibus Sacerdotes
aut in Pauperum usu^ aut (...) Captivorum redemptione^ erogatis, suis
orationibus pacem populo ac Salutem impetrent. i. e. Whereupon we ordain that
all the People bring in the Ecclesiastical Tithes, which being bestowed either
for the use of the Poor, or for the Redemption of Captives, the Priests by
their Prayers may obtain Peace and Safety for the People. Instead of which his
English runs thus, Wherefore we D^cree and ordain, That the Anti^nt Custom be
obs^rved s^ill among the Faithful, and that all the People bring in the Tithes,
which maintain the Worship of God. Let the Understanding Reader compare now,
and see what he can find in this English to Answer that in the Latin [quibus
Sacerdotes, aut in pauperum usum, aut in captivorum redemptionem erogatis, suis
orationibus pacem populo ac s^^utem impetrent] or what in the Latin to Answer
this in the English [That the Ancient Custom be observed still among the
Faithful; And, That Tithes maintain the Worship of God.] This is a fault this
Priest is too frequently guilty of: he gives not his quotations in the Authors
words, but in his own, concealing the Author's, that he may the more safely and
undiscerned twist his quotations to his purpose, and thereby lead his Readers
judgment Captive Hoodwi^kt. His design here was to prove the Antiquity of
Tithes in the Christian-C^urch, to contenance which, he is not content with
what is said in the Decree, viz. That the Christians have kept these Laws
inviolate for a long time; but adds, The Ancient Custom. And because the words
of the Decree show what Service Tithes were then ^ut to, namely, the us^ of the
Poor or R^demption of Captives, he leaves that out, and inst^^d thereof puts in
[which maintain the Worship of God] And having thus formed it for his purpose,
he thinks now he has got enough to serve his turn. These words (he says) do
fully prove our Assertion of Tithes having been paid from the beginning, ^ure
divine, page 87.

But he mistakes in this too, and that not a little. This Council falls a great
(...) too low to prove his Assertion. For how should these, who lived so near
the end of the sixth Century, understand the Practice of the first Times, what
was done in the beginning, and what was paid in the earliest days of
Christianity, better then they whose lot fell nearer to the first Times by
well-nigh the one half? Or what likelihood is there, that if Tithes had been
paid from the beginning, from the earliest days of Christianity, no one of
those many Councils before remembered, should so much as once have mentioned
Tithes, especially seeing diverse of them speak particularly of the Offerings,
Oblations, Rev^nues and Treasure of the Church? But this Council intimates,
that Tithes had been paid for a long time.

What then, must that long time be extended to the very beginning, to the
earliest days of Christianity? No such matter. Seldom says, That long time
they speak of, might have had perhaps beginning from the Doctrine of those two
great Fathers St. Ambrose and St. Augustine, about the Year 400. History of
Tithes, page 48. From which time to this Council, there having passed about one
hundred and eighty years, might not improperly be called a long time. The
common use of speech will ^ustifie it. But the Decree mentions Divine Laws,
from whence the Priest infers Tithes were paid from the beginning, jure divino.

But Seldom, in the place fore quoted, shows, that the Laws there called
Divine, were but the Mosaical Laws, which these Priest^, both one and 'tother,
refuse to claim by, Friend^y Co^^erence, page 133. Right of Tithes, page 46.
T^us much of the particular parts of the Decree. Now of the Council, it self,
it is observable, that as it was but a provincial Council, and so affords no
general Determination; so (as Seldom Notes, page 58.) Not so much as any Canon
of it is found mentioned, as of received Authority, in any of the more Ancient
Compilers of Synodal Decrees: which he there shows at large. But leaving what
has been said of this to the Readers observation and judgment, I go on to
examine his next quotation out of the Council of Hispalis, which he Dates in the
Year 590. and delivers in these words, We ordain that all the Fruits and Tithes
as well of Cattle as of Fruits, be rightly offered to their several Churches,
by Rich and Poor, according to the saying of the Lord by the Prophet, Bring ye
all the Tithes into the Storehouse, etc. -- For as God has given us all, so
of all he requires Tithe of the Profits of the Field, and all Provisions, of
Bee's and Honey, Lambs, etc. And he that pays not Tithes of all these, is a
Thief to God himself, page 88. His observation on this is, That they all
declare Tithes to be due, jure divino.

But whence fetched they their Opin^on of the Divine Right of Tithes? Do they
not deduce it from the Words of the Prophet, and ground their Decree thereupon?
And had not those Words of the Prophet a direct reference to the C^remonial
Law? And is not the Ceremonial Law ended and abrogated by Christ? And do not
these Priests disown any claim from it? Friendly Conference, page 133. Right of
Tithes, page 4^. What trifling then is it thus to Argue! Besides, there is
great ground to sus^ect the credit of his quotation. Seldom Nothing the
falsehood which some c^mmit, who out of Iuo, attributed an express Canon for the
payment of first Fruits and Tenths, to the provincial Synod of Sivil, and
giving the words of that Canon, little different from these quoted by the
Priest, says, The old Manuscript Copy of Iuo has it, ex concili^ Spanensi,
and the Printed Book ex concilio Hispalensi. Then sticking a little at the word
[Spanensi] he adds, Whatever he meant by it, clearly the whole Canon is of much
later time, the first words of it also being nothing but the Syllables of one
of Charlemains Laws, that was not made till 780. years from Christ. He observes
also that Gratian warily abstained from using these Canons; and a little after
concludes positively, That among the known and certain Monuments of Truth, till
about the end 800 years, no Law Pontificial of or Synodal (saving that of
Mascon) Determins or Commands any thing concerning Tenths, although very many
are which, speaking purposely and largely of Church Revenues, Oblations, and
such like, could not have been silent of them, if that quantity had been then
established for a certain duty. He then shows that the Canonists and others in
later Ages, compiling their Decrees, have made those words, by which the
Offerings of the Christians were expressed, to serve as if they had expressly
named Tithes (in which Observation he seems to take this very Priest by the
Nose) and concludes thus, He that reads those old Canons only, as they are so
applied, in late Authority, to Tithes, might perhaps soon think that at first
they were made specially and by name for them. The matters (says he) is
plainly otherwise. What was ordained in them about Tithes, is out of them in
later times (Tithes and Oblatio ^s being then supposed of equal right) expressly
extended also to Tithes. And to this purpose he cites Friar (...), (in Prolegom
ad To^^. 1. Con^il.) thus, Licet forsan fals^ t^li sint Pontifici, vel cert^
tali Co^cilio per scriptorum inc^rian ad scripti. i. e. Although perhaps
(speaking of such Canons) they are falsely ascribed to such a Pope, or to such a
Council by the carelessness of Writers. Thus far Seldom, Hist. Tythe^, c. 5.. 5.)

And in his sixth Section of the same Chapter, mentioning again the Decree of
Masoon, which was but Provincial, he says, No Canon as yet was received in the
Church generally, as a binding Law, for payment of any certain quantity; which
not only appears (says he) in that we find none such now remaining, but also
is confirmed by the Testimony of a great and learned French Bishop (in whose
Province also Mascon was) that could not be ignorant of the received Law of his
time. He lived and wrote very near the end of this four Hundred Years (I think
(says he) in the very beginning of the next, which, according* to S^lden's
division, must be the Year 900.) And, in a Treatise about the dispensation of
Church Revenues, expressly denies, that before his time any Synod or general
Doctrine of the Church had determined or ordained any thing touching the
quantity that should be given, either for Maintenance or building of Churches.
He gives the Testimony of this Bishop in his own words, thus, Ja^ vero de
donandis rebus etordinandis Ecclesijs, nihil unquam in Synodis constitutum est,
nihil a Sanctis Patribus public praedicatum. Nulla enim compulit necessitas,
fervente ubique religiosa devotione, et amore illustrandi Ecclesias ultro
^estruante, etc. (i. e. But now concerning endowing and ordaining Churches,
there has never been any thing decreed in Synods, nor publicly preached by the
holy Fathers. For there has not been any necessity for that, religious Devotion
being every where warm, and the desire of adorning Churches burning of its own
accord. And then adds, This Author is Agobard Bishop of Lions (very learned and
of great judgment) and had not so confidently denied what you see he does, if
any Decree, Canon, or Council, generally received, had before his time
commanded the payment or offering of any certain part. And to confirm the Truth
of this Bishop's Testimony herein, he adds, that Neither in the Codex Eccl^si^
^niverculis, or the Codex Ecclesi^ Roman, or Africane, Fulgentius Ferrandus,
Cresconius, or Isidore's Collection (all which, in those elder Ages, were as
parts of the Body of the Canon Law) is once any mention of the name of Tenths.
Thus far Seldom. By which it may appear that Tithes had not so early a
settlement in the Church as the Priest would persuade his Reader.

The Priest seems now to have done for the present with Councils, and betakes
himself to the Laws of Kings and Emperors. To which before I pass, I desire the
Reader to take notice to what a nothing his great talk of Councils is come; and
that after all his great Brags, he has produced but one Council that expressly
names Tithes, and that but a Provincial one neithe^, and falling so much short
of that Antiquity, that Ancient Date, the Beginning and earliest days of
Christianity, which he so frequently and vauntingly repeats, that it was not
much less then 600. yea^^ after Christ, before it was made, and then too in
probability little regarded.

. 8. Now let us observe the Laws he offers, made by Kings and Emperors
concerning Tithes. The first he instances is of Constantine the Great, Who (he
says, page 89.) being settled in his Empire, in the Lands under his Dominion,
out of every City gave a certain Tribute, to be distributed among the Church
and Clergy of the Provinces, and confirmed this Donation to stand forever.

If this be true, yet what relation has this to Tithes? If Constantine gave a
Tribute out of every City, does it thence follow that that Tribute was Tithes
or the Tenth part of the Revenue of those Cities? Or if that should be
supposed, would the Priest thence infer, that the Country People, the Farmers,
the Husbandmen, who lived not in the Cities, but in the Country-Towns and
Villages, were by this Donation obliged to pay the Tithes of the Increase of
the Lands, which they man^red and occupied? What need had there been then of
such a Tribute out of the Cities? This instance of Constantin's Donation, if it
be allowed to prove any thing, will rather prove that Tithes were not then
paid, then that they were. But the Truth of the Donation is questioned. Cusanus
says thus of it, Sunt m^o judicio illa de Constantino Apocrypha, i. e. Those
things concerning Constantine are in my judgment Apocryphal, that is, obscure
and doubtful. Many other Authorites Perkins produces to prove the Donation of
Constantine false, Problem. page 15. But whether it be false or true, it speaks
nothing of Tithes, and therefore is the less to be regarded.

The Priest goes on thus, It were endles's to relate all the Constitutions of
pious Emperors either to enlarge the Revenues of the Church, to preserve its
Liberties, or to secure the Donations made by others. Let that one Law which is
so full for the Divine Right of Tithes, serve instead of many instances, page
89.

I cannot but take notice, how short-winded this Priest is when he comes in
earnest to produce his Authorities. He talks big before-hands, and gives great
expectation of what he will do, but when he comes to the Point, how mean
(Alas!) is his performance in respect of the preparation he makes! What a noise
did he make of Councils ere now! Who that heard him would not have almost
thought, that All the Ancient Councils had been called on purpose to settle
Tithes upon the Clergy? And yet after all this heaving and swel^ing, the great
Mountain has brought forth but one Mouse, and that a little one too; I mean
his high talk and great preparation has produced at last but one Authentic
Council that mentions Tithes (if that one be Authentic) and that but a
Provin^ial neither. And now that he is slipped from Councils to the Laws of Kings
and Emperors, he instances one of Constantine the Great, of suspected Credit,
that has no mention of, nor relation to Tithes, and then immediately says, It
were endless to relate ALL the Constitutions of Pious Emperors, etc. as if he
had almost wearied himself with relating so many before, whenas indeed this was
the first and only one that he had so much as named. And how poorly afterward
does he come off, when he says, Let that ONE Law which is so full for the
Divine Right of Tithes, serve instead of MANY instances! Can any one doubt (who
observes his manner of writing) that this is only a Flourish to hide his
penury? It had been worth his while (though he had taken a little the more time
for it) to have given us some of the most material of those MANY Constitutions
of Pious Emperors, which he says it were ENDLESS to relate; and it is not to
be questioned but so he would, could he have found amongst them All any that
had spoken but favorable of Tithes. But since no more are to be had, let us
look the more intently on this he does give, and see whether it deserves to
serve instead of Many instances. He words it thus, page 89. The Tithes by God's
Command are separated for the Priests, that they which are of Gods Family may
be sustained by his Portion, and therefore they cannot by any human Privilege
be given to Laymen; lest the Supreme Authority should therein prejudice the
Divine Commandment.

I see no reason for his calling this a Law, which is rather a Declaration by
Doctrine, then a Constitution by Precept. If it be a Law, he might have done
well to have acquainted his Reader who was the Lawmakers. He neither tells us
who was the Author of it, nor in what Age 'twas made; but sets it down bare and
naked, as I have here Transcribed it: only in the Margin he has this reference
[Cod. l. 7. Tit. de pr^scrip] But though he conceals the date of it, yet that
Passage in it [therefore they cannot by any Human ^iviledge be given to
Lay-men] speaks it to be of much later Birth then he would willingly have it
pass for. However, let the Age and Author of it be as they are, it deserves not
the name of a Law, much less of such a Law, as in the Case of Tithes may serve
instead of many instances: for it injoyns nothing, but only supposes Tithes
separated for the Priests by God's Command, and declares they therefore cannot
by any Human Privilege be given to Laymen. This peradventure may somewhat
concern the Civil Magistrate and the Impropriators, but not the Case in hand.

In the same place, he says, A parallel Law to this we find in Authenticis,
ti. eod.

It may be so. But where he found it, there it seems he thought fit to leave
it, for he says not a word more of it. But going on nearer to King Ethelwolf's
time, he says, K. Ethelwolf might know how the Religious K. Riccaredus had
confirmed the Decrees of the first Council of Hispa^is about paying Tithes,
Anno. 5^0. Nor could he be ignorant what Charles the great had done in settling
Tithes on the Church about 100. years before K. Ethelwolf's Don^tion. page 90.

The Story of Riccaredus I am a stranger to, and like to be for him; for he has
not been so fair as to acquaint his Reader whence he took it. That of Charles
the great was about the year 780. far enough short of his boasted Antiquity,
and of the earliest days of Christianity, falling indeed in a time when the
Church was miserably depraved and corrupted, and growing every day worse and
worse, as I shall have occasion more particularly to show when I come to
Ethelwolf's time. And though the Priest says, This Emperor (who gave Tithes)
was so far from Idolatry, that he called a Council to condemn the use of
Images, and write against them himself.

Yet Corruptions en^ugh were there then in the Church, beside the use of Images
to prove the Religion he professed to be Popish, according to the definition of
Popery given by the other Priest in his Friendly Conference, page 149. where he
says, I cannot give you a more brief and true Account of Popery then this,
That it is such Doctrines and Supperstitious Practices, which by the Corruption
of time have prevailed in the Church of Rome, contrary to the True, Ancient,
Catholic, and Apostolic Church. Now that the Doctrine of Purgatory, of the
Intercession of Saints deceased, of Monkish life and the Calibate (or unmarried
life of Priests) and that the Practice of Praying for the Dead, of Sacrificing
for the Dead, of Praying to Saints, of Going Religiously on Pilgrimage as a
part of Divine Worship, that the use of Chrism and of Exteam Unction, were
received in the Church long before this Charles his time, I have already
showed; That these Doctrines and Practices by the corruption of time have
prevailed in the Church of Rome, I have proved before by the unquestionable
evidence of Protestant Authors: and whether these Doctrines be true or false,
whether these Practices be Superstitious or no, whether or no both the
Doctrines and Practices be contrary to the True, Ancient, Catholic and
Apostolic Church, let the true Protestant judge. If these Doctrines and
Practices are not Superstitious, if they have not prevailed by the corruption
of time, if they are not contrary to the True, Ancient, Catholic and
Apostolic Church, then am I under a mistake. But if they are Superstitious, if
they have prevailed through the corruption of time, if they are contrary to the
True, Ancient* Catholic and Apostlick Church, then are they Popish (according
to the Priests own definition (...)) and consequently Tithes, so far as he
derives their institution from those who were in the belief and use of these
Superstitiou^ Doctrines (...) Practices, had their institution from Popery. But
(...) this more when I come to Ethelwolfs time.

What has been said in this place with relation to Charles the Great may
opportun^ly also give^ check to the Priest's over-bold Assertion in his
following words, when he says, that Before the time of King Ethelwolf, Tithes
were settled on the Church in most parts of the Christian World, eve^ by Civil
and Ecclesiastical Constitutions, as well as Voluntary Donations, etc. page 90.

I call this an over-bold Assertion, because, First, I know he herein affirms
more by a great deal then he is able to prove; and Secondly, If he could make
such a general settlement appear, yet would not that acquit Tithes from the
blemish of a Popish Institution, i^ as much as I have proved before, even by
the Priests own definition of Popery, that Popery had made her encroachments in
the Church before the time of Charles the Great.

. 9. Hitherto he has traveled Foreign Countries to seck a Right to Tithes,
and has taken much pains to little purpose. Now he begins to look Homeward,
where I am of Opinion he will speed no better. He had a mind in his way to
brand me with ignorance, but he wanted an occasion for it. Where therefore he
could not find a way, he resolved (like the Carthaginian Captain) to make one.
Hereupon he says, page 91. He perceives all along I (...) the very Birth of
Tithes in the Year 855. For this Suggestion he has not the least color of
reason. For if the Birth of Tithes were dated (as he says) in that Year, it
was (...) but (...) but his Brother (...) that (...) them that date, by fixing
on Ethelwolf's C^arter for the ground of his Claim to Tithes, which was made in
that Year. The Argument was his own, the Method and order of his Discourse was
at his o^n choice. Had he designed an elder Birth to Tithes, he might have
given them an elder Date if he could. But he thought fit to Date his Claim to
Tithes from Ethelwolf's Donation, which, out of Sp^lman, I showed was made in
the Year 855. and thereupon I said (page 2^9.) If he had any Charter or
Settlement of Tithes of older Date then that of Ethelwolf (which was about the
Year 855.) he should have produced it, and probably so he would. However, since
he did not, I have no reason to think he (...) any ^lder. I took the oldest he
thought fit to give, and did not take upon my self to Date the Birth of Tithes,
but showed the Reader in what year my Opponent had dated his Cla^m.

^ But having liberally bestowed his Brothers ignorance upon me, and thereby
got an occasion to insinuate that I am miserably mistaken, he goes about to set
forth a more an^ient date of the Birth of Tithes, then that of Ethelwolf's
Charter. And first he brings in Flet^ the Lawyer expounding the word
[Church-esset] to signify a certain measure of Corn which every one of Old
gave to the holy Church, about the time of St. Mar^^n' s Feast, as well in the
time of the Britains as the English; adding, that it was after called first
Fruits. From hence he infers, That by this account, there was a kind of Tithes
paid by the Britains before the co^^ing of Austin.

Pray mark his word [a kind of Tythes] he himself it seems for) all his usual
confidence, would not adventure to call it simply Tithes, but a kind of Tithes.
What m^ans he by that? Was this certain measure of Corn the tenth part of the
Crop? he says, Every one of Old gave this certain measure of Corn, but
doubtless every one had not a Crop of Corn growing. But waving this and his
other Conceits of the Saxo^ words Ciric-sceat, or Ciric-set signifying the
Tribute of the Church, or the Church Seed; with what else he urges out of
Malmsbury, Spelman and Lindenbrogius, concerning first Fruits of Seed, and
Tribute of Corn together with the Law he cites of K. Ina commanding the payment
of the Caric-sceat on the Feast of St. Martin under a severe penalty (all which
are nothing to the present purpose, unless he could prove that this
Church-esset and Caric-sceat were really and properly Tithes, which I deny) I
go on to his next quotation, the Epistle of Boniface to Cuthbert Archbishop of
Canterbury, in which he tells me, I shall find Tithes by name. Only by the way,
seeing he has mentioned K. Ina for a Patron of Church Revenues, I desire the
Reader to take a little notice of the corruption and superstition of that Age
and Church in which K. Ina lived, and for whose sake he made that Law* He built
(says Speed) the Abbey of Glasenbury, and garnished the Chapp^l thereof with
Gold and Silver, and gave rich Ornaments thereto; as Altar, Chalice, Censer,
Candlesticks, Basin and holy Water, Bucket, Images and Pale for the Altar. He
instituted also a certain Yearly payment to the Sea of Rome, known afterward
and challenged by the name of Peter Pence, and casting off at last his Regal
Authority, he went to Rome, where in the habit of a Religious man he spent the
remainder of his Life. By this the Reader may perceive what Religion K. Ina was
of, who besides his other Superstitions, was a s^tter up of Images in the
Church; and declared his Communion with the Church of Rome, not only by his
Donation to it, but by entering and leading a Monkish life in it* And what the
Church of Rome at that time was, in point of Idolatry, is notorious to all that
have conversed in the Histories of those times, and observed the great (...)
occasioned about Images and Image Worship between the Emperors Philippicus and
Leo the third on the one hand, and the Popes Constantine, Gregory the second,
and Gregory the third, (under one of whose (...) Ina went to Rome) on the other
hand; the Emperors endeavoring the destruction of Images; the Popes with the
Clergy cls stoutly maintaining and defending them. And under two of these Popes
were two Councils called in Rome on purpose to establish Image Worship. Now to
his quotation out of Boniface, he says, page 92. If I desire to have the name
of Tithes, as well as the thing, among the Ancient Saxons, I may find in the
Epistle of Boniface to Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno. 745. That the
English Priests in those days were maintained by the taking the daily
Oblations and Tithes of the faithful.

Hitherto he has found neither the thing nor the name among his Saxon
Evidences, but has given only some ill grounded Conjectures that Church-esset
and Ciric-sceat might signify a kind of Tithes. And what he has now found in
the Epistle of this Archbishop Boniface, comes much too late to clear Tithes
from the blemish of Popish Institution. For if he could prove an Institution of
Tithes in this Nation, a general Dedication of Tithes or any positive Law
commanding the payment of Tithes here, as early as this Epistle of Boniface;
which yet is far from early in comparison of the earliest days of
Christianity, yet unless he could also wipe away (for covering will not se^ve)
those foul Spots and filthy Stains, those gross Corruptions and Superstitions,
wherewith the Church was (...) that time, and before, miserably polluted and
deformed; all he can say will not acquit Tithes from a Popish Institution, even
according to the Notion his Brother Priest has given of Popery. But though
through the blind devotion of that Age, some of the most superstitiously
Zealous might not improbably give Tithes, yet has not he given, or met with
any Law, Constitution, or Synodal Decree of that time (of undoubted Credit)
injoyning the payment of Tithes. This very Cuthb^rt, to whom the forecited
Epistle of Boniface was written, being then Archbishop of Canterbury, called
together the Bishops and Prelates, and held a great Synod near a place called
Clomesh^, the Decrees of which Synod John Fox has set down particularly, in
his Acts and Monuments of the Church, upon the Year 747. (in which Year that
Synod was held) But in all those Decrees there is not the least mention of
Tithes: No Constitution yet appears, Civil or Ecclesiastical, for the payment
of Tithes. And as for Boniface himself, from whose Epistle the Priest would
prove the settlement of Tithes in England before Popery, take but the Character
that Fox gives of him in the place fore-quoted, and then think as thou can of
him, the Religion and times he lived in. First he taxes him with maintaining
superstitious Orders of lascivious Nun^ and other Religions, and restraining
the same from lawful Marriage. Then he adds, For so we find of him in Stories,
that he was a great setter up and upholder of such blind Superstition and all
Popery. Who being admitted by Pope Gregory the second, Archbishop of Magunce,
and endued with full Authority legantine over the Germans, builded Monasteries,
Canonized Saints, commanded Relics to be worshipped, etc. Item (says he) by
the Authority of the said Archbishop Boniface, which he received from Pope
Zachary, Childerious King of France was deposed from the right of his Crown,
and Pipinus betrayer of his Master was confirmed, etc. From this Boniface (adds
he) proceeded that detestable Doctrine which now stands Registered in the
Popes Decrees, Did. 40. Cap. Si papa. which in a certain Epistle of his is
this, That in case the Pope were of most filthy living, and forgetful or
negligent of himself, and of the whole Christianity, in such sort, that he led
innumerable Souls with him to H^ll, yet ought there no man to rebuke him in so
doing, for he has Power to judge all men, and ought of no man to be judged
again. Now Reader weigh and consider with thy self what manner of Bishop this
Boniface was, what a Religion he professed, what times he lived in, and then tell
me whether or no Popery had not made her encroachments in the Church, in the
time of this Bishop Boniface.

Next to the Epistle of Boniface before mentioned, the Priest offers a
Collection made by Egbert Archbishop of York in the Year, as he says, 750. of
all the Canons that were made in the Councils before his time, and which were
in force in England; among which Canons, he says, page 93. there is frequent
mention of Tithes, as particularly in the 4. 5. 99. and 100. The words of the
fourth Canon he gives thus, That the People be (...) in the right manner of
Offering them to Gods Church. The words of the fifth Canon he sets down thus,
That the Priest shall take them, and set down the names of those who gave them.
There he stops, omitting the rest of that Canon, which in the Latin thus
follows, [et secundum Autoritatem Canonicam coram testibus divi^ant, et ad
ornamentum ecclesiae primam eligant partem, secundam autem ad usum pauperum
atque peregrinorum per ^or^^ manus misericorditer cum omni humilitate
dispensent; terti^^ vero sibimet ipsis Sacerdotes reservent. i. e. and
according to Canonical Authority shall divide them before Witnesses, and shall
choose the first part for the Ornament of the Church; The second part they shall
with all humility most mercifully distribute with their own hands to the use of
the Poor and of Strangers; but the third part the Priests shall keep for
themselves.] I have Transcribed this only to show the Priest's Craft in
concealing it. He would have the benefit of this Canon, he would use the
Authority of it to prove his Claim to Tithes; but he would not have the People
understand how and to what uses Tithes were appointed by this Canon to be
employed. How great a charge are the People now at in maintaining the Poor, and
in repairing and adorning those Houses which they call Churches, over and above
their Tithes to the Priests, whereas this Canon which the Priest urges for the
proof of his Claim to Tithes, commands expressly that the Tithes being divided
into three parts, two parts of the three should be bestowed upon those public
uses, and the Priests to have but the one third part that remained. But now,
alas! the Priests swollow the whole tenths, the two parts as well as the third;
and the People are fain to make New-Levies to defray those public charges,
from which by this Canon they were to be freed. But be this spoken by the way
only. Now to the Canons themselves. He says, they were collected by Egbert
about the Year 750. but by whom and when were they made? Doubtless that had
been very material, but he has not a Syllable of it, but delivers it in the
gross, for a Collection made by Egbert of all the Canons that were made in the
Councils before his time, etc. But by what Art did Egbert collect Canons that
were not made till after his death? For that some such are ^n that Collection
which bare his name, Seldom gives more then probable reasons. First, he says,
The Authority of the Title must undergo a Censure. Then he adds, Who ever made
it, supposed, that Egbert gathered that Law and the rest joined with it out of
some former Church-Constitutions, neither does the name [Excerptiones] denote
otherwise. But in that Collection some whole Constitutions occur in the same
Syllables as they are in the Capitularies of Charles the Great. Of which he
instances one, and says, There are some others which could not be known to
Egbert that died in the last year of Pipin, Father to Charles. How (says he)
came he then by that? And how may we believe that Egbert was the Author of any
part of those Excerptions? Unless you would excus^ it with that use of the
middle time^ which often inserted into one Body and ^^d^r one name, Laws of
different Ages. (But that excuse will not help, since there would still remain
the same doubt and ground for jealousy that these Canons about Tithes were
made in some of the latter Ages, not in (much less before) that which Egbert
lived in) But admit that (says Seldom) yet what is [Secundum canonicam
autoritatem coram tescibus dividant?] The Antientest canonica autoritas (says
he) for dividing Tithes before Witnesses, is an old Imperial attributed in some
Editions to the leave^th year of the Reign of Charles the Great, being King of
France, in others, to the Emperor Luther the first. But refer it to either of
them, and it will be diverse years later then Egbert's death. And (adds he)
other mixed Passages there plainly show, that whose soever the Collection was,
much of it was taken out of the Imperial Capitularies, none of which were made
in Egbert's time. Perhaps (says he) the greatness of Egbert's name was the
cause why some later Compiler of those Excerptions might so inscribe it, to
gain it Authority. And a little lower, he says, The heads of a Synod holden in
Egbert's time, under King Ethelbald and Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury, are
yet extant; but not any express mention is found in them of Tyth^^, although
most of the particulars of Church Government are touched there. Thus far Seldom
in his History of Tithes, c. 8.. 1. whose words I have here set down the more
at large, that the Reader may see not only his judgment of this Collection, but
the Reasons also, on which his judgment was grounded; which I doubt not will
satisfy the judicious and disinteressed Reader that neither was that
Collection of Canons made by Egbert, nor are those Canons themselves of so
great Antiquity as the Priest pretends, and would gladly have them taken to be.

To these forementioned Canons, he adds another of the Council of Chalcuth,
which he dates in the Year 787. and gives in these words, All men are strictly
charged to give Tithes of all that they Posses's, because it is the Troprierty
of the Lord God, or the part that specially belongs to him, page 93.

Whether this Canon be genuine or no, is somewhat doubtful. Some Objections lie
against it, as the making Renulph, King of West-Saxony, to join with Offa in
calling the Council, which seems not well to agree with Renulph's time; and
some other variation of Names, which possibly the mistake of Transcribers might
occasion. But that which is more material is, that the very Syllables of this
Canon are found among some Constitutions made by Odo Archbishop of Canterbury,
about 150. Years after the Date of this Canon. See Selden's History of Tithes,
c. 8.. 8. But not to insist on things doubtful, that which I observe is, that
this Council (or Synod rather) of Chalcuth was held under two Legates ^ent from
Rome by Pope Hadrian the first; which plainly shows both that the Popes Primacy
and Authority was before that time received and owned in England, that this
Council was held in Subjection to him, and that the Church of England was then
in Communion with the Church of Rome. All which is deduceable from that Epistle
written by the said Legates to the Pope, in which giving him a particular
Account of the Transactions of that Synod, they have these words, Haec Decreta,
beatissime Papa Hadriane, in Concilio publico coram Rege Aelfwaldo and
Archiepiscopo Eanbaldo et Omnibus Episcopis et Abbatibus Regionis seu
senatoribus Oucibus et Populo Terrae proposumus; et illi ut superius fati sumus
cum om^i devotione menti^ juxtapossibilitatem virium suarum, adjurante superna
clementia, se in omnibus custodive denovorunt, and signo Sanctae Crucis in vice
vestra, in manu nostr^ confirmaverunt, etc. i. e. These Decrees, most blessed
Father Hadrian, WE PROPOSED in the public Council before K. Aelfwald and
Archbishop Eanbald and all the Bishops and Abbots of the Country, as also the
Senators, Dukes and People of the Land; and they with all devotion of mind, as
we said before, did Solemnly Promise, that by the help of God's Mercy, they
would observe them in all things according to their utmost Ability, and they
confirmed them in OUR hand in YOUR STEAD with the sign of the Cross, etc. And a
little after, acquainting the Pope that the same Decrees were forthwith carried
to the Council held the same time under Offa for the Western part (for the
Legates it seems divided, and went one to Aelfwald in the North, 'tother to
Offa in the West) adds, that upon the reading thereof, Omnes consona voce and
alacri animo gratiam referentes Apostolatus vestri admonitionibus, promiserunt,
etc. i. e. They all with one voice and cheerful mind, returning thanks for the
admonitions of YOUR APOSTLESHIP, did Promise, etc. What the Church of Rome at
that time was has been somewhat declared before, and may be more hereafter.
But of Pope Adrian himself, who sent those Legates hither, and by whose
procurement and Authority that Council was held, take a Character from John Fox
in his Book of the Acts and Monuments of the Church, Vol. 1. page 117. Adrian
the first likewise following (says he) the steps of his Forefathers the
Popes, added and attributed to the veneration of Images more then all the other
had done before, writing a Book for the ADORATION and utility proceeding of
them, Commanding them to be taken for Laymens Kalenders, holding moreover a
Synod at Rome against Felix, and all others that spoke against the setting up
of such Stocks and Images. Judge now Reader, whether this Council of Chalcuth
be a fit instance to prove that Tithes were settled on the Church before Popery
had made her Encroachments in it, and that Tithes had not their institution
from Popery, when this very Council was held by Legates sent by the Pope on
purpose for that end.

. 10. Having said what he can from Councils and Canons, he makes a show as if
he would bring forth some temporal Laws also for the settlement of Tythe^ in
England before Ethelwolf's time. His words are these, page 94. If it be
inquired what Laws our Princes made in this matter: Not to mention all those
Charters which from the first beginning of Christianity, do confirm all the
Liberties, and all the Revenues of the Church (among which were Ty^^^s) we will
only note, that Ethelbald King of Mercia, Anno. 794. confirms to all the Clergy
of his Kingdom the Liberty which they had out of the Woods, the Fruit of the
Ground, and the taking of Fish. And this (being after that Epistle of the
German Boniface, which assured us Tithes were then enjoyed by the Clergy) must
(he says) be meant of Tithes.

In the former part of these words there is a flourish and a falsehood. The
flourish in these words [not to mention all the Charters which from the
beginning of Christianity, do ^onfirm, etc.] what else is this but an empty
found of words without matter? The falsehood in these words [Tythes were among
the Revenues of the Church from the first beginning of Christianity] this ^ tax
for a downright falsehood, let him clear it as he can. Then for the Donation or
Confirmation of Ethelbald: It speaks nothing of Tithes, but discharges the
Monasteries and Churches of his Kingdom from public Taxes, Burdens and
Services (some few excepted) and then says, Let the Servants of God (it speaks
generally, not the Priest^ or Clergy only) have their own liberty in the Fruits
of the Woods and Fields, and in taking Fish, that they need not make presents
to the King or to the Princes, unless they do it of their own accord, but being
free let them serve God, etc. Here Is no mention of Tithes; and if there had,
yet I think the Priest would have been hard bestead to have acquitted them by
this Donation from a Popish Institution, or to have proved this Charter made
before Popery had made her encroachments in the Church; especially if we
consider that Fox in his Book of Martyrs, gives this very Charter as an
instance of the Popish blindness of that Age. His words (speaking of them that
builded and endowed Churches, Monasteries, Abbeys, etc.) are these, The cause
and end of their Deeds and Buildings cannot be excused, being contrary to the
Rule of Christ's Gospel, for so much as they did these things seeking thereby
Merits with God, and for remedy of their Souls, and remission of their Sins, as
may appear testified in their own Records, whereof one here I thought to set
forth for probation of the same. Then he sets down this very Charter of
Ethelbald, and after adds, By the Contents hereof may well be understood (as
where he says, Pro amore celestis Petriae, pro remedio anime, pro liberatione
anim^, et absolutione delictorum, etc. i. e. For the love of the Heavenly
Country, for the remedy of my Soul, for the deliverance of my Soul, and pardon
of my Sins, etc.) how great the ignorance and blindness of these men was, who
lacking no Zeal, only lacked Knowledge to rule it withal: Seeking their
Salvation not by Christ only, but by their own deservings and meritorious
Deeds. Thus far Fox in his Acts and Monuments of the Church, Vol. 1. l. 2.
toward the end. From which the Reader may observe how contrary his Opinion of
those times was to this Priest, who brings the very same Charter for proof that
Tithes were settled on the Church before Popery had made her encroachments in
it, which Fox gave as an i^stance of Popish blindness and ignorance. And
besides the general corruption of that time, The Author of this Charter
Ethelbald himself was a lewd and vicious person. Speed in his Chronicle, page
254. calls him A most lascivious Adulterer, and the Archbishop of Ment^ in an
Epistle to him, taxes him with wallowing in Luxury and Adultery with Nuns.

To this Ethelbald, the Priest ^oyns K. Offa, who he says in the Year 793. did
give the tenth of all he had to the Church.

Why did he not add the occasion of this Gift? Was he as^amed of it? so let him
then be of the gift too. It was a most ex^^rable. Murder, agg^a^ated with the
violation of Hospitality. The Story Fox sets down out of Ior^alensis and
Malmsbury, to this effect; Ethelbert, King of Eastangles came to the Court of
Offa with a Princely Train to sue for his Daughter in Marriage, Offa's Queen
suspecting Ethelbert had some other design, persuaded her Husband to kill him:
Offa thereupon the next day caused him to be trained into his Palace alone from
his Company by one called Guimbertus, who took him and bound him, and there
struck off his Head, which forthwith he presented to the King and Queen --
Offa length understanding the Innocence of thus King, and the heinous Cruelty
of the Fact, gave the tenth part of his Goods to holy Church, and to the Church
of Hereford, in remembrance of this Ethelbert, he bestowed great Lands -- and
afterward went up to Rome for his Penance, where he gave to the Church of St.
Peter a Penny through every House in his Dominion -- and there at length was
translated from a King to a Monk, Martyrol. vol. 1. page 117. Here now we see
the cause of this Gift was a most barbarous Murder, and the Gift the price of
innocent Blood. Yet this Gift of Offa's was but particular, the tenth of his
own Goods, not a general act, nor find we that he made any Law to compel others
to do the like. But the Priest urges that this Offa had with all his Clergy
condemned the adoration of Images, and so was no Idolater. That he and all his
Clergy did condemn the adoration of Images, is more I think then the Priest can
prove; but suppose that, does it therefore follow that he was no Idolater? Is
nothing then Idolatry but worshipping of Images? What Is the praying to Saints?
What Is the worshipping of Relics? Will the Priest say that Offa and all his
Clergy had condemned this also. He Will say perhaps he was no Papist neither.
What went he up to Rome for? What made him so observant and bountiful to the
Pope? What made him before receive the Popes Legates? are not these plain
Arguments of his communion with the Church of Rome, in which besides all other
Idolatries, the adoration of Images was then most zealously maintained?

From Offa's Gift he takes a step of about sixty Years to Ethelwolf's Charter,
finding nothing in the way to countenance Tithes. Now before we enter upon
Ethelwolf's Charter, I entreat thee Reader to cast thy Eye a little back, and
take a short Review of the ^uthorities he has urged to prove the settlement of
Tithes in England before Ethelw^lf's time. His first out of Fl^ta has nothing
of Tithes. His second of Ina has nothing of Tithes. His third of Boniface
proves not any settlement of Tithes, nor that the Priests were maintained by
Tithes; but only that they did receive Tithes of such as did freely offer them.
His fourth of Egberts Coll^ction of Canons, is proved by Seldom not to be
Collected by Egbert, but by some other of later times. His fifth of a Canon of
the Council of Chalcuth is by Seldom upon reasonable grounds suspected to be a
Constitution of Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, above a Hundred Years after
Ethelwolf's time. His sixth of E^helbald's grant speaks nothing a^ all of
Tithes. His seventh and last of Offa was not any general settlement, but a
particular (...) of the tenth of his own Goods. So that amongst all these there
is not any one positive Law, Ecclesiastical or Civil, undoubtedly genuine, and
certainly made within the time pretended, that expressly commands the payment of
Tithes, or clearly declares that Tithes in those times were generally and
constantly paid. Then for the qualifications of the Persons by whom he fains
Tithes were settled, one was A setter up of Images in the Church; another, A
lascivious Adulterer; a third, A treacherous and cruel Murderer, and all
superstitiously devoted to the Idolatrous Church of Rome. All which due^y
considered, what advantage I pray has he got at last? What additional strength
has he gained? What further discovery has he made? What antienter evidenc^ has
he found? What (...) authentic Charter has he produced for the settlement of
Tithes on the English Church, then that of Ethelwolf? Where Is now his great
b^ast of Antiquity, and his vaunt of the early settlement of Tithes? when after
so long a search, and narrow a scruting among all the old Records he could
find, he is able at length to show no Charter for the settlement of Tithes in
England, of elder date then that of Ethelwolf, in the Year 855. nor any
Conciliary Canon for the payment of any tolerable reputation, save that of
Chalcu^h in the Year 789. (if at least that may be reputed tolerable) which was
held and governed by the Legates of Pope Adrian (a stout maintainer of
Image Worship, and so in the Priest's own Notio^ an Idolater) sent hither from
Rome on purpose.

. 11. Now come we after this far-fetcht ^ompass to K. Ethelwolf's Charter at
last, which the former Priest had the wit to begin with at first, and not
trouble himself with a fruitless search after what was not to be found, as this
wise man has done to little purpose. The occasion of the Donation he tells us,
page 96. was the Danish Invasions, which made K. Ethelwolf co^sult hi^ (lergy
and Nobles, by what means they might best avert the anger of God, etc.
Whereupon (he says) it was by general consent there determined, That the
Tithes throughout all England should be granted to God and the Church.

He said in the page next before, That K. Ethelwolf in this Donation does
rather confirm the right of Tithes, then Originally make them due. Here he
says it was determined that Tithes throughout all England should be granted,
etc. Which of these must stand? Was it a Grant or a Confirmation? Were Tithes
throughout all England granted before? what need had there then been of a Grant
now? Were Tithes throughout all England not granted before? what was there then
for K. Ethelwolf to confirm? This hangs not well together. But I observe his
eager desire to say enough, causes him sometimes to say too much.

I expected now we should have forthwith entered upon the Examination of this
Donation. But, whatever the matter is, he interposes another Section, to sup^ly
(as it seems) the defects of the Charter. Thus he begins it, page 97. But lest
there should be any defect in this Charter we will show how it has been
confirmed since in all Ages. Hereupon he takes occasion to mention Allured and
Guthrum, Edward the Elder, Ath^lston, Edmund, Edger, Canute and Edward the
Confessor. All which he might very well have sp^red; the question not being how
late Tithes were settled, but how early? for if Ethelwolf's Donation be
inpugned as Popish, I think he takes but an indirect course to Vindicat^ that
by instancing others more apparently Popish then it self. Yet as if he had no
sense of this he runs on not only to, but through the Norman Conquest, as far
as the time of the Reformation, and out of Spelman conclude^, These Grants had
been ratified in thirty nine several great Councils and Parliaments before the
Reformation. But of whom I pray did those Councils consist before the
Reformation? Were they not the Popish Clergy, the very same (or of the same)
that drank the Blood of so many godly Martyrs, and Decreed Tithes to themselves?

Here he takes occasion to touch again upon his Old string of Divine Right, and
Tithes being Originally due to God, etc. page 99. Which because I would not
(like him) be ^ound always singing the same Song, I forbear to reply to,
referring the Reader to what has been already said in Answer thereunto in the
former part of this Discourse upon his first Period. But there is another
Passage in this Section, page 99. which I am not willing to pretermit. Amongst
other great things which he speaks of this Donation, on^ is, That the benefit
thereof has been enjoyed for eight hundred Years by those to whom the Donation
was made. For this I confess I am beholding to him. He has helped me to a
notable Medium to prove what sort of Priests this Donation was made to, by
assuring me it was made to them, who for so long a time enjoyed the Benefit of
it; which is a Characte^ not at all applicable to the present English Clergy,
nor to any other so aptly as to the Popish Priests, who enjoyed the benefit of
it by far the longest of any. Though considering the date of the Charter and
the time of Reformation (between which scarce full seven hundred Years did
intervene) I see not how the Popish Priests neither can be said to have enjoyed
the benefit of that Donation for eight hundred Years, unless he intend that he
and his Brethren are fundamentally and in the ground a part of the same
Priesthood with them, though in some min^ter Circumstances disagreeing; and so
would reckon the benefit of this Donation to have been enjoyed for eight
hundred Years by those and these in common. But then he should consider, that
this infers the Donation to be made to those and these in common, the
consequence of which will be, that these and they are Ministers of Christ a
like. But because this Passage seems somewha^ anigmatical, if I have not fully
reached his sense, I desire he will explain it in his next. Meanwhile I go on to
his next Section, in which he notes three general Exceptions that I take at
this Charter of Ethelwolf, which in so many Sections he intends I perceive to
avoid rather then Answer.

. 12. My first exception, he says, is in respect of the Author of that
Charter, page 289. And here, he says, I affirm K. Ethelwolf was a Papist.

I not only affirmed, but proved it from History, and gave such demonstrations
of it as he chose rather to overlook then answer. It had become him to have
showed (if he could) that the instances I gave of Ethelwolf's being a Papist,
were either not true, or not conclusive. But he has not so much as attempted
either of these. I showed from good authority that Ethelwolf was bred a Monk,
took upon him the Vow of single Life according to the prof^ssion of that Order,
was aft^rward ^^de Deacon and Bishop in the then Clergy, but upon the Death of
his Father, was in order to the Civil Government, absolved of his Vows by Pope
Gregory the fourth, went himself in great Devotion to Rome, confirmed his
former grant of Peter Pence to the (...) obliged himself further to the Yearly
payment of three Hundred Marks to Rome, wh^reof two Hundred were appointed by
him to buy Oil to keep all the Lamps burning in St. Peter's and St. Paul's
Churches at Rome, and the other Hundred Marks was a Yearly present to the Pope,
and that he was the Pope's Creature.

All this spoken of Ethelwolf particularly, the Priest passes silently over,
without the least touch or note; and as one that is ashamed to confess, and
afraid to deny, he puts me off with this sorry shift, page 100. If T. E. had
known what gives a man the just denomination of a Papist, he would not have
discoursed so absurdly.

What a pitiful come off is this! Is this like a Disputant? W^y did he not
take up the discourse, and lay open the absurdity of it? Would a man of his
scantling of understanding and discretion let slip so fair an advan^age? Who
could have thought it! Well, that discourse however, absurd or not, remains
una^swered, and the instances there g^ven to prove Ethelwolf a Papist are not
disproved, or any way removed by the Priest. He tells us, it is not every one
that agrees in some Opinions with the Roman Church, wh^ is a Papist; since then
all Christians in the World would be Papists, ibid.

But what is this to the purpo^e? is not this another device to avoid the
matter? Are the Instances I gave of Ethelwolf's being a Papist common to all
Christians as well as Papists? It Is true indeed, there are some Tenants common
to Papists and all Christians, as that there is a God, that Christ is come, and
has suffered for Mankind, etc. But are those things mentioned before of
Ethelwolf of the Nature of these? are they received in common by all Christian,
as well as by Papists? Let me come a little nearer him. He reckons himself not
only a Christian, but a Minister of Christ also; Is what is related before of
Ethelwolf consistent with his Christianity? If not, why does he thus abuse both
his Reader and me, by suggesting that what I there spoke of Ethelwolf is
agreeable to all Christian, as well as Papists. But if what is spoken before of
Ethe^wolf be not agreeable to all Christians, but to Papists only, I hope it
will be sufficient proof that Eth^lwolf was a Papist.

Having said who is not a Papist, he now gives us the definition of a Papist
thus, He is a Papist who professes himself a Member of the Roman Church, and
acknowledges the ^opes Suprema^y, believing all the Articles of the Roman
Church' s Faith, p. 101.

This definition would exclude a great number of professed Papists from being
Papists; for many that have lived and dyed in the profession of that Religion,
and in communion with the Roman Church, did not believe all the Articles of the
Roman Church's Faith. Most notorious are the Controversies which for many Ages
have been maintained amongst the Religious Orders of that Church, one sort most
hotly and violently impugning the Faith and Opinions of the other, yet all
Papists. So that to the constituting a Papist it is not of absolute necessity
that he believes all the Articles of the Roman Church's Faith. But if he
profess himself a Member of that Church, and be in communion with it, that is
enough to denote him a Papist. The other Priest in his Friendly Conference,
page 149. gave his Parishioner a Definition of Popery; his words are these, I
cannot give you a more brief and true account of Popery then this, That it is
such Doctrines and superstitious Practices, which by the corruption of time
have prevailed in the Church of Rome, contrary to the true, ancient, catholic
and apostolic Church. Now if this be a true account of Popery, and so true an
one that he cannot, as he says, give a more true; what truer account then can
be given of a Papist then to say, he is a Papist that holds such Doctrines and
su^erstitious Practices, etc. Or, he is a Papist that holds Popery: But Popery
is such Doctrines and superstitious Practices, which by the Corruption of time
have prevailed in the Church of Rome, contrary to the true, ancient, catholic
and apostolic Church. Therefore he that holds such Doctrines and superstitious
Practices, which by the corruption of time have prevailed in the Church of
Rome, contrary to the true, ancient, catholic and apostolic Church, is a
Papist. Now let us measure Ethelwolf by the Priests definition of Popery, and
see how far Ethelwolf will fall short of being a Papist. That Ethelwolf held
the Doctrine of the Caelibate, or single life of Priests, is clear from his
taking upon him the Vow of Single Life when he entered his Monkish Order. He
held the Doctrine that the Pope had po^er to absolve and release him from his
Vows, and accordingly received an Absolution from the Pope. He held the
practice of burning Lamps continually day and night in the houses they called
Churches, and accordingly gave two hundred Marks a year to buy Oil to feed the
Lamps in two of those Churches, and that in Rome. Now if these Doctrines and
Practices were superstitious; if they were such as by the corruption of time
prevailed in the Church of Rome; if they were contrary to the true, ancient,
catholic and apostolic Church (which none I think but a Papist will deny)
then according to the Priest's Definition they are Popery, and consequently
Ethelwolf in holding them was a Papist.

But the Priest says, King Ethelwolf did never profess himself a Member of the
Roman Church, ibid.

Is not this strange! What made him then seek Absolution of his Vows from the
Pope? What caused him to go in such great Devotion to Rome? What moved him to
give two hundred Marks a year to maintain the Lamp-Religion of the Ro^an
Church? What induced him to settle a hundred (...) a (...) upon the Pope? What
led him to re-build the English School ^n Rome, ^ounded at first by (...), for
a Seminary to train up the English Youth in the ^eligion of the R^man Church?
And how I wonder ^as he the ^opes Creature (as in History i^ recorded of him)
if he never professed himself a M^mber of the Roman Church?

He adds, that Ethelwolf and his Succ^ssors were Vicarius Christ, o^ning no
Supre^m in their K^ngdom^ but Christ, ibid.

Certain it is, that the Popes Supremacy was received long before Ethelwolf's
time. Perkins against (...) acknowledges, it begun openly and (...) in (...),
Anno ^^7. which was near two hun^^ed and fi^^y years before the Charter of
(...) for Tithes; and ^e quot^s S^gebert upon the year ^07. thus, Boniface
obtained of the Emperor (...) the Church of Rome should be the H^ad of all
Churches. T^is was within a few years after Austin's coming from Rome hither,
and planting the ^oman Religion here. From which time, for the space of
well-^igh a hundred years, all the Archbishops of C^nterbury, seven in number
succ^ssiv^ly, were Italians and Foreigners, as Fox notes in his Martyrology,
vol. 1. page 121. showing ^articularly in one of them, Theodorus by Name, that
he was sent into England by Vitellianus the Pope, to be Archbishop of
Canterbury, whereupon this Theodorus took upon him the placing and displacing
the Bishops at his Pleasure. He turned out Cedda and Wilfride the Archbishops
of York, under Pretense they were not lawfully consecrated, notwithstanding
(says Fox) they were sufficiently authorized by their Kings. Wilfride hereupon
went to Rome to complain (but without redress) Why did he not complain to his
King, if he was accounted Vi^arius Christi? Why made he his application to the
Pope, if the Pope's Supremacy was not then owned? Besides, if Ethelwolf and his
Successors were Vicarij Christi, owning no Supreme in their Kingdoms but
Christ; how came it that they subjected themselves and their Kingdoms to the Sea of Rome, making them tributary to the Pope by the yearly payment of Rome
scot or Peter-(...), which was a (...) Tax laid upon every House in England,
and paid to the Popes Treasury at Rome?

H^ adds further, That Ethelwolf did not hold all the Opinions of the Church of
Rome, and therefore was no Papist, p. 101.

That Ethelwolf was a Papist, according to the account which the other Priest
gives of Popery (which he says is the t^uest Account he can give of it) I have
proved before. That the holding every Opinion of the Church of Rome, is
absolutely necessary to the denominating a Papist, I deny. A great part of the
professed Papists do not hold all the Opinions of the Church of Rome. His
Consequence therefore is false, although he should prove his Proposition.
Suppose a man hold Purgatory, Indulgences, praying to Saints, worshipping of
Saints, praying for the Dead, sacrificing for the Dead, worshipping of Relics,
Auricular Confession, ^ennance, Absolution, Pilgrimages, Single Life of
Priests, Latin Services, Masses, Merits, and abundance more of such like Romish
Ware; shall this man be denied to be a Papist because he holds not every
particular of the Church of Rome? How absu^d were that? Verily I cannot see
what should induce this Priest thus to argue, unless he should have
apprehension, that the account which his Brother Priest has given of Popery,
will take in him and his Brethren too, as holding such Doctrines and
superstitious Practices, which by the corruption of time have prevailed in the
Church of Rome, contrary to the true, ancient, catholic and apostolic Church;
and has therefore to secure himself from the Imputation of Popery, invented
this new Definition of a Papist.

But when he cannot clear Ethelwolf from being a Papist, he atttempts to
justify his Donation of Tithes though a Papist, and therefore says, page 101.
If we should grant -- that Ethelwolf was a Papist, yet neither would that make
his Donation of Tithes void; for an erroneous Opinion in the person who does a
thing good in it self (as we have proved Tithes to be) does not make the Act
void.

How lightly does he speak of Popery! how willing he is to extenuate it! An
erroneous Opi^ion! It seems then Popery in his Opinion, is but an erroneous
Opinion. I always thought Popery had been at least one degree worse then a
bare Erroneous Opinion. But suppose it for the present to be but an erroneous
Opinion; yet may not an erroneous Opinion be sufficient to make void an Act
which flows from that Erroneous Opinion, and is designed to uphold that
Erroneous Opinion, as this Donation of Tithes did? The Opinion which was the
cause of this Donation was this, That this Gift would be a means to appease the
Anger of God, obtain remission of Sins and Salvation of his Soul. This was (to
say on more of it) a very erroneous Opinion, and from this erroneous Opinion
did spring the Donation of Tithes. Now this Opinion (which was the cause) being
thrown aside and rejected, the Donation (which was the Effect) is void of it
self; according to that known Maxim Sublata Causa tollitur effectus; i. e. When
the Cause is taken away, the Effect is taken away also. Nor was this Donation
Erroneously grounded in respect only of the Remission and Salvation expected by
it; but also in respect of the Person^ to whom, and the Service for which it
was given. They to whom Tithes were then given, were not the Ministers of
Christ, but his E^emies; and that Religion which Tithes w^^e given to support,
was not the true undefiled Religion and uncorrupted Worship of God, but the
false corrupted Religion and Worship of the degenerate Church of Rome. Wha^ he
says of the Act or thing being good in it self, has no place here, unless he
could as really prove, as readily say, that Tithes are good in themselves: How
Tithes or Tenths are good in themselves, any more then Ninths, Eights,
Sevenths, or any other number, I confess I do not understand.

But says he, page 101. If all the good acts of Papists (in the true sense)
and all their Charters and Donations be void, merely because ^ade and done by
Papists; then all the Charters of our Kings, all the endowments of Hosp^^als
and Schools, Magna Charta, and all public Acts for some Hundreds of Years
before K. Henry the eighth, would be void: Which Principle (says he) would
destroy the Maintenance of the Poor, the Privileges of Cities, and the Freedom
of all English Subjects. (With him in this part agrees the other Priest in his
Vindication, page 303. urging for instance Magna Charta, to both which one and
the same Answer may serve.)

This is all grounded upon a mistake, and I doubt a wilful one too. His
interest diswades him from distinguishing, as he ought, between Religious and
Civil Acts. What the Papists did as men, as Members of a Body Politic is one
thing; what they did as Christians, as Members of a Religious Society is
another. Though in their Religious capacity they were wrong, yet in their civil
capacity they were right? they were really men; they were truly Members of the
Political Body, though they were not truly Members of the Body of Christ, their
Kings were true Kings, their Parliaments were true Parliaments, their Civil
Government, a true Government, though their Church was not the true Church. The
making void therefore this Charter of Tithes, which had direct Relation to
their Religion, and was designed to su^port their Church and Worship, which was
false, does not at all shake, much less overthrow those civil Acts, Laws,
Charters and Privileges, which in a civil capacity, as Members of the Body
politic, and with relation to the civil Government, which was true, were made
or enacted by them. He grounds his Thesis on a false Hypothesi^, when he says,
If all the good Acts of Papists (in the true sense) and all their Charters and
Do^ations be void, merely because made and done by Papists, etc. For I do not
say that all the good Acts of Papists (in the true sense) are void; but I say
that th^s Act (the Donation of Tithes) was not a good Act, being given to
maintain that Ministry which was not the true Ministry of Christ, but a false
M^nistry, and to uphol^ that Worship which was not the true Worship of God, but
a false Worship. Nor were all their Charters and Donations void. merely because
made and done by Papist; but this Charter of Tithes is therefore void, because
made to support and sustain a Religion and Worship by which God was
dishonored. So that I impugn not all the good Acts of Papists, merely because
done by Papists (nor indeed any good Act of theirs in the true sense) neither
seek I to evacuate all their Charters and Donations (or indeed any of them)
merely because made by Papists: but I impugn this Donation and Charter of
Tithes, as an evil Act, proceeding from the erroneous, unsound and corrupt
judgment of Papists, and tending to uphold and maintain an erroneo^^, unsound
and corrupt Religion and Worship. Safe then and sound may all the good acts of
Papists in the true sense, all their civil and political Acts, Laws, Charters,
Grants and Donations, the maintenance of the Poor, the Priviledge^ of Cities,
and the Freedom of all English Subjects, stand and remain inviolate and
untoucht, notwithstanding the enervation of this Charter for Tithes.

. 13. The second Objection which he offers in my Nam^ is this, That Tithes were
given to maintain the Popish Clergy. This he says is a mistake, page 102. for
says he, It was for the Maintenance of the English Clergy, who had a Patriarch
of their own in those days, and were a Church of themselves, not holding all
the Opinions of the Roman Church, nor professing any Canonical obedience to the
Pope -- and therefore they cannot justly be called a Popish Clergy.

That Tithes were given to maintain the English Clergy is not doubted. But what
then? Does their being an English Clergy acquit them from being a Popish
Clergy? Cannot an English Clergy be Popish? I wish with all my Heart it could
not. But what I pray was that Clergy that drank such great Draughts of
Protestant Blood in Q. Mary's time? was it not both English and Popish. Since
then an English Clergy has been Popish, now vain a shift is it in him to say
Tithes were not given to maintain the Popish Clergy, because they were given to
maintain the English Clergy. But this English Clergy had (he says) in those
days (of Ethelwolf) a Patriarch of their own. Had they so? How much was
Ethelwolf then overseen in sending to Pope Gregory for absolution from his
Vows, when he might as well have had it from his own Patriarch at home* What
was the matter? was the Patriarch busy, or out of the way, or did not
Ethelwolf know there was one. But who I pray was Patriarch in his time? what
was his Name? When began the Patriarc^ at of England, and how long stood it?
Out of what Legend I wonder did the Priest take this Fable, that he quotes no
Authority for it. This Patriarch doubtless must be a man of a very soft and
easy temper, to let the Pope send over his (...) hither to be Archbishops of
canterbury, the chief Sent of his Patriarchat; and send his ^egats hither to
call and govern Councils. And when Th^odor^s the Italian Archbishop of
Canterbury took upon him to displace Wilfride Archbishop of York, was not
Wilfride very much to blame to neglect his own Patriarch, and go to Rome to
complain to the Pope? What Patr^arch alive, but a very good natured Man would
have endured all this? But I am partly of the Opinion, when it comes to the
upshot, we shall find no other Patriarch of England but the Pope, (or some
Deputy of his) who being in the time of the Council at Nice, one of the four
Patriarchs of the Christian World (as it was then called) took in these Western
parts into his Patriarchat. And when Gregory Bishop of Rome dispensed with the
English in the case of Degrees prohibited, he did it (says Perkins) as
Patriarch, Problem. page 204. Whence it appears that England was then subject
to the Patriarch of Rome, which it would not have been, if it had had a
Patriarch of its own.

He adds, They were a Church of themselves, not holding all the Opinions of the
Roman Church, nor professing any Canonical obedience to the Pope. What he means
by their being a Church of themselves I understand not. They were such a Church
of themselves, as the Pope sent his Creatures to be Archbishops in. They were
such a Church of themselves, as whose Councils the Pope sent his Legates to
govern. They were such a Church of themselves as in case of grievance had
recourse to the Pope for redress. And for the Opinions of the Roman Church,
that they held them all, I will not say, but I dare affirm they held enough to
justly denominate them a Popish Clergy. Whateve^ the Opinions of the Church of
Rome then were, that th^se were in Communion with that Church is notorious, and
that some time before Eth^lwolf, Pope Vitellianus sent Theodorus over into
England and diverse Monks of Italy with him, to set up here in England Latin
Service, Masses, Ceremonies, Letanies, and such other Romish Ware, etc. if Fox
and his Testimony may be taken, whose very words these are, Martyrol. vol. 1.
page 112. And what Observance they paid to the Pope may be not only gathered
from that passage in Archbishop Wilfride's address to the Pope, wherein
speaking of Th^odore by whom he was turned out, he says, Quem quidem, pro eo
quod abhac Apostolicae sedis summitate directus est, accusare non aude^. i. e.
Whom in as much as he has been directed by this high Apostolical See, I dare
not accuse. And from Rainolds De Romans Eccles. Idolatria. Where in his Epistle
page 13. He tells the English Semi^aries, that about the Year 800. the King of
England Revere^cing the Pope as St. Peter's Vicar, gave him Yearly a Penny out
of every Family, etc. But also most plainly concluded from the words of
Florilegus, cited by Camden in his Brittania, page 411. where mentioning diverse
Privileges of the Monastery of St. Albanes, founded by K. Offa, and endowed by
him and his Successors, he gives this for one, that The Abbat or Monk
appointed Archdeacon under him, has pontifical Jurisdiction over the Priests
and Laymen, of all the Possessions belonging to this Church, so as he yields
subjection to no Archbishop, Bishop or Legate, save only to the Pope of Rome.
To the Pope of Rome then it appears, this Abbat, notwithstanding all hi^
Privileges, did yield subj^ction: How much more then did the rest of the
Clergy, who were not privileged as he was, yield obedience to the Pope! The
same Author there likewise adds, That Offa the magnificent King granted out of
his Kingdom a set Rent or Imposition, called Rome-scot to St. Peter's Vicar,
the Bishop of Rome, and himself obtained of the said Bishop of Rome, that the
Church of St. Albane, the Protomartyr of the English Nation, might faithfully
collect and reserve to their own use the same Rome-scot throughout all the
Province of Hertford, etc. We s^e now what respect, what regard, what
obs^rvance, what veneration, what subj^ction and obedience was used toward the
Popes of Rome by the Kings and Clergy of England, even before Ethelwolf's time;
much more was it increased afterward, as times grew worse, and Popes higher.
That the Church of Rome was then idolatrous, and that grossly too in the Worship
of Images, I have showed before; as also, that diverse Monks were sent into
England by the Pope, to set up their Latin Service, Masses, Letanies,
Ceremonies, and other Romish Ware here. That this Romish Ware was set up here
cannot be doubted, since Theodore (one of those Monks which the Pope thus sent)
was made Archbishop of Canterbury. From all which let the Reader judge whether
the Clergy of those times was Popish or no.

But if they were, it is much alike for ought I se^ to the Priest; For he says,
page 102. Suppose again the Saxon Priests had been Papists, that would not have
made the Donation of Tithes invalid, because Tithes are God's Right, and the
Grant was intended to God.

So that how bad soever the Clergy was to whom Tithes were given, it is all one,
the Donation (if he may have his will) must stand. But why? Because, says he,
Tithes are God's Right?

But how come Tithes or Tenths to be Gods Right more then Nineths or Eighths?
He begs the Question, on, and gives it for proof.

He adds, The Grant was intended to God.

He said himself but a few Lines before, It was for the Maintenance of the
English Clergy, using the words of Ingulf, [Universam dotaverat Ecclesiam
Anglicanam; i. e. He endowed the whole Church of England.] But suppose the
Grant intended to God, must all Grants stand then that were intended to God? A
notable way indeed to revive all the old Grants and Donations, which in the
thickest Darkness of Popish Ignorance were by blind Zeal and superstitious
Devotion given to Holy Church (as they called it) and intended to God.

But what think thou, Reader, makes this Priest play the Advocate thus for
God, and stickle so hard for God's part? is it his Care for God, or his Love to
himself? thou shall see anon the Reason. He intends to make himself God's
Receiver, and therefore no wonder if he talk so much of God's part.

But he says, The Clergy of that Ag^ were God's only public Ministers.

It seems then he can be content to call the Popish Clergy God's public
Ministers: but I hope he sees the consequent, that then the popish Church was
God's public Church, and the popish Worship Gods public Worship also; and
where then was the Church, Worship and Ministry of Antichrist, so much cried
out against by God's Confessors and holy Witnesses in almost every Age? Were
they the public Ministers of God who believed and held the Doctrine of
Purgatory, of praying for the Dead, of sacrificing for the Dead, of praying to
Saints, of worshipping Relics, of Auricular Confession, of Pilgrimages, of
Consecrations of Water, Oil, Salt, Crism, of Latin Servic^, Masses, Letanies,
and other Ceremonies of the Church of Rome. By this, Reader, thou may guess
what a kind of Minister he himself is.

He adds, The Donors supposed them a good Ministry, and as such endowed them;
for they esteemed them to be God's Receivers, p. 103.

There Is no doubt but the Donors supposed them a good Ministry; but that
Supposition does neither make nor prove them so. And seeing they were not what
the Donors supposed them to be, there is no reason why that Donation should
stand, which was made upon such a mistake, and without which it had not been
made. For it cannot be supposed the Don^^s would have made such a Donation, had
they not by Mistake supposed that Ministry (to which they made it) to be what
it was not: and Reason would, that what was done upon a mistaken Supposition,
should, when the Mistake appears, be ^oid* But if all that has been given upon
wrong Suppositions must stand, his Office of Receiver may in time grow very
considerable: for, not here to mention all other popish Gifts, what does he
imagine the Turks think of their Priests? Do not they suppose them to be a good
Ministry, and as such endow them? Do not they esteem them to be God's
Receivers? Whatever Donations then amongst them have been made, or shall be,
upon this Supposition, shall be valid and in force, according to his Argument,
in succeeding Ages; and if ever the Turks should be prevailed upon to assume
the Name and Profession of Christianity (though otherwise sufficiently
erroneous and corrupt) this Priest stands ready to be the Receiver of what was
given to the Turkish Priests, up on the same Reasons by which he claims what
was given to the popish Priest, viz, That the Don^rs supposed them to be a good
Ministry, and as such endowed them; that they esteemed them to be God's
Receivers; that the Grant was intended to God; that if there had been a Fault
in the least, that would not prejudice the Masters Title; and that if they had
been a Turkish Clergy, and forfeited their own Right, they could not forfeit
his. The other Priest one may see has the Office in his Eye already; for he
says, Suppose the Turkish Empire (through God's Mercy) should be converted to
Christianity, may not the Muffti himself, and those whom T. E. calls Emaums
(which are the Turkish Priests) together with all the Mosche (which are their
Temples) and Reven^es now belonging to them, be reconsecrated to Christianity?
Vindic. page 314. Judge now, Reader, whether with these men all be not Fish
that come to Net; and whether it is likely they would stick at any thing that
is like to be gainful, who have already contrived a Reconsecration of the
Turkish Priests Revenues.

But to go on; The Author of the Right of Tithes pursues his Argument to the
same purpose again, page 104. (says he of Ethelwolf 's Clergy) If they were
erroneous, neither Prince nor People knew it; and they did not give these to
maintain their Errors, but to maintain that which they believed to be a good
Ministry, and the true Worship of God; and therefore the Donation remains good.

May not all this be said of the worst state of the Roman Church? nay, may it
not be said of the very Turk (whom I mention not for comparison, but
illustration sake) Does either Prince or People know that their Priests are
erroneous? or do they endow them to maintain their Errors? nay, do they not
give their Endowments to maintain that which they believe to be a good
Ministry, and the true Worship of God? But must those Endowments therefore
remain good, and Christian Ministers claim and exact them!

He adds further, That though that Clergy were erroneous, yet Ethelwolf ought
to have given them God's du^, and the people ought to have paid it to them,
which he a^gues as examples from the Example of the Jewish Priests, who though
very erroneous, had a Right to T^thes.

But is it as certain, that the popish Clergy in Ethelwolf's time was chosen
and ordained by God, as the Jewish Priests were? And is it as certain, that
Tithes were appointed by Christ for the Maintenance o^ Christian Ministers, as
it is that they were appointed by God for the Maintenance of the Jewish
Priests? He might d^ well to observe a Difference between the states of Law and
Gospel. God then chose that whole Nation to be his peculiar People: has he
ever chose a whole Nation to be his peculiar People since? Nay, Has he not
chose himself a peculiar People out of all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and
Peoples, picking here one and there one, one of a Tribe and two of a Family?
Out of that People he separated one entire Tribe to the service of the
Tabernacle, who in a natural and lineal Succession were appointed to carry on
and continue that Priesthood to the end of that Polity: but under the Gospel it
is not so. His Argument therefore from the Example of the Jewish Priests will
not hold. But if Ethelwolf and the People ought to have given and paid Tithes
as God's Due to that Clergy, though ^rroneous, then surely he and they were
unjust in not giving them sooner, and so were also his Predecessors: for, if as
God's Due they ought to have given them at all, they ought then to have given
them from the first, and upon that Supposition were guilty of Sacrilege in
detaining them, which the Priest it may be did not foresee when he called
Ethelwolf a Religious and Mild Prince, page 95. a Good King, page 107. and the
Clergy's B^nefactor, page 109. But to what end does he argue the validity of
the Donotion from the ignorance of the Donors, saying, If the Clergy were
erroneous, neither Prince nor People knew it, etc. seeing it had been all one
if they had known it. For if Ethelwolf ought to have given Tithes to that
Clergy, and the people ought to have paid them, though that Clergy were
erroneous, what odds had there been if both Prince and People had known them to
be erroneous? They must it seems have given and paid them Tithes howev^r. How
ill do these two periods agree! In the first he says, Though that Cl^rgy were
erroneous, yet Ethelwolf ought to have given them God's Due, and the people
ought to have paid it to them. In the second he says, The Donation is therefore
good, because if they were erroneous, neither Prin^e nor People knew it. Thus
one while, their ignorance of the Clergy's Errors, and belief that they were a
good Ministry, makes the Donation of Tithes to them good. Another while, though
they were erroneous, yet the Prince ought to give them, and the people ought to
pay them: What would it have availed then for either Prince or People to have
known the Clergy was erroneou^, if whether they ^new it or knew it not, they
were obliged to pay them?

But whatever that Clergy was, he says, Almighty God has now provided himself
of Ministers that ar^ no Papists, but the most considerable Enemies to Popery
in all the World, p. 10.

I verily believe it indeed, and withal, that those Ministers whom God has now
provided for himself, neither do nor dare receive Tithes. And though he cries
out, It is from a Protestant Clergy that the Quakers would take Tithes: I dare
engage the Quakers shall never serve the Protestant Clergy as the Protestant
Clergy has served the Popish, who have cried out, and that justly, against the
popish Clergy, and thrust them out, but have got the Tithes which were given
unto them, and keep them for themselves. The Protestants in protesting against
the popi^h Clergy, did well and very commendably: but their taking Tithes from
the popish Clergy to themselves is their blemish, and will be so long as they
retain them.

. 14. The third Objection which the Priest gives in my Name is this, That
Ethelwolf granted this Charter for Tithes upon evil Motives. For the Good of
our Souls, and the Forgiveness of our Sins, are the words of the Charter; which
shows it to be an effect of that popish Doctrine of m^riting Salvation by good
works; and that he gave this as an expiation for his Sins. Upon this he says,
page 105. It Is somewhat strange that T. E. should reckon ^oth these for evil
Motives; and it is the first time that I ev^r heard it called an evil Motive,
to be moved to do a good work, for the Good of our Souls.

It Is very strange this Priest should think to avoid the ^orce of the Objection
by a Quibble only. To be moved to do a Good Work simply, is not an Evil Motive;
but to be moved to do a good work as an expi^tion for Sin, or with an
expectation of meriting Salvation thereby, is an evil Motive.

Again, (says the Priest) The desire of Remission of his Sins was a good Motive
in it self, only he took an ill course to obtain it, if he sought expiation by
Good Works, ibid.

The Desire of Remission of his Sins was a good Desire; but what was it a
Motive to? If it was a Motive to him to give Tithes, that argues he expected
Remission of his Sins by this Donatio^* and that he did so the words of the
^^arter confirm [Pro remissione animarum and peccatorum nostrorum] And though
the Charter be by diverse dive^sl^ reported, yet in this part they generally
agree either in words or substance

Florentius of Worcester has, Pro Redemptione anime sue and Antecessorum
suorum; i. e. For the Redemption of his Soul, and of the Souls of his
Ancestors. With him agrees Hoveden. And Hu^tingdon does not much differ, whose
words are [Propter amorem Dei et redemptionem sui; i. e. For the Love of God
and his own Redemption.] And the Bishop and Clergy then on their part
undertaking, that such a number of Psalms and Masses should be sung and said
for the King and his Nobles, express themselves to the same purpose, as having
respect to the same end, namely, [Pro salute (as Matth^w Westminster has it)
pro mercede et refrigerio delictorum suorum, (as in Malmsbury) i. e. For their
Salvation, for their Rewa^d, and an abatement of their Offenses.] So that it is
plain, they expect^d by this Donation to obtain the Salvation and Redemption of
their Souls, the Remission and Forgiveness of their Sins.

And that it was the common Opinion of those times, that Sins might be expiated
by Acts of Piety and Charity (as they accounted them) the Examples of Offa and
A^frida (the one falling somewhat before, the other somewhat after Ethelwolf's
time) persuade. The first whereof having most treacherously and inhumanly
murdered Ethelbert King of ^ent, did thereupon give the tenth part of his Goods
to the Church, and founded Monasteries. The latter having occasioned the Death
of her Husband Earl Ethelwold, and murdered her Son in Law King Edward, did
found Religious Houses for Monks and Nuns, To EXPIATE (that I may use the words
of a great and learned Antiquary) and make SATISFACTION for that most foul and
h^inous Fact, wherewith so wickedly she had charged her Soul, by making away
King Edward her Husband's Son; as also to wash out the murdering of her former
Husband Aethelwold, a most Noble Earl, etc. Camden Brittan. page 262.

And that these Acts, and such like, of those and other Princes of those times,
have been thus taken and understood by men of Note and Learning, appears not
only by the last quoted Authority, but also by the Testimony of F^x, who
compiled the Book of Martyrs: He in his first Volumn, page 110. enumerating the
many Monasteries and other Religious Houses, founded and endowed before
Ethelwolf's time, says thereupon, The End and Cause of these Deeds and
Buildings cannot be excused, being contrary to the Rule of Christ's Gospel, for
so much as they did these things seeking thereby MERITS with God, and for
Remedy of their Souls, and REMISSION of their Sins. For Proof whereof he
produces a Charter of King Ethelbald (above fifty years older then that of
Ethelwolf) granting certain Privileges to Religious Men, in which after the
Preamble are these words, Qua propter, ego Ethelbaldus Rex Merci^rum, pro amore
caelestis Patrie, et remedio anima^ mea studendum esse previdi, ut eam per bona
opera liberam effice^em in omni vinculo delictorum: i. e. Wherefore I
Ethelbald, King of the Mercians, for the Love of the Heavenly Country, and for
the Remedy of my Soul, have foreseen it needful to endeavor by good Works to
make my Soul free from all bond of Sins. from which sentence Fox observes how
great the ignorance and blindness of those men were, who lacking no Zeal, only
lacked Knowledge to rule it withal, seeking (says he) Salvation ^ot by Christ
only, but by their own deservings and MERITORIOUS deeds. And in page 123.
setting down the Charter of Ethelwolf (so dear and precious to the Priests)
upon these words in it [Pro remissione animarum and peccatorum Nos^rorum] he
has this Note, Hereby (says he) it may appear, how when the Churches of
England began first to be endued with Temporalities and Lands; also with
Privileges and exemptions enlarged: moreover (and that which specially is to
be considered and lam^^ted) what PERNICIOUS Doctrine was this, wherewith they
were led, thus to set Remission of their Sins, and Remedy of their Souls, in
this Donation and such other Deeds of their Donation, contrary to the
information of Gods word, and no small derogation to the Cross of Christ. Thus
far Fox; by which the Reader may at once see both the Opinion and Practice of
Ethelwolf's Age in this matter, and also the Censure of this Ecclesiastical
Writer in the early Age of Protestancy.

Yet the Priest says, page 106. This Popish Doctrine of Merit and expiation by
good works is not so old as that Age; which he infers from some directions
given by Anselm to those who visited the Sick, in which is mention of being
saved by the death of Christ; as also from the words of Pop^ Adrian, who calls
(as he says) Merits a broken Reed, etc.

The Popish Doctrine of Merits and Expiation by good works was not on a sudden
and at once received in the grossest sense in which it has since been h^l^,
but by degrees; and for a while remission of Sins was attributed to the death
of Christ, and good work^ jointly; which is the reason that in the writings of
those elder times mention is made of the death of Christ, and of good works
promiscuously, and the work of Redemption, Salvation, Remission indifferently
ascribed to each. This the Priest seem not ignorant of, when he says, page
10^. We may perceive they did not think this good work ALONE could expiate
their Sins, or merit Salvation without God's Mercy.

As for the judgment of Ansel^, Adrian, or any other such, it is not conclusive
in this case: for we are not so much to regard what was the private judgment of
some one or few particular Persons, as what was the general Opinion of the the^
Church. We find in Queen Mary's time, when Popery was as its height, when Dr.
Day, Bishop of (...) came to visit Stephen Gardener the bloody Bishop of
Winchester, lying then at point of Death, and began (as Fox relates) to comfort
him with words of Gods promi^e, and with the free justification in the Blood of
Christ our Lord, repeating the Scriptures to him, Winchester hearing that, What
my Lord (quoth he) will you open that Gap n^w? then farewell all together: to
(...) and such other in my case you may speak it; but open this Window unto the
people, then farewell all together, Martyrol, vol. 2. page 1622. None I think
can doubt but the Doctrine of meriting Salvation, and of Expiating Sins by good
works, was then generally believed in the grossest sense by the Church of Rome,
and yet we see by this in^tance some of tha^ Church had a private Judgment
otherwise, and some of the worst of that Church too. For scarce did Bonner
himself send more Sheep to the Roman Shambles, then did this Bu^cherly Bishop
of Winchester, who (as Fox observes in the place fore cited) on the day that
Ridley and Latimer were burnt at Oxford, deferred his Dinner till about four of
the Clock in the afternoon, re^using to eat till by a Post from Oxfor^ ^e had
certain intelligence, that the Fire was kindled upon those Godly Martyrs. Thus
we see some of the worst of the Romanists did not hold all the Opinions of the
Church of Rome; yet neither does that prove either that those Romanists were no
Papists, nor yet that the Church of which they were Members did not hold those
Opinions.

But the Priest, as if he hoped to wind himself off from the Objection by
criminating the Quakers, says, To merit Pardon and Salvation by good works, is
now a Doctrine of the grosser Romanists, and I fear of some Quakers also, who
(sleighting merit and necessity of Christ's Death) ascribe Salvation to the
following the Light within* p. 10^.

In this he slanders the Quakers. I reject his Charge, and in the Name of the
Quakers deny it. Let him name those Quakers that slight the Merit and
Necessity of Christ's Death. I solemnly declare I know no such; and yet I
think, if any such there were, I might as well pretend to know them as he. Nor
do the Quakers ascribe Salvation to the following the Light within, but they
ascribe Salvation to Christ Jesus, to whom the Light within does lead those
that truly follow it. Herein he has wronged the Quakers, as in his next words
he abuses me; T. E. (says he) himself pleads, that there is no Salvation unless
we have a ^inless Perfection, and (as if Christ had never dyed) positively
affirms, Wheresoever there is Sin, there is also Condemnation; for which he
sets page 97. of my Book, in which no such words are to be found as he has put
down in the first part of this Sentence [viz. That there is no Salvation unless
we have a ^inless Perfection] these not being my words, but his own. And the
latter part he has grossly perverted, making those words [Wheresoever there is
Sin, there is also Condemnation] to import, as if Christ had never dyed; for
which there is no color at all. For the End of Christ's Coming and tasting
Death, was not to take away the condemnation only, and leave the sin remaining;
but he was manifested to take away our sins, 1 Jo^n 3. 5. to destroy the works
of the Devil, verse. 8. Not only to take off the Condemnation due for those
Works, and leave the Works standing; but to destroy the Works themselves. And
where Sins are not taken away, where the Works of the Devil are not destroyed,
there the Condemnation is not taken off, but remains, as the Apostle proves,
Romans 2. 9. Now this Doctrine does not at all deny the Death of Christ, nor
derogate any thing from the Virtue and Power thereof, but confesses and exalts
it, in that it ascribes to him the whole work of taking away not only the
condemnation, but the sin also; of not only taking off the guilt, but
destroying the works of the Devil too: whereas the contrary Doctrine does
import, that Christ has not completed the Work he came to do, while it
supposes him to take away the Condemnation, but leave the Sin remaining, whenas
he was manifested on purpose to take away the Sin, and to destroy the Works of
the Devil.

But as if the Priest thought it not enough to pervert my words, and fasten on
them a suggestion by no means deducible from them, he thus goes on; Now he that
looks for Salvation by his Per^ection, does hold that Popist Doctrine of
meriting Salvation by good Works.

But who is he that looks for Salvation by his Perfection? The Quaker does not:
who does? It is one thing to believe Perfection attainable, to aim at it, and
press after it, but it is another thing to look for Salvation by it. Patience,
Humility, Meekness, Temperance, Charity, and other Christian virtues are not
only desirable, but (I suppose he will grant) attainable. But must they who seek
after and obtain these Virtues, needs look for Salvation by them? it is no fair
consequent: and had he had the last of these Virtues, he would not have
suggested this foul slander.

He adds there, And he that proudly says, he has no Sin to be remitted,
r^nders Christ's death as useless, as he that believes he shall obtain
remission by his good Works.

He that speaks proudly, Sins in so speaking: But that must not be charged on
him who speaks the Truth in humility. That remission of Sins is to be received
through the Blood of Christ; the Apostle Paul expressly says to the Ephesi^e^s,
c. 1. 7. and Colossians, c. 1. ver. 14. Now he who has thus received remission
of his Sins, and with an humble and thankful Heart acknowledges it, can he be
said to render Christ's death useless, when he attributes the remission of his
Sins to Christ's Death? If any one says his Sins are remitted, when they are
not, he is to blame and deceives himself. If any one expects remission of Sins
by any other way then the death of Christ, he renders the death of Christ
useless. But surely, he that in Truth and Humility, acknowledges he has
received remission of Sins through the death of Christ, does not thereby render
the death of Christ useless, but altogether useful; since without it his Sins
had not been r^mitted. And thus the Quaker does, to the refutation of the
Priest's slander, and the discovery of his evil mind in suggesting the Quaker
will be found more a Papist then K. Ethelwolf.

But whether Ethelwolf were a Papist or no, it is much alike to the Priest, for
he says, We conclude therefore, that the Quaker falsely accuses our Anc^stors
in calling them Papists, and their Clergy Popish, and in affirming they were
acted by evil motives. And yet (says he) if all these had been as true as they
are false, it had been hurtful only to themselves, but does not at all make
their pious Donations of Tithes to God and his Ministers to be void, page 109.
What Ethelwolf was, who gave Tithes, (viz. first a Monk in Orders, then
absolved from his Vows by the Pope, a great Benefactor to the Pope, and to the
Church of Rome in particular, and in a word the Popes Creature.) What motives
induced him to give Tithes (viz. to obtain thereby Remission of his Sins, and
the Redemption of his Soul.) What Clergy that was to whom he gave Tithes (viz.
Popish Priests and Monks, corrupt in Doctrine, corrupt in Practice, corrupt in
Life, corrupt in Manners.) What the Religion of those times was, (viz. praying
to Saints, praying for the Dead, sacrificing for the Dead, worshipping of
Relics, A^ricular Confession, going on Pilgrimages, extreme Unction, Christ,
holy Water, Purgatory, Latin Service, and saying Mass, with abundance more of
the like nature) has been related before. And what a kind of Protestant that
Priest is, who will deny this to be Popery, and them to be Papists that held
them, I leave to the Readers judgment. Many more instances might be given to
show how foully the Church of that Age was overrun with the Romish Leprosy;
but these I take to be sufficient to satisfy any true Protestant. And indeed
to what purpose were it to add more, when the Priest here says, That if all
this had been true (that they that gave Tithes had been Papists, and the Clergy
to whom they gave them had been Popish, and the motives on which they gave them
had been Evil) yet it had been hurtful only to themselves, but does not at all
make their Pious Donations of Tithes to God and his Ministers to be void. So
that it seems be they good or bad that gave, be they good or bad to whom they
gave, be the motives good or bad which iuduced them to give, he regards none of
all this; it is the Gift he looks at, and so long as he can enjoy that, he
matters not whence or how it came. But seeing he having prostituted his both
Reason and Conscience to the libidinous desire of advantage and interest,
regards not how he comes by it: I will only recommend to the Reade^s
consideration how ill it become^ them, who pretend to be Protestant Ministers,
to lay claim to the gift of a popish Prince, given to maintain a popish Clergy
and Worship, and upon such motives as are not only evil. but directly contrary
to Protestant principles.

. 15. In the former Ob^ections which the Priest made in my Name against the
Donation of Tithes, he left out the instances I had given to prove the Donation
popish, and took no notice of them. In this which next follows, he leaves out
some* and gives the others false: I to manifest further the corruption of that
time, and Apostasy of that Church, did set down what the Clergy on their part
undertook, in consideration of the said Charter, to perform, as in Spelman's
British Councils I found it thus, It pleased also Alhstan and Swi^hin, the
Bishops of the Churches of Shirborn and Winchester, with their Abbats, and the
Servants of God, to appoint, that upon the Wednesday in every Week, all our
Brethren and Sisters in every Church, should sing Fifty Psalms, and every
Priest say two Masses, one for K. Ethelwolf, and another for his Nobles that
consented to this Gift, for a reward and for an abatement of their Offenses.
And that they should say for the King so long as he lived, Oremus, Deus qui
justificas; for his Nobles also while they lived, Pretend Domine; but after
they were dead, for the deceased King by himself, and for the deceased Nobles
in common, etc. Instead of this he has these words, page 109. Some slighter
Cavils he has, page 292, 293. As fi ^st, his calling the Clergy of that Age
Apostates and corrupt, for being so grateful to their Benefactors, as to engage
to sing David's Psalms, and to make Prayers twice a Week for them, that God
would reward their bounty and pardon their Sins. What is there in this at all
like my quotation, unless it be the word [Psalmes?] Do I call them Apostates
and corrupt for being grateful to their Benefactors? Or do I not note the
manner of their expressing their gratitude, as an instance of their Apostasy
and Corruption? in that they undertook to say Masses for them, both Living and
Dead? instead of which he says, they engaged to make prayers for them. Yet he
is fain to confess, page 110. they called these Prayers [Missas] but says,
they were far different from the Missal of the Church of Rome, whose Offi^^s
(he says) were first brought in here by Osmund Bishop of Sailsbury, Anno. 1096.

But in that he speaks wrong. For long before Osmund's time (300. Years at
least) under Pope Adrian, who (according to Genebrand) entered the Popedom in
the Year 772. (about eighty years before Ethelwolf's Donation) the Roman Missal
(made, as they say, by Pope Gregory) was (by decree of a Council at Rome, with
the help of a Popish Miracle) commanded to be universally received and used.
The Story whereof (for brevity here omitted) is set down at large by Durundus
in his Rationale l. 5. c. 2. and out of him and other Authors, by John Fox in
his first Volumn of the Book of Martyrs, page 117. This Decree for the
establishing Gregory's Missal, and making it universal, was vigorously
prosecuted by Charles the Emperor, not only threatening, but punishing those
that refused it, and burning the other Service Books wherever he ^ound them,
insomuch that, as Fox observes, Gregory's Service had only the place, and has
(adds he) to this day in the greatest part of Europe. And that it was received
and used here in England as well as in other Countries, not only the Devotion
this Nation then had to the Church of Rome, and the influence Charles the
Emperor had upon the English, may make it probable: But the occasion of
Osmund's bringing in that Service which was called the Use of S^rum, set down
at large both by Fox and Stow, does fully and plainly prove. Fox vol. 1. p.
166. says, Thurstan coming out of Normandy with William the Conqueror, and
being made Abbat of Glastenbury, fell out with his Monks to such an height that
from Words they went to Blows, by which diverse were Wounded, and some Slain;
the occasion whereof was, that Thurstan contemning their Quire Service, then
called the Use of St. Gregory, compelled his Monks to the use of one William a
Monk of Fisca^ in Normandy. Stow in his Annals of England, page 157. upon the
Year 1083. relating the same matter, says thus, This Man (Thurstan) among
other his Fellows, despising the Song called Gregory's Song, began to counsel
the Monks to learn the Song of one William of Festamps, and to sing it in the
Church, which to do when they refused, as they that had been ever used not only
in this, but in other service of the Church, to follow the manner of the Roman
Church, sudainly on a day with a company of Armed men brake into the
Chapter House, etc. and so goes on to relate the Skirmish which being beside my
purpose, I omit, and only observe from these Testimonies, first, that this
Roman Mass, instituted by Gregory and bearing his Name, and by Pope Adrian and
his Roman Council appointed to be used in all places, was received and used
here in England before the Conquest; secondly, that the English Clergy had been
ever used, not only in this, but in other service of the Church to follow the
manner of the Church of Rome; thirdly, that this Missal of Gregory, thus by
decree of Council made universal, and then received and used here in England,
was in substance the same that was used afterward, both here and elsewhere
until the time of Reformation; Fox saying expressly, that Gregory's Service had
only the place, and yet has to this day in the greatest part of Europe. But
that the Reader may the better judge whether these Masses were such innocent
things as the Priest does here represent them, whether the Priests that said
them were the right Ministers of God, as page 112. he makes no doubt they were;
whether the People that used them were nearer in Opinion to the Protestant
Church of England then to the present Papists, as page 135. he says they were;
And whether if they were so, it is not greatly to be lamented; take here a
Story out of Bid, showing what Opinion they had in those times of the virtue
of their Masses. In the Wars between Ecgfrid and Edilr^d Kings of
Northumberland and Mercia, a Young Man named Innua, one of Ecgfrid's Soldiers
was l^ft for dead among the Slain; where, after he had ^ain a Day and Night,
recovering sense and strength, he got up, intending to escape to his Friends,
but falling into his Enemies hands, he was made a Prisoner, and after his
Wounds were ^ured, he was bound, that he might not get away: But no Bonds would
stay upon him, but always at a certain hour fell off. Of which Bid gives this
reason, This Young man had a Brother, a Priest, named Tunua, who was at that
time Abbat of a Monastery called from his Name Tu^uacestir. This Abbat hearing
his Brother was slain, went to search out his Body among the dead, and found a
Corpse so like his Brother's, that not doubting it to be the same, he took it up
and buried it in his Monastery; and took care that Masses were said often to
obtain pardon for his Soul; by the celebration of which Masses, says Bid, it
happened that no man had power to bind him, but presently his Bonds were
loosed. And he reports the Yo^ng man himself to give this Answer to the Earl
that had him in custody, inquiring the reason why he could not be kept bound, I
have (said he) a Brother a Priest in my Country; and I know that he, supposing
me to be slain, does often say Mas^ for me, and if I were now in the other
World, there my Soul, through his intercessions, would be released from
punishments. Afterward, when this Young man, being Ransomed, returned home,
and recounted what had befallen him, many (says the Historian) by the report
hereof were stirred up in Faith and Devotion to Pray, or to give Alms, or to
offer the Sacrifices of an holy Oblation to the Lord, for the REDEMPTION of
their Relations who were departed out of this World. For they understood (says
Bid) that the healthful Sacrifice was available to the EVERLASTING REDEMPTION
both of SOUL and BODY. Thus have thou Reader a brief discovery both what sort
of Masses were then in use, and what they attributed to them: no less then the
Redemption of Souls, for which Christ died. Now for a close, take withal the
Account which Perkins in his Problem against Coc^ius, page 145. gives of the
Rise of the Mass, thus, First, (says he) The Lord's Supper was celebrated in a
most plain manner. 2 dly, It was increased with Ceremonies, and first with
Oblations for the Dead, which was a gratulation or thanksgiving for them, and
this was two Hundred Years after Christ. 3 dly, Prayers for the Dead were added
about the Year 400. Then Purgatory, and Redemption of Souls out of Purgatory by
Masses. Then about the Year 780. Gregoryes Mass began to be used in the
Churches of Italy, where before the Liturgy of Ambrose had been more in use. 4
thly, They began to dispute of Transubstantiation about the Year 840. So that
it seems, not only saying of Masses for the Redemption of Souls out of
Purgatory was in use, but Transubstantiation also was on Foot before this
famous Charter of Ethelwolf for Tithes was granted. Judge now R^ader, if thou
art a Protestant, whether Popery had not made her encroachments in the Church
before Ethelwolf's time; whether the Cl^rgy to whom he gave Tithes were not
Popish, who undertook to say these Masses for him and his Nobles both Living
and Dead, and whether the Priest has not grossly abused his Reader in suggesting
that these Masses were only innocent Prayers, and in affirming they were far
different from the Missal of the Church of Rome.

. 16. Next, he says, page 110. I quarrel with the Charter for the Names of the
Saints annexed to it, in whose Honor its said to have been made.

I gave the words of Ingulf thus, -- for the Honor of Mary the glorious Virgin
and Mother of God, and of Saint Michael the Archangel, and of the Prince of
the Apostles Saint Peter, as also of our holy Father Pope Gregory. To take off
this Note of Popery, the Priest says, page 110. T. E. may ^ote, that there is
not one of the three Mentioners of this Clause that agree in it, so that it is
very probable, the Historians living some Ages after, might (as their manner
is) put in this less mat^rial passage in the phrase of their own times, of
which dealing in other Cases I could give many instances.

To let pass his Solecism, or Incongruity of Speech, [that there is not one of
the three Mentioners of this Clause that agree in it] more tolerable in one so
illiterate as my self, then in such a profound Rabbi: I desire him and the
Reader also to take notice, that the same Objection, upon the same Reason, lies
as forcibly against the Extent of the Charter it self, there being as great
variety and little agreement in that part amongst the mentioners of the
Charter, as there is in the mention of the Saints, for whose Honor the Charter
is said to be made; so that up on that s^ore it may as well be questioned,
whethe^ the Grant was general of All England, or not: for some of the
Historians give it in such words as seem to speak only of his Demeasne Lands,
some of his Kingdom of West-Sa^ony only: so that it is as probable that the
Historians that extend this Donation to All England, might therein follow the
Humou^ of their own times, of which dealing in other cases I could give some
instances also. In the mean time the Priest had best have a care how he
adventures to ra^e the Images of the Saints carved upon his beloved Charter,
lest before he be aware he shake and weaken the Foundation of the Charter it
self.

But he says, However, it was given to God in the first pla^e, and no mention
of the Saints in all the body of the Charter,

But sure he had forgotten that Matthew of Westminster has in the very body of
the Charter [Deo et beatae Mariae et omnibus Sanctis; i. e. To God and blessed
Mary, and to all Saints.]

In his next page he says, I quarrel with the other Priest because he will not
grant they gave Tithes in a blind and superstitious Zeal; and he takes upon him
to defend it misapplying the words of the Apo^tle, It is good to be Zealous
always in a good thing.

But the Priest has not proved their giving of Tithes a good thing; and I have
proved, they were blind and superstitious in this as well as in other things,
and therefore their Zeal therein was not commendable, but condemnable.

But his Brother Priest seems to be now of another Mind, and to understand the
Case better; for in hi^ Vindication, page ^03. acknowledging, there might be
some Corruptions and great Defects in Ethelwolf's Charter, yet withal
endeavoring to excuse him, as having no idolatrous Design, but an honest Zeal,
that those whom ^e esteemed Ministers of Christ, might be provided for; he
adds, What can be more uncharitable the^ to make a damnable Idolater of him,
for doing something, though it were in an ill manner, through invincible
^gnorance? Thus he, who in his Conferrence, page 147. would by no means admit
that Tithes were given in an ignorant Zeal, does here, in Contradiction both to
his Brother Priest and to himself, acknowledge this Do^ation of Tithes was made
in an ill manner, and through invincible ignorance. Nor does he attempt to wipe
off those stains, which I had discovered in his Charter, but rather endeavors
to cover them again, by drawing the Curtain of Ignorance before them. This
however he is forced to grant, That this Donation of Tithes proceeded from
Ignorance, yea, from in^incible Ignorance: so that ignorance, at least, (to say
no worse) was, in this particular, the Mother of Ethelwolf's Devotion.

Again, says the Author of the Right of Tithes to his Brother Priest, Whereas
you had said, Tithes were given to God for the Maintenace of his Ministry, T.
E. interprets this to be a calling the idolatrous Priesthood of the Church of
Rome Gods Ministers, which (says h^) is a malicious and false Inference, since
the Priesthood to whose Maintenance Tithes were given, was neither Idolatrous
nor the Priesthood of the Church of Rome, page 111.

The Inference is neither malicious not false; but plain and true. These
Priests, both one and the other, affirm that Priesthood to whose Maintenance
Ethelwolf gave Tithes, to be God's Ministry. I have proved they were a Popish
Priesthood by the Testimonies of diverse approved Authors, by the tenor of the
Charter it self, and by the Definition the former Priest gave of Popery, viz.
That it is such Doctrines and superstitious Practices, which by the corruption
of time have prevailed in the Church of Rome, contrary to the true, ancient,
catholic and apostolic Church. I have showed at large that those Priests, to
whose Maintenance Ethelwolf granted Tithes, did hold and use such Doctrine and
superstitious Practices, as by the corruption of time have prevailed in the
Church of Rome, contrary to the true, ancient, catholic and apostolic Church,
of which I have given ma^y instances. I have also proved that Priesthood Popish
by the assertion of this latter Priest my present Opponent, who in his Right of
Tithes, page 99. saye^, The Benefit of this Donation has been enjoyed for
eight hundred years by those to whom the Donation was made, which must of
necessity be understood of popish Priests, otherwise the Assertion is utterly
false. For he is a mere Stranger to History, who does not know, that from
Ethelwolf's time until the Reformation, which in this Nation began little more
then a hundred years ago, Romish Superstitions, Corruptions and Idolatries,
increased daily and prevailed, and the English Clergy in every Age grew more
devoted to the Observance of the Sea of Rome. Now when I have so fully proved
that that was a popish Priesthood to whose Maintenance King Ethelwolf gave
Tithes* and yet these Priests plainly affirm that, that Priest^ hood was God's
Ministry, what inference can be more plain and true, then that they call that
idolatrous Priesthood of the Church of Rome God's Ministers? This Priest says,
page 102. The Clergy of that Ag^ was God's only public Ministers; and page 99.
The benefit of the Donation had been enjoyed for eight hundred years by those
to whom the Donation was made. The Donation was made in the year eight hundred
fifty five, to which 800 years of enjoyment being added brings to the year one
thousand, six hundred, fifty five: I desire thee Reader to compare these two
sayings of this Priest together, and to examine well the account of time, and
then judge whether this very Priest, who cries out so vehemently against me for
inferring that the other Priest called the idolatrous Priesthood of the Church
of Rome God's Ministers, calling it a malicious and false inference; does not
himself call that idolatrous Priesthood of the Church of Rome, God's own
public Ministers. When he says, The Clergy of that Age, to whom this Donation
of Tithes was made, was God's only public Ministers, and that the Benefit of
this Donation was enjoyed for eight hundred years by those to whom the Donation
was made, does it not clearly follow that he accounts all the popish Clergy in
England, in the blackest and bloodiest times of Popery, even Bonner himself and
his ^rethren, God's only public Ministers, who were indeed the public
Ministers of Antichrist, and the greatest Enemies of God? Nay, he adds, page
112. It is certain the Donors intended them (viz. Tithes) to the right
Ministers of God; and I make no doubt (says he) they were such to whom they
gave them; and they to whom they were given enjoyed (says he, page 99.) the
benefit thereof for eight hundred years. What Is the Consequent? That he makes
no doubt they were the right Ministers of Christ, who enjoyed the Tithes for
eight hundred years after Ethelwolf, which comprehends the Popish Priesthood in
its most filthy and poluted state. Can any one believe this Priest to be
himself a Minister of Christ? Let him clear himself hereof if he can, and show
how the Benefit of this Donation of Tithes was enjoyed for eight hundred years
by any Priesthood that was not Popish and Idolatrous.

. 17. In his next Section he falls foully upon me; and he that was so
fine-mouthed, that he would not meddle with Scurrility, because Railing is not
Reasoning, p. 12. bestows here again on me his usual Rhetoric of Dishonesty,
Ignorance and Impudence. The Occasion he takes from hence. The former Priest
had said in his Friendly Conference, page 146. Tithes being given to God for
the Maintenance of his Ministry, n^ blemish in the Dedication of them can alter
their pr^perty. Hereupon in my Answer, page 294. I observed he was for having
all he could get, be it dedicated by whom it will, or how it will, and that he
wanted nothing but power to revive all the old Donations of the Papists, given
in the midnight darkness of Popery, to redeem their Souls out of a supposed
Purgatory; then I added, Nay, so general is his Assertion (no Blemish, etc.)
that nothing once dedicated by whomsoever, would seem to come amiss to ^im; not
the Offerings of the Gentiles to their Heathenish Deities, not the Endowments
of the Turks to their Mah^metan Priests, nor yet the thirty pieces of Silver
(the price of Innocent Blood) had Juda^ chanced to have dedicated it, would
upon this Position, have been unwelcome t^ this man, could he once but have got
them into possession To this the latter Priest says, page 113. Were these
given to the true God? or were these Offerings Tithes? If they were not both of
these, why does this Quaker mention them here?

To justify Ethelwolf's Donation of Tithes to the Popish Clergy, the Priest
often urges the Intention of the Donors, as page 103. The Donors supposed them
a good Ministry, and as such endowed them; for they esteemed them to be God's
Receivers. Again, page 112. It is certain the Donors intended them to the right
Ministers of God. And page 104. They gave Tithes to maintain that which they
believed to be a good Ministry, and the true Worship of God; and therefore the
Donation remains good. Here its evident he makes the validity of the Donation
to depend upon the Intention of the Donors. But when the Gentiles offered to
their Heathenish Deities did they not suppose and believe those Deities to be
true Gods, and the Priests of those Deities to be a good and a right
Priesthood? and did not some of them offer Tithes also, as the Priest has taken
some needless pains to prove? Now if as he argues page 104. The Donation
therefore remains good, because the Donors gave Tithes to maintain that which
they believed to be a good Ministry, and the true Worship of God (although in
very deed it was a bad Ministry, and a false Worship) I appeal to the judicious
Reader, whether the same Argument does not serve, and the same Reason reach to
fetch in the Gentiles Donations of Tithes to their Heathenish Priests. And for
the Turks, who are said to profess the true God (though not to worship him
truly) can any one doubt but they believe their ^ahumetan Priests to be a good
Ministry, and their Al^oran-worship the true Worship of God? how plain is it
then, that according to this Priest's Argument, their end^wments to their
Priests remain good? and that these Priest^ could be well content to receive
them, if they knew but how to come by them, and the rather because the Revenues
of the Turkish Priests consist partly in Tithes als^. Nay, he sticks not to
say, page 117. If the things were offered to maintain (...) evil way of
Worship, they may be applied to maintain a right way of Worship; but still they
must remain sacred? But the other Priest has since cleared the case: for in
his Vindi^. page 314. he says, Suppose the Turkish Empir^ (through Gods mercy)
should be converted to Christianity, may not the Muff^i himself, and those whom
T. E. calls Emaums together with all the Mosks and Revenues now belonging to
them, be reconsecrared to Christianity? What therefore I observed from the
words of the former Priest, is confirmed and proved by them both; and no
imputation of di^honesty or ignorance, can be justly charged on me therein. But
he taxes me with impudence, in calling that a general Assertion which (he
says) had three limitations, Tithes, the true God, and the Maintenance of his
Ministry. page 113.

But he might have taken notice, that I called his Assertion general with
relation to those words [No blemish, etc.] which is spoken without any
limitation; be the Blemishes in the Dedication never so many, never so great,
never so foul, yet with them it matters not; No blemish in the dedication of
them can alter their property, said the first Priest, and Your words I will
stand to (says the last Priest) and make it appear, That such things as Tithes
are, being given to the true God for a good end, NO BLEMISH in the dedication
can alter their property. This he undertakes to prove by the instance of the
Censers offered by Co^ah's company, page 114. And he blames me for observing
what a pretty Parallel the other Priest had found out, and how well he had
matched his case, in bringing this rebellious Consecration, att^nded with a
damnable Sin, to Parallel the dedication of Tithes. But doubtless he that shall
well consider it will find he has by this Parallel rather hurt then helped,
disgraced then credited his Cause. It is the difference, he says, between
these two Cases, that makes the Argument good. Why then did he call it a
parallel case? Is this case parallel to his, and yet does his Argument receive
its strength not from the parity but the disparity or difference of the case?
that is strange indeed: where was his Logic, and common sense, when he writ
that! He quarrels also at the reason given why those Censers were commanded to
be kept, namely, To be a sign and memorial to the Children of Israel, that no
s^ranger, etc. Numb. 16. 40. This Reason, though given in the Text, he rejects,
and says, If we dare believe Almighty God, rather then this ignorant Quaker,
this was not the Reason why they were to be k^pt; for, says he, God gives
another Reason of that, ver. 37. Because they are hollowed, and ver. 38. For
they ^ffered them before the Lord, therefore they are h^llowed.

In the same 38. verse, the particular Reason was given also, The Censers of
these Sinners against their own Souls, let them make them broad Plates for a
covering of the Altar: for they ^ffered them before the Lord, therefore they
are hollowed: and they shall be a sign unto to the Children of Israel. Here was
both a general Reason, and a paerticul^r, the general Reason was, their being
hollowed; the particular Reason was, that they might be a Sign and Memorial
unto the Children of Israel, as the Text expresses. Now the general Reason does
not exclude the particular, any more then the particular does destroy the
general. But here we see plainly that God would not suffer these Censers to b^
used in the service to which they were dedicated, but caused them to be wrought
out, and put to another use; which because I expressed before by [the altering of
their property] he makes himself profanely merry; and having ironically called
it an ingenious Note of T. E's, he asks, Has not his immediate t^aching learnt
him to speak sense? the form of the Censers was altered indeed, but the
property (says he) was not altered at all.

What manner of teaching he has had is sufficiently discovered by his frequent
Scurrilities and profane I^sts. But for all his conceit, he may take notice,
that the word [property] having various significations, relates to use as well
as to possession; so that those Censer^ being turned into Plates, and thereby
losing with their ^orm the use to which they had been appropriated, it is not
improper to say the property of them (in that respect) was altered. But not to
regard such triffling Cavils, wherein the other Priest also concurs with him in
his Vindication, page 304, 305. let us examine how far the instance of the
Censers may patronize this Donation of Tithes. In the time of the Law, among
the Vessels and Utensils of the Tabernacle, Censers had a place and service by
God's command; and they, as well as the rest of the holy Vessels, were hallowed
and consecrated to the service of God. And while tha^ Tabernacle or Temple, and
the Ceremonial Worship thereof remained, these V^ssels were not to be put to
any profane or common use. Yet had not those Vessels any intrinsic and
perpetual Holiness, but only an outward and temporal sanctity, as Vessels set
apart ^or that service. But when that Service was at an end, that Temple
forsaken, that Worship, and all its dependencies, laid aside, those Vessel^
ceased to be Holy, and became subject to common use. And though while that
Typical Worship stood, in the Service of which Censers were by divine
appointment used, the Offering of Censers before the Lord did hallow and exempt
them from common use: yet (...) that Worship is ended, and Law abrogated, in
and by which Censers were appointed to be used, the Offering of Censers now
would not have that effect. For if a man should now dedicate to the Lord all
such Vessels as were formerly used in the ^^wish Worship; what would such a
Dedication signify? Must the things so dedicated be reputed Holy, and exempted
from all common use? That were indeed a ready way to extirpate Christianity,
and reduce the World to Judaism: but who wo^ld not declame against that! As in
the case of the Censers, so in the case of Tithes, which was another part of
the Ceremonial Law, and appurtenant to that Typical state. W^ile the Ceremonial
Law was in force, if a man made an Oblation of Tithe, or any other part of his
estate, it was thence^orth hollowed to the Lord, and might not be converted to
common uses. But since Christ has abrogated the Ceremonial Law, b^ which
Tithes were commanded, a Dedication of T^th^s is n^ more sacred NOW, th^n a
Dedication of Censers NOW would be. When therefore the Priest says, page 114.
These Censers were by God's spe^i^l order declared holy, and forbidden to be
used to any ^o^mon use afterward* it must be understood of (...) time of the
Law, when Censers were in use; not of the time of the Gospel, wherein they have
no place. And when he says, page 117. The Censers being once given to God,
must remain to be his sti^^; If he extends the particle [still] to the present
time, he errs ^gregiously; if he do not so extend it, he does not obtain his
end. And when he says, page 114. If the Censers might not be alienated, much
less should Tithes; He argues fallaciously: for it does not follow, that
because the Censers might not be alienated then, Tithes should not be alienated
now. But as, if the Censers dedicated under the Law might not be alienated
then, neither might Tithes be alienated then: So if Censers dedicated under the
Gospel, may be alienated now, Tithes dedicated under the Gospel, may in like
manner be alienated now. This he cannot avoid, if he grant that Censers and
other Vessels of the Jewish Worship dedicated under the Gospel, may be
alienated: But if he do not grant this, he ^ets open, not a Wi^ket, but the
broad Gates to Judaism. For if it be in man's power to dedicate what he pleases
to God, and the thing so dedicated must be reputed holy, and separate to a
Religious use, what bar is there to hinder the bringing in of all the Jewish
Ceremonies? In short, The hallowed Censers not being alienable then (in the
time of the Law) show that Tithes might not be alienated then (in the time of
the Law) but it does not prove that Tithes might never be alienated, any more
then it proves that Censers might never be alienated, but must remain separated
to holy uses to the World's End. Though Censers offered in the time of the Law,
when they were in use by divine appointment, were hallowed, and not alienable
to common uses; yet after that Law was abrogated, and the use of Censers ended,
the offering of Censers would not have hallowed them, but they might
notwithstanding such Oblation be put to common uses. And if the offering of
Censers then will not patronize the offering of Censers now, nor their being
hallowed then infer their being hallowed now; to be sure the offering and
hallowing of Censers then will not justify the offering and hallowing of
Tithes n^w; nor the unlawfulness of alienating those hallowed Censers then,
infer it unlawful to alienate Tithes now. The offering of Censers then, while
that Worship stood to which they served, will no more authorize any to dedicate
Tithes now, when that Priesthood is ended to which they did peculiarly belong,
then it will warrant the offering of Censers now, when that Worship to which
they served is ended. Neither does it any more follow, that because the Censers
then offered were hallowed, and might not then be alienated to common uses,
therefore Tithes now offered are hollowed, and may not now be alienated to
common uses; then it does that if Censers should be now offered they would be
hallowed now also, and might not now be alienated to common uses. Thus then we
see his instance of the Censers will not make good the Donation of Tithes, but
that Tithes, notwithstanding the Dedication he talks of, may safely be
alienated to common uses. And indeed, if this matter be rightly considered, it
will appear the World has been grievously g^ll'd in this ^ase of Dedications.
For first it was hammered in^o the peoples Heads, that to make Dedications of
Moneys, Lands, Tithes, etc. to God and holy Church, was a thing very pleasing
and acceptible unto God, a means to appease and pacify his Wrath, to obtain
Pardon and Remission of Sins, and the ready way to get out of Purgatory. When
once the People had drunk in this Persuasion, how was their ^Dedicating Zeal
inflamed! what Murder or other horrid Cri^e was committed, the expiation
whereof was not sought by a Gift to holy Church (as it was then called!) They
needed not any other Spur; and had not the Statute of Mortmain at length been
provided as a Bit to restrain and curb the immoderate heat of their misguided
Devotion, it may well be doubted that instead of the tenth nine parts of ten
had been given to the Church, so willing were men to go the nearest way to
Heaven, as they misapprehended this to be. It was (says Andrew Willet in his
Synopsis of Popery, fifth general Controversy, page 309.) a common practice in
time of Popery, so the Priests might be enriched, they cared not greatly though
all the Stock of their Patrons and Founders were undone. The Statute of
Mortmain (says he) was made to restrain this. And now although those Priests,
by whose false Insinuations and crafty Allurements the most of these Donations
were fraudulently procured, are turned out of doors and rejected, yet another
sort are come up in their rooms, who, though they pretend to be the most
considerable Enemies to the former in the World, yet are well content to reap
what the others had thus s^wed. These men tell us, that these Don^tions
(Tithes, and such things as Tithes are) must remain sacred, may not be
alienated to common uses. And if any one would object that they were gotten
indirectly, obtained per dolum malum, by Fraud and Cousin, it avails not; they
make no matter of that; No Blemish in the Dedication can alt^r the Property,
say they, who make themselves the Receivers. F^ctum valet, quod fieri non
debuit, said the Friendly Conference, page 147. in Margin; i. e. Though they
ought not to have been dedicated at all, yet being once dedicated, the
Dedication stands good. Thus, Reader, thou may see how miserably the World
has been abused by their Priests, who taking advantage to work upon their
Devotion, enticed the People to make these Donatio^s, and now cry out they are
irreversible, being once dedicated they cannot be altered, nor alienated to
common uses. Who sees not now, that by the same Art they might have gotten, and
with the sa^e Reason have held nine parts of ten, as well as the tenth? And
well was it for the Nation that a stop was put to this Ecclesiastical Drein,
before the Church-Corban had swallowed up all; out of which, it seems, there is
no Redemption.

. 18. In his next Section, page 117. he charges me with exasperating the
Impropriators against the Priests, and endeavoring to get them on my side;
which is altogether false. I am not so tender of the Impropriators Right (as he
suggests) as not believing the Impropriators have any Right to the Tithes of
another man's Crop; It is notorious enough that the Quakers suffer by
Impropriators as well as by Priests; and my Argument lies against both. But he
that shall read that place in my Book which the Priest has quoted, page 297.
may plainly see my aim is to show, that even according to the Priest's
Argument, the Impropriators have no right to Tithes. My words are, It is
obvious, that if because Tithes have been dedicated (as he says) to God, it is
unlawful to alienate them to common uses, then it must needs be unlawful for
them to hold their Impropriations, because they were offered in like manner as
the rest of the Tithes were. But (say I there) let them look to themselves.
Whether this be flattering and cl^^ing the Impropriators (as he unhandsomly
suggests) let the Reader judge. Then for those Lands given to Abbeys and other
Religious Houses (as they were once called) and upon the dissolution of those
Houses settled on the Crown, it is manifest his Argument impeaches that
settlement, and all the subequent Tittles to those Lands derived therefrom, and
aims at reducing those Lands into the Clergyes hands again. For if, as he
argues, being once dedicated they cannot be alienated to common use; and that
it is a dangerous thing to meddle with any thing that has given been to God,
Fr. Confer. page 147. And again, as the Censers being once given to God, must
remain to be his still, -- so we may learn it ought to be in other sacred
dedications, -- they must remain sacred still, Right of Tithes, page 117. Then
seeing these Abbey Lands were once dedicated to God as well as Tithes, it
follows unavoidably from his Argument, that they cannot be alienated to common
uses, but must remain sacred still. Thus we see at once both the aim of his
unsatiable Eye, and the weakness of his Argument, which in my former Book, page
297. is detected at large, and the discovery thereof has so ^ettled the man,
that by way of revenge, and to vent his Anger, he calls me poor Quaker,
^lattering Quaker, doubletongued and false-hearted man, with more to the same
purpose; and what I speak with reference to those who possess the Abbey Lands,
he p^rverts and directs to the I^propriators. But he should have ^onsidered,
that his criminating me, does not at all acquit himself. For if he will infer
from my reasoning, that I deny the Impropriators Right to Tithes, which I
readily enough acknowledge I do, yet what is that to his Justification, whose
Argument (if true) would strip not Impropriators only, but all others also who
possess Abbey Lands, or any other Revenues once dedicated to God and Holy
Church, as the Phrase was: Yet he would hide his own Tenth, and smooth the
matter over, as if the Priests were the most resigned and submissive Men
imaginable to the Law, and very good Friends to the Impropriators. For our
parts ( says he, page 118. like the Pharis^^, Luke 18. 11.) we do not (like
the Quakers) take upon us to censure the actions of our Princes and
Parliaments, -- Whatever Opinions the Priests hold in this matter, they do not
oppose the Laws, and go about to persuade any to take away the Impropriators
Estates from them. Do they not? Pray hear now what the Author of the
Con^erence, in his Vindication, page 305. says, I confess that Henry 8. did
alienate them ( speaking of Tithes, etc.) And so did he also establish the six
bloody Articles, to show himself as ill a friend to Protestants as to Tithes:
but is not this ( says he) a wise Argument, to prove that Sacrilege may, de
jure, be c^mmitted, because, de facto, it has been committed? judge now.
Reader, the truth of that saying of the other Priest [viz. We do not take upon
us to censure the Actions of our Princes and Parliament] when this Priest
charges Henry 8. and his Parliament with downright Sacrilege. He might have
considered, that how ill a Friend soever Henry 8. was to Protestants, he was
not so ill a Friend to Tithes, as the Priest represents him, since the first
Statute Law extan^ for the payment of Tithes was made under his Reign.

But further, says the Author of the Right of Tithes, page 118. We do not
pretend Conscience to save charges, as the Quakers manner is.

Does he know any Quaker that pretends Conscience to save charges? If he does
know any such, I desire he will name him. But if he knows no such, what has he
told? If he would needs raise a Slander on the Quakers, could he find nothing
that would have looked more likely? Do not the Quakers know before hand, that
if they refuse to pay Tithe, they incur the penalty of treble damage, which by
that time it is levied, seldom comes to less then five or six times the single
value of the Tithes demanded, besides Imprisonment? Is this the way to save
Charges? What Reader could he expect to find out of Bedla^ so much beside his
Wits, as to receive a suggestion so utterly repugnant to common sense and
reason, as this is? But to proceed.

. 19. The Priest is troubled that Tithes are reputed of Popis^ Institution, and
^ain he would clear them if he knew how. He tryes all the ways he can, and
leaves no Stone unturned. His first attempt is to defame me, that my discourse
might have the less acceptance: In order whereunto he tells his Reader, page
120. T. E. now falls to work for the Jesuits in good earnest, laboring to make
out the Pope's Title to England, by a Prescription of eight or nine Hundred
Years.

In this he is very faulty: for (besides his having represented me all along as
a mere piece of Ignorance and Folly, and thereby rendered me a very unfit Agent
to carry on the deep designs of those crafty and politic Statists) he knows
full well, that I labor not to make the Pope a Title to England; but to raize
out all Monuments of his usurped Authority, that no print nor Foot-step may
appear of his power having been exercised here by the continuance of any Custom
which received either life or growth from him, as this of Tithes did. And since
it may be lamented, but cannot be denied, that the Papal Authority has had too
long as well as too great a sway here; whether I pray does best become a
Protestant, to acknowledge freely its full time, and reject fully all its
Institutions; or to mince the matter, represent the time shorter then it was,
and retain some of the Popish Institutions, which like the Wedge of Gold and
Babylonish Garment, both de^ile the Camp, and deform the Reformation; Popery is
now so justly abhorred by the generality of English, that it were a vain attempt
to set up any thing apparently and avowedly Popish. Therefore the Enemy of true
Religion invents other ways to keep up Popish Institutions, and one is to date
the Ri^e of Popery so low, as may leave room to introduce or continue some
Popish Customs, upon a pretense that they are antec^dent to Popery. But he that
shall duly consider the state of the Church, in and from the Apostles times,
will find that the Mystery of Iniquity, which began to work in their days,
has continued working ever since, and in every Age successively has brought
forth more and more of its work. So that Popery was not All brought forth in a
Day, nor in an Age, but was introduced gradually. And as the true Religion of
Christ was instituted, prosessed and practiced some time before it was
distinguished by the Name Christian. So the false Religion was received also
before it was denominated Popish: yet this false Religion was really in its
Nature Popish, before it obtained to be called Popish, as the true Religion was
really in its Nature Christian, before it received the Name Christian. He
therefore that will receive whatsoever he finds practiced or commended in the
Church before the Name of Popery prevailed, may be very likely to receive
something which was brought forth by the working of the mystery of Iniquity,
and is really and truly of the Nature of Popery.

But the Priest says (as he has said before, more then once) If the Saxons in
K. Ethelwolf's ti^e were Papists, it will not follow that all their Donations
are void.

I say so too. Some of their Donations were merely civil, made by them as men
and Members of a civil Society; but this of Tithes was the product of their
Religion, and of that part of it wherein they were most corrupt. So that
although All their Donations are not void, yet if any at all of their Donations
are void, there is none which with more reason should be so then this of Tithes.

Again he says, Suppose they were Papists in some things, yet it follows not
that giving Tithes was a Popish Act; for all the Acts of Papists are not Popish.

But I have proved that the giving of Tithes was a Popish Act, proceeding from
such Motives, and attended with such Circumstances as are repugnant to true
Protestant Principles.

But says he, page 121. The Protestants have disputed as much and as well for
Tithes, as ever the Papists did.

If by Protestants he means his Brethren the Priests, I wonder not at all at
it: Tithes are their Diana, the Oil that nourishes their Lamp, page 13. No
wonder then if they dispute for Tithes, and that much too, but how well let
others judge. Yet commonly the Dispute ends on their parts with Club-Law, and
in the case of Tithes an Imprisonment and trebble damages are Ratio ultima
Cleri, the Clergy's last Argument, and many times their first too, but always
the strongest, and that they most rely on.

He adds, It is a Popish Opinion, That the Bishop of Rome can exempt men from
paying Tithes.

It Is so indeed: but it is the subsequent of another Popish Opinion, That the
Bishop of Rome can enjoin men to pay Tithes. So that the particular exemption
from Tithes and the institution of Tithes are de^ived from one and the same
Power. And if the payment of Tithes had not been settled and established by the
Authority of the Bishop of Rome, the Opinion of his power to exempt men from
paying Tithes had not prevailed as it did. But do not these Popish exemptions
remain still among the Protestants? Those Lands which the Pope made Tithe free,
are they not Tithe free still? What signifies that I pray? Is that an argument
of the divine Right of Tithes? and that Tithes are due by the moral eternal
Law? Or is it not rather a fair intimation, that Tithes are indeed but of human
Institution, and that from the Bishops of Rome too? whose exemptions are in
force, and observed here, even to this day.

Then he says, I begun too low by far; for if Popery came not into the Church,
till about seven Hundred Years after Christ (according to T. E's proof) then
Tithes were much ancienter then Popery; for they were paid (says he) and
declared to be due to the Church at least five Hundred Years before.

In all this he is wrong. For first, I have proved Popery did come into the
Church before seven Hundred Years after Christ, and before any settled payment
of Tithes. Next, he neither has proved, nor can prove by any Testimony of
credit in this case, that Tithes were paid and declared to be due to the
Christian Church at least five Hundred Years before. He may talk of the
Apostles Canons and Clement's Constitutions and be laugh't at for his pains:
but no Authentic evidence of those times can be produced to prove the payment
of Tithes. The oldest of his Authors that mentions Tithes is Origin; who
grounded his judgment on the L^vitical Law, and thought it necessary that that
Law should stand in force according to the Letter, which could not be
consistent with Christianity. But although Origin was a learned man, yet
Perkins says he was Errorum plenus, full of Errors; and Hierom calls his
Writings, Ven^nata, Venomous: and among the rest of his Errors Purgatory was
one, as witnesses the same Perkins against Co^^ius, Probl. page 175. So that
if he will fetch Tithes from Origin, he may take Purgatory along with them, if
he please. However, he shall find that some of those Opinions which afterward
were most rightly denominated Popish, were by the Mystery of Iniquity brought
into the Church as early as his earliest mention of Tithes, let him climb as
high as he can.

. 20. But to clear Tithes from a Popish Institution, he says, page 122. That
most of those Doctrines which are properly called Popery, and which first
caused and still justify the Protestants separation from Rome, were not
maintained as Articles of Faith, (...) no^ in the Church of Rome it self, at
the time of this Donation, Anno 855.

Of this he gives several Instances, page 123. the first is this, The Marriage
of Priests was not forbidden till the time of Gregory the 7th, above two
hundred years after.

For this he cites Polid. Virgill de ver. invent. l. 5. c. 4. But how unfairly
he has quoted his Author, and how foully he has abused his Reader, let
Polydore's own words show in the place cited, where having declared how it
fared with the Eastern Priests in that case, he adds, At occidentalibus
paulatim est Connubium abrogatum. Syricius enim priums ^acerdotibus et
diaconis, ut ait Gratianus distinctione 82. ^onjugio interdicit, qui circiter
annum salutis humane 387. federe caepit: i. e. But Marriage was taken from the
Priests in the West by degrees. For Syricius, who began to sit (in the Roman
Chair) about the year of man's Salva^ion 387. was the first that forbad
Marriage to Priests and Deacons, as Gratian says in his 82 Distinction. Idem
instituit (says Polydore) ut quicunque aut viduam aut secundam duxisset uxorem,
ab ordine sacerdotali pelleretu^; sic per hoc voluit ut deinceps Digamus ad
officium facerdotis non admittertur: i. e. The same Syricius ordained, that
whatsoever Priest had married a Widow or a Second Wife, should be put out of
his Priesthood; so by this he would not have any one that had had two Wives be
admitted from that time forward to the Priests Office. Then says he, Pelagius
secundus deinde statuit, ut subdiaconi vel uxores a se separarent, vel illis
contenti, sacerdotiorum possessione cederent, et cum neutrum admisissent,
jussit, ut omnino uxores, abse abnegarent: i. e. Afterward Pelagius the second
(who sat about the year 580.) appointed that Subdeacons should either put
their Wives from them, or contenting themselves with them should quit their
Benefices; and when they would admit of neither, he commanded, that by all
means they should put their Wives away from them. Verum id decretum (adds he)
Gregorius qui Pelagio successit, iniquum censuit, -- et idcirco ^anxit, ut
nullus amplius fieret subdiaconus, nisi se ca^te victurum prius promississet,
quo si^ cunctis legem continentiae imponeret: i. e. But Gregory, who succeeded
Pelagius (the same who sent Austin the Monk over hither) thought that Decree
unjust, -- and therefore he made a Decree, that from thenceforth none should be
made a Subdeacon, until he had first promised to live chastely; that so he
might impose the Law of Continency upon them all. And says Polydore, Voluit,
opinor, Gregorius minores coercere, ut illorum exemplo majores ex Syricij
decreto mox sua sponte matrimonia spernerent: i. e. Gregory. I think, was
willing to restrain the lesser Orders, that by their Example the greater after
a while might of their own accord despise Marriage according to the Decree of
Syricius. Then a little lower he adds. Ceterum non tenuit quempiam tum primum
ista Gregoriana lex, sicut ante Calesti decretum non est servatum, quom idem
Gratianus auctor est, primum sacerdotibus universis indixisse Caelibatum. Alij
id Eugenio post Gregorium attribuunt. Preterea illud ipsum tum M^ldensi synod^
tum Carthaginensi est magno omnium consensu statutum, sieut in Canonicis
Decretis distinctione 32. ^t 84. legimus. Ita al^j^ deinque super alijs
promulgatis legibus, non ante Pontificatum Gregorij 7. qui anno salutis 1074^
est Ponti^ex creatus, conjugium adimi Occidentalibus sacerdotibus potuit: i. e.
But that Law of Gregory 's did not at first restrain any of them, as the Decree
of Calistus before was not kept, whom the same Gratian reports to be the first
that enjoined Single Life to all Priests. Which others attribute to Eugenius
after Gregory. Moreover the very thing (viz. that Priests should not Marry, was
ordained both in the Synod of Meldensis and Council of Carthage, with the full
consent of all, as we read in the Cano^^cal Decrees, Distinction 32. and 84.
Thus one Law being made upon the Neck of another, Marriage could not be taken
from the Western Priests before the time of Pope Gregory the seventh. who was
made Pope in the year of Salvation 1074. Thus ^olydore. Judge now Reader the
honesty of this Priest, who brings Polydore for a Witness, that the Marriage of
Priests was not forbidden till the time of Gregory the seventh, above a
thousand years after Christ; whena^ Polydore there says expressly, The Marriage
of Priests was forbidden by Syricius about the year 387. and afterward by
other Popes and Councils, although their Decrees could not so far prevail a^ to
take away Priest, Marriage wholely, until the time of Gregory the seventh. But
though Priests Marriage was not wholely taken away before Gregory the seventh's
time, yet evident it is, the Opinion that it ought to be taken away was
received, and according thereunto Endeavors used to take it away many hundred
years before Gregory the seventh's time, or King Ethelwolf^ either. The
Marriage of Priests (says Polydore) was forbidden long before, and Laws made
against it, although they were not obeyed. The Marriage of Priests was not
forbidden (says this Priest) till the time of Gregory the seventh, and brings
Polydore for his Voucher. Shameless man! Is this the way to provo Tithes
antienter then Popery? What Credit can be given to any Quotation that this man
brings, who makes no Conscience of speaking falsely? But that Priest, Marriage
was indeed forbidden long before either Gregory the seventh or Ethelwolf either
was born, Perkins against Coccius plainly acknowledges; first he says, Problem
page ^90. Conjugium Clericorum ante ^recentos a Christo annos fuit ubique sine
interdicto, et sine voto continentiae perpetuo, liberum: i. e. The Marriage of
Priests for three hundred years after Christ, was everywhere free, without
Interdiction, and without perpetual Vow of Continency. Then page 192.
Continentiae votum necessarium et perpetuum, videtur in occidentali Ecclesia
statutum primo, et annexum ordinibus, circa annum 380. a Christo. Ante quidem
receptum suit, sed privata quorundam devotione, non publico Ecclesiae judicio.
Tum autem primum communi decreto (si non est fictitium decretum istud) in
occidentalibus Ecclesijs interdictum dicitur co^j^gium Clericorum, ut impurum,
a Syricio Papa: i. e. The necessary and perpetual Vow of Continency seems to
have been ordained first in the Western Church, and annexed to Orders, about the
year from Christ 380. It was indeed received before, but by the private
Devotion of some, not by the public Judgment of the Church. But that is the
first time that by a common Decree (if that Decree be not forged) the Marriage
of Priests is said to have been forbidden by Pope Syricius in the Western
Churches, as impure. And there is the more Reason to believe this Decree of
Syricius genuine, because it is evident that this was the Opinion of those
times. Origin above 150 years before, said, Videtur mihi quod illius solius est
offerre sacrificium, qui inde^inent et perpetuae se devovit castitati: I think
it belongs to him only to offer sacrifice, who has devoted himself to
uncessant and perpetual Chastity, Hom. 13. upon Numb. Pope Syricius himself in
an Epistle to Hymerius Bishop of Tarracon, says, that They who are in the
Flesh, that is, they who are Married, cannot please God. And Leo the first, in
an Epistle to Anastatius, says, To set forth the purity of perfect Continency,
Marriage is not allowed so much as to Subdeacons. By all which it appears,
that Priests Marriages were denied and forbidden in those early Ages of the
Church, the Mystery of Iniquity even then working. And this being one of those
Doctrines which, by his own confession, are properly called Popery, may serve
to convince him of the Corruption of those times to which he refers the rise of
Tithes.

His next Instance is of the seven Sacraments, the Number of which he says was
not defined till Peter Lombard's Days, Anno 114^. He quotes Cassander de
sacran (...).

The Book I have not, and therefore cannot examine his Quotation. But if he has
dealt in this as in the former, he is not at all to be regarded. However, if it
be as he says, that the Number of the seven Sacraments was not defined till
Peter ^ombard's days, yet were there so many other Popish Doctrines and
Opinions received in the Church long before, as sufficiently prove those times
to be Popish, from which he fetches his Donation of Tithes.

Next, he says, The Doctrine of Transubstantiation was not received for a point
of Faith till the Lateran Council above one thousand two hundred years after
Christ.

Although Transubstantiation was not by public Decree imposed as an Article of
Faith, until the Council of Lateran, yet was it received and believed by many
some hundreds of years before. Perkins says, Problem page, 145. Disputations
began concerning Transubstantiation about the year 840. So that
Transubstantiation it seems was a hatching before Ethelwolf's Charter for
Tithes was granted. And as the Council of Lateran, somewhat after the year
1200. was the first that made Transubstantiation an Article of Faith; so the
same Council of Lateran was the first general Council that decreed ^^rochial
Right to Tithes, as Seldom proves in his History of Tithes, chapter 6.. 7. and chapter
10.. 2. toward the end. So that the general parochial payment of Tithes, and
the general belief of Transubstantiation, were decreed and established at one
and the same time, in one and the same General Council.

Purgatory it self (he says) was but a private Opinion, and affirmed only by
some, Anno 1146. and Indulg^^ces can be no older: yea, their application to
Souls in Purgatory was first brought in (he says) by Boniface the eighth.

Purgatory (says Perkins, page 175.) was first received in the Church by
Tertullian and Origin, who both lived about two hundred years after Christ.
That it was held by Augustine also, and others of the Fathers, though in
somewhat a different Notion from what it afterward obtained, he shows, p. 176,
and 178. and concludes, page 180. Ergo Purgatorium, quod est inter Mortem et
ultimum judicium, quodq: tantum inservit expurgandis peccatis venialibus,
paenis temperalibus, non ^uit receptum apud ^eteres nisi sort post annum 600.
i. e. Therefore Pu^gatory which is between Death and the last Judgment, and
which serves only to purge venial sins, and take away temporal punishments, was
not received among the Ancients unless happily after the year 600. Whence by
implication is granted that after the year 600. (which was two hundred and
fifty years before Ethelwolf's Donation of Tithes) Purgatory was received, even
in this sense among the Ancients. It Is true, Indulgences can be no older then
Purgatory, nor need they; for that is old enough to prove those times Popish
wherein Tithes were granted. Polydore, Vergil de Invent. Re^. l. 8. c. 1.
searching the Original of them, says, Non reperio ante fuisse, quod sciam,
quam D. Gregorius ad suas stationes id praemij proposuerit: i. e. I do not
find, so far as I know, that Indulgences were before St. Gregory proposed that
Reward to his Stations: which was about the Year 600. Then using the Testimony
of the Bishop of Rochester to the same purpose, he adds, Atque hoc pacto post
Gregorium veniarum Seges paulatim crevit, cujus messem non exiguam permulti
interdum colligerunt, etc. i. e. And by this means after Gregory's time the
Crop of Pardons or Indulgences grew up by little and little, of which very many
have sometimes reapt a large Harvest; and whence it appears Indulgences were in
use much earlier then the Priest delivers. But to proceed, the Priest says,
that the half Communion began but a little before the Council of Constance, and
was never decreed till then; That the putting the Apocripha into the Canon of
Scripture, and diverse other points, were never decreed till the Council-of
Trent; And that, if it were not to avoid prolixity, he could make it evident,
That the Pope's universal Supremacy and Infallibility, Iu^^ification by the
Merit of Good Works, Auricular Confession, Formal Invocation of Saints, and
other Corruptions of the modern Papists, were not determined as Articles of
Faith, no not in Rome it self in Ethelwolf' s time.

That many, if not most of these were believed, and publicly held in the
Church of Rome, long before Ethelwolf's time, is undoubted. Concerning the
^ope's Supremacy, Perkins says, Problem. page 202. Primatus Dominij, vel
authoritationis in Romano Pontifice, ante 600. an. ignotus, public et
manifest caepit in Bonifacio anno 607. i. e. The Primacy of Dominion or
Authority in the Pope of Rome, which was not known before the year 600. began
publicly and manifestly in Boniface in the year 607. (about two hundred and
fifty years before Ethelwolf's Charter.) And of Confession he says, page 180.
Confessio aur^cularis, id est, confessio specialis omnium mortalium peccatorum,
ad eorundem remissionem necessaria, et sacerdoti occulte facta, cepit in
Ecclesia urgeri et praecipi circa annos a Christo octingentos: i. e. Auricular
Confession, that is, particular Confession of all mortal sins, held necessary
for the obtaining Remission of them, and which is made in private to the
Priest, began to be enforced and commanded in the Church about eight hundred
years after Christ (which was about fifty years before Ethelwolf's Charter.)
And of Invocation of Saints, he says, page 89. No Invocation of the Dead can
be showed in the Church for three hundred and fifty years after Christ. Then p.
90. he says, This Invocation began to be brought into the use of the Catholic
Church about the year 380. by common Custom and private Devotion. And page 91.
he affirms, that After the year 400. the ancients did commit Sin, yea, and were
guilty of Sacrilege in the Invocation of Saints; of which he gives many
Instances full of gross Impiety, and then adds, page 94. The Invocation which
in former Ages was of private Devotion began to be public about the year 500.
for then Petrus Gnaphaeus mingled the Invocation of Saints with the public
Prayers of the Church. For he is said to have invented this, that in every
Prayer the Mother of God should be named, and her divine Name called upon. And
about the year 600. Pope Gregory the great commanded a Letany, which was made
for the Invocation of Saints, to be sung publicly.

Thus we see that these Doctrines, which he says are properly called Popery,
were received, held, believed and publicly professed many a year before
Ethelwolf was born. And were it not to avoid prolixity, I could make it
evident, that the greatest part of the Errors, Corruptions, Superstitions and
Idolatries of the Church of Rome, were received, believed and openly maintained
long before Ethelwolf made his Donation of Tithes. But suppose the particulars
he has instanced were not determined as Articles of Faith in Ethelwolf's time,
but without any such formal Determination were received and commonly believed,
are they therefore not popish? Does Popery lie only in the Determination of
them? If they are Errors, if they are Corruptions, if they are Superstitions,
if they are Idolatries, after they are determined as Articles of Faith, then
surely they were such before, else the bare determination of them would not
have made them such. Besides, if there were Truth in what he says, that the
particulars he has mentioned had not been determined as Articles of Faith
before Ethelwolf's time, nor could have been Popish without such a
determination; yet very many other Instances may be given of Doctrines and
Practices properly Popish, sufficient to prove not the Church of Rome in
general only, but the then Church of England also (which was a Member of that,
and for at least seven continued Successions, received her Metropolitan Bishop
out of the Romish Church) to be Popish, according to the Definition his Brother
Priest has given of Popery, in his Friendly Conference, page 149.

. 21. But to clear those times from the imputation of Popery, he undertakes to
reply to the Instances I had given in my former Book. First, he says, F^r
those, page ^01. the Quaker lays not much stre^^ upon them, and there are some
of them allowed by the best Protestants, and all men that understand Antiquity
know those ^ecretal Epistles to be forged, which first attributed these
Constitutions to those early Popes.

Is not this a pretty way of replying, to say his Opponent lays not much stress
on them? what may one not answer after this rate? Next he says, there are some
of them allowed by the best Protestants: but which are they? why did he not
distinguish betwixt those he does allow, and those he does not allow? The
Instances were, The use of Holy Water to drive away Devils, said to be
Instituted by Alexander the first. The Consecration of Chrism once a Year, by
Fabianus. That all should stand up at the Reading of the Gospel, by Anastatius.
That Wax Tapers should be Consecrated on the holy Sabbath, by Zozimus. That
Processions should be made on Sundays, by Agapetus. Some of these, he says,
are allowed by the best Protestants, but which they are he keeps to himself.
Lastly he says, All men that understand Antiquity know those Decretal Epistles
to be forged, which attribute those Cons^itutions to these early Popes. Whether
those Epistles be forged or no, I will not undertake to determine; nor need I^
for I delivered not those Instances upon my own Authority, but gave the Authors
out of whom I gathered them, namely Fas^ic. Temp. Platina and Burdegalensis; to
which more might be added, if need were. But suppose what he ^ayes, that those
Decretal Epistles are forged: yet all men that understand Antiqu^ty know that
the things there instanced were in use before Ethelwolf's time, and therefore
must needs be instituted before. So that his exception against the Decretal
Epistles is but an idle shift: for if it should be granted that those
Constitutions were not made by those early Popes to whom they are attributed,
yet certain it is they were made by Popes earlier then Ethelwolf's Charter for
Tithes; which is enough to prove that Popery had made her ^ncro^chments in the
Church before this dear Donation and famous Charter was made. Thus we see his
tripartit^ Answer comes to just nothing; and doubtless he spoke considerately
when he said, page ^^4. I will content my self to Reply to the Quaker's
Instances; for it can hardly be supposed he could expect by this Reply to
content any bo^y but himself.

But perhaps he looked upon those things as too immateria^ to deserve his
notice, and therefore co^tent^d himself to pass over them as lightly as he
could; as before he did Ethelwolf's being absolve^ from his Vows by the Pope,
going on Pilgrimage to Rome, and making such liberal Donations to uphold
Superstition there. But now that he comes to instances which he accounts more
material, it is to be hoped he will give a more material Reply. First, ^aith
he, concerning deposing of Kings, T. E. says, Pope Zachary, took upon him to
depose K. Chilperick, and absolved his Subjects from their allegiance. Thus (he
says) is a Forgery invented by the Champions of the Pope's Supremacy, but
denied by the French, who do assure (...), that the deposing of K. Chilperick
was done by Pip^n himself, by the consent of the whole Kingdom of France,
before any notice was given to the Pope about it, page 125.

That the Reader may be the more able to judge of the Truth of this matter, I
will give him the words of the Authors themselves by whom it is delivered (so
many of them as I have by me, which are but a few in respect of the many by
whom this passage is recounted.) First therefore the Author of Fascic. Temp.
(ad annum 744) says thus of Pope Zacha^ias, Ipse Regem Francorum, scilicet
Hylderien^^, deposuit, and in locum ejus Pippinum instituit, quia utilior fuit.
Et hic patet potesta Ecclesiae q^anta ^uerit hoc tempore qui regnum illud
famosissimum transtulit de veris haeredibus ad genus ^ippini, propter legitimam
cau^am. i. e. He deposed the King of France, namely Hylderick, and set Pippin
in his place, because he was more useful. And here (says he) it appears how
great the power of the Church was in this time, in that he Translated the most
famous Kingdom from the true Heirs to the Race of Pippin, for a lawful cause.
platina, though he mentions not the deposing of Childerick, yet the setting up
of Pippin by the Pope he does in these words, At Pipinus regnandi cupidus,
legatos suos ad Pontificem mittit, eumque rogat, ut Regnum Franciae sibi
auctoritate sua confirmet. Amuit Pontisex ejas postulatis, -- atque it a ejus
auctoritate regnum Franciae Pipino ad judicatur. i. e. But Pipin having a
desire (...) Reign sends his Ambassadors to the Pope^ and (...) him to confirm
the Kingdom of France to him BY HIS AUTHORITY.^ The Pope grants his requests,
and so BY HIS AUTHORITY the Kingdom of France was adjudged to Pipin.
Burdegalensis says of Pope Zachary (Chronograph. l. 2. ad annum 741.) (...)
caepit Francos juramento (...) absolvere, i. e. This Pope was the first that
absolved the French from their Oath of Allegiance: For which he quotes Aemil.
lib. 2. And a little after, of Child^rick he has these words, Childerico (...)
Rege in Monasteriam truso, Pipinus -- concilio Ponti^icis a Galliae Proceribus
Rex declaratur eta S. Bo^ifacio -- Germanorum Apostolo inungitur. i. e.
Ch^lderick the French King being thrust into a Monastery, Pipin is by the
counsel of the Pope declared King by the Nobility of France, and ancinted by
St. Boniface the Apostle of the Germans. John Fox in his Book of Martyrs, Vol.
1. page 116. ^ath it thus, By the Authority of the said Archbishop Boniface,
which be received from Pope Zaehary, Childericus King of France was deposed
from the right of his Crown, and Pipin^^ the betrayer of his Master was
confirmed or rather intruded ^n. Perkins against Coccius, prob. page 223.
says, Depositio Childerici Francorum Regis suit a Proceribus et Pop^lo
consilium vero deponendi, Papae fuit. i. e. The deposing of Childerick the
French King, was done by the Nobles and People; but the Counsel that he should
be deposed, was given by the Pope. He quotes there Sabellicus, Blondus, and
from him Alcuinus, Paulus and many others, all agreeing that Childerick was
deposed by the counsel of the Pope. Did all these combine to invent a Forgery?
or were all these Champions of the Pope's Supremacy; some whereof were
Protestants? The Priest says Chilperick was deposed before any notice was
given to the Po^e about it, and that he did only approve of the deed after it
was done, page 125.

But besides Popish Authors, Fox says he was deposed by the Popes Authority:
And Perkins, though he makes the act of deposing to be the Peoples, yet he
acknowledges the Pope advised them thereunto; both which must be false, if what
the Priest says be true. But Perkins proves by diverse Witnesses of (...), that
The Pope's counsel was first had [Zacharia Roma^o Pontificie PRIUS consulto]
before Childerick was deposed, or Pipin made King. So that I conclude the
Priest wrong in saying, it was done before any notice was given to the Pope
about it. But (...) let the Reader judge.

He offers another Evidence against this deposition of Childerick by the Pope's
Authority, which is part of an Epistle from Hinc-marus Archbishop of Rhemes to
Pope Adrian the second, who (he says) had written to him to Excommunicate the
King of France. The words he gives thus, There was never any such precept
before sent from Rome to any of my Predecessors, page 125.

That might be without any injury to the former Relation of Childerick's being
deposed by the Pope. For Fox says he was deposed by the Authority of Boniface
Archbishop of Mentz, which he received from the Pope. Now this Boniface had a
power L^gantine from the Pope, and is called by Burdegalensis the Apostle of
the Germans: So that it may very well be that the Pope by this Legate of his
might depose the French King, and yet send no precept about it to the
Archbishop of Rhemes, who were Hinc-Marus his pred^cessors. But however from
these very words of Hinc-Marus it is evident, that Pope Adrian took upon him to
Excommunicate the King of France, however he succeeded in it. And from another
clause in the same Epistle there is great ground to suspect, that he purposed
to d^p^se as well as Excommunicate him, and to s^t up another in his stead: Why
else does Hinc-Marus, in the Name of the French, say there, Let him not command
us Franks to serve him that we will not serve? Hence I think may well be
gathered that the Pope did not only require the Archbishop of Rhemes to
E^communicate the French King, but also commanded the French Men or Franks to
s^rve another; w^ic^ sufficiently shew^ how much the Popes even the^ took upon
them, ^lthough the Franks would not so los^ their King.

But he says, There is as little Truth in Gregory the thirds deposing of Leo
Isaurus about Images, page 126.

The very words of Platina in the Life of Gregory the third, are these, Hic
statim ubi Pontificatum iniit, Cleri Romani consensu, Leonem tertium
Imperatorem Constantinopolitanum imperio simul et communione ^idelium private;
quod sanctas imagines ^ sacris aedibus abrasiss^t, and statuas demolitus esset,
etc. i. e. He, as soon as he was made Pope, with the consent of the Roman
Clergy, Excommunicates Le^ the third, the Emperor of Constantinople, and withal
deprives him of his Empire, because he had rased the holy Images out of the
Churches, and had demolished the Statues. Fox says, vol. 1. page 116. Leo was
Excommunicated by Gregory the third. And Perkins, page 210. quotes August.
Stench. cont. vallam in these words, Gregorius tertius Excommunicavit Leonem,
and ab ejus Imperio Roman Italiamque avertit, omnibus juramento ^^delitatis
absolutis. i. e. G^egory the third Excommunicated Leo, and withdrew Rome and
Italy from his Government, setting them all free from their Oath of Allegiance.
From these Testimonies whether Gregory the third, did depos^ the Emperor Leo or
not, let the Reader judge. Besides, this same Emperor had been Anathematized
before by Pope Gregory the second, as the Author of Fasciculus Temporum
affirms, who also notes (ad annum, 714.) that About those times the Popes began
to set themselves against the Emperors more then ordi^arily, even in temporal
matters, and to transfer the Empire from one Nation to another, a^ the time
required.

The next instance of Popery which he carps at is, the worship of Images, which
he says, page 128. is another manifest Slander, not that the Saxons had no
Images, for that he acknowledges they had, but says, they had them only for
Ornament, Memory, Reverenc^ and Example, but not for Worship, page 129.

Perkins showing the gradual Introduction of Images, says, Problem. page 77.
They were not used otherwise then for Ornament for three Hundred and Eighty
Years after Christ. Then page 78. about the Year 400* the Historical use of
them began to come up, not in private Houses only, but also in the Churches of
the Christians. But (adds he) as Superstition increased, the worshipping of
Images took place, yet it was not received by Learned and Godly Men, nor were
Images set forth to be worshipped openly before the Year 600. And if (says he)
the Worship of Images gained ground any where before these times, it was not
among the Learned, but the superstitious People. But after the Year 600. the
Worship of Images grew more ^ommon, especially among the common People, who by
Superstition were easily led into Idolatry. And although upon the second
Council of Ni^e's Decr^eing the Worship of Images, a Book was written
contradictory thereunto, and a Synod holden at Frankford where in the Acts of
that Council were condemned, yet was not that Synod clear in the case of
Images: for it condemned the Council of Constantinople also held a little
before under the Emperor Co^r^^ymus for the abolishing of Images, and as
^erk^ns observes went a middle way between that and the Council of Nice, giving
a cer^ain v^n^ration to Images, which was at least Superstition and Popery. But
^or the Church of Rome it self, of which the Saxon Church was a Member, with
which it was in Communion, and to which it was in subjection, if we inquire how
it stood with her in those times, with respect to Imageworship, Fox in his
Martyrol. vol. 1. page 116, and 117. tells us, That not only Pope Gregory the
second and third, with Pope Zacharias and Constantine the first, wrought great
Masteries against the Greek Emperors, Philippicus and Leo and others, for the
maintaining of Images to be set up in Churches: but also that Pope Paul the
first, thundered out great Excommunications against Constantine the Emperor of
Constantinople, for abrogating and plucking down Images set up in Temples; And
that Stephen the third, not only maintained the filthy Idolatry of Images in
Christian Temples, but also advanced their Veneration, commanding them most
ethuically to be increased, etc. This was about One Hundred Years before
Ethelwolf's Donation of Tithes: and if the Church of Rome, which was then the
Mother Church to England, was so Idolatrous then, what may we think she was in
Ethelwolf's time, one Hundred Years after? and what may we suppose that King
himself to be, who was so great an Admirer of her, and bountiful Benefactor to
her!

He says, Thirdly, I instance in Miracles and Intercession of Saints, taxing
Bid with these points of Popery, and the Saxons of his time. To this, says
he, page 131. I reply, That if the belief of Miracles make men Papists, then T.
E. and his Quakers are all Papists; for they believe they are immediately
taught, which is a stranger and greater Miracl^ then any they can find in all
Bede's History.

What a miserable shift is this! Is this Reasoning? or Railing? would any man,
that had either a good Cause or good parts, have showed so much weaknes^ to
give a mere Quibble instead of a solid Reply! In his 28 Sect. page 161. He
charges me (though very unjustly, as in its place, c. 5. S. 4. I have showed)
with evading all serious Answers by some petty Cavil. Judge now Reader, if
himself be not here guilty, of what he there charges upon me. Has he not in
this very place evaded a serious Answer by a petty Cavil? But this is an usual
way with him, when he is hard set, and willing to avoid the matter. I alleged
that long before Ethelwolf was Born, Popery had made her encroachments in the
Church, among many instances whereof that I brought, one was the belief of
strange kind of Miracles wrought by the Relics of Popish Saints; nor only so,
but by the Wood of the Cross, and by Holy Water also: This I proved by diverse
quotations out of the Ecclesiastical History of Beda the Saxon. To which, after
his profane Jest, he replies, It is not unlikely but some extraordinary
Miracles might be wrought at the first Conversion of the Saxons, the more
easily to Convince that rugged People; and the want of human learning in that
Age, might occasion the credulous reception of more then was true; and yet we
must not condemn them presently for Papists, ibid.

He that will take the pains to read Bede's History (particularly his third
Book, 2, 11, 13, and 15. Chap. and his fifth Book, 4. Chap.) may there find
relation of Miracles as palpably Popish as any in the Roman Legend. And if it
should be granted, that Miracles were then wrought to Convince that People, it
must be supposed that those Miracle^ (if wrought by the Power of God) were
wrought to Convince them of the true Faith and Worship of God, and to establish
them in it. But the Miracles mentioned in those Chapter^ of Bede's History to
which I have above referred, tend not to the setting up of the true Worship of
God, but a false Worship, even the Worship of the Church of Rome, in the
veneration and adoration of Relics of Popish Saints, of the Wood of the Cross,
of Holy Water, and of consecrated Oil, which all men know to be a part (and a
corrupt part too) of the present Romish Religion. So that in these things the
Saxon Church then appears to have been in the same condition, in which the
Church of Rome both then was and now is.

He says, They might be credulous and apt to be imposed upon, but that was
their infirmity, and amount^ but to Superstition, not to Popery, ibid.

He forgets his Brother's Definition of Popery, Friendly Confer. page 149. That
it is such Doctrines and SUPERSTITIOUS Practices, which by the corruption of
time have prevailed in the Church of Rome, contrary to the true, ancient,
Catholic and Apostolic Church. So that if those things recorded by Bid, to
be wrought and believed by and among the Saxons, were such superstitious
practices, as by the corruption of time have prevailed in the Church of Rome,
contrary to the true, ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic Church, then they are
Popery, and they by and amongst whom they were so wrought, believed and
received were Papists; but no Protestant I hope will deny the instances above
given to be superstitious Practices, to have prevailed in the Church of Rom^
through the corruption of time, and to be contrary to the true, ancient,
Catholic and Apostolic Church. Besides, if (as he says) they might be
credulous, and apt to be imposed upon, and so could be excused (as he would
have them) upon the score of their Infirmity; yet who I pray were they that
took the advantage of their credulity, and did impose upon them? were they not
their Priests? their Clergy? and what were they mean while? If the People were
credulous and easy to be beguiled and imposed upon: the Priests were not less
crafty and ready to impos^ upon them and beguil them. But was not this the same
Priesthood to which Tithes were afterward^ given; who thus imposed upon the
credulous People, and deluded them with lying Wonders?

As for Intercession of Saints, he says, If I mean that the Saxons prayed to
the Saints as their Interc^ssors with God, I do egr^giously wrong them, page
132.

About what time the Opinion of the Interc^ssion of Saints was received in the
Church, and how understood, Perkins in his Problem of the Church of Rome, page
87. etc. shows, First, (he says) it was altogether unknown in the Church of
God for the space of two Hundred Years after Christ. After which time Origin
(he says) and other Fathers disputed concerning the Saints Intercession for
us, but very diversely and doubtfully, until the Year 400. From that time it
seems to have been a received Opinion. For the Ancients, he says, page 89.
teach that the Saints do interceed, not only openly by Praying, but
interpr^tatively also by meriting or deserving; of which he there gives many
instances, and concludes that among the An^ients, the Saints are made immediate
Intercessors to God for us. From this belief of the Saints Intercession, sprang
the custom of Invocation or Praying to Saints, which Perkins shows was not in
the Church for three Hundred and Fi^ty Years after Christ, but began to creep
in about the Year 380. and after the Year 400. he says, the Ancients sin^ed,
and were guilty of Sacrilege in praying to the Saints, of which he gives many
Instances, some whereof show that the Saints were prayed to as Intercessors to
God, yea, as Mediators between God and Man. For Paulinus in natali. 3. in
Faelicem, says, Exora, ut precibus plenis Meritisque redonet Debita nostra
tuis. i. e. Pray (O Faelix) that he would forgive us our Sins for the sake of
thy full Prayers and Merits. And Fortunatus in vita Martini lib. 2. thus
entreats Mart^n, Inter me et Dominum Mediator ad esto benign. i. e. Be thou (O
Martin) afavourabl^ Mediator between the Lord and me. No^ was this Opinion of
the Intercession of the Saints, and consequently the custom of praying to the
Saints, the private Belief and Practice only of some, but the same Perkins,
page 94. tells us, that the Invocation which in former Ages was of private
devotion, began to be public about the Year 500. for then, says he, Petrus
Gnaph^us mixed the Invocation of Saint^ with the public Prayers of the Church,
for he is said to have invented this, that in every Prayer the Mother of God
should be named, and her divine (...) called upon: and Gregory the great (adds
he) about the Year 600. commanded that a Letany of Prayers to Saints should be
sung publicly: This is spoken of the Church in general. Now concerning the
Church in this Nation, it is to be noted that this is that Gregory who sent
over Austin the ^onk to Plant the Romish Religion here, and whose Successors
for many Years after had the ordering of the English Church, and making Bishops
in it, and for the space of one Hundred and Fifty Years at least, the
Archbishops of Canterbury were Italians or other Foreigners of the Popes
placing. How those Italian Prelates, that came out of the Bosom of the Roman
Church, did form the Church here, I leave to the Readers judicious
consideration; adding only, to show the devotion of the English then to the
Roman Church, that Beda in his Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 5. says, Oswi King of
Northumberland was so greatly in love with the Roman and Apostolical
Institution, that had he recovered of an Infirmity whereof he died, he intended
himself to have gone to Rome, and there to have ended his days, as I^a, Offa,
K^nredus, with other of the Kings of this Land afterward did in Monkish Orders,
as ^ox reports. And that Stow in his Annals, page 157. speaking of the English
Monks unwillingness to change their manner of singing, which they had re^eived
from Rome, says, [As they that had been ^ver used not only in this, but in
other s^rvice of the Church to follow the manner of the Roman Church.] Now
inasmuch as the Church of Rome did pray to Saints as their Intercessors with
God, and the then Church of England was in subjection to the Church of Rome,
and had the Roman Church in so great veneration and esteem: since the same Pope
Gregory that sent Austin to set up the Popish Worship here, did appoint a Let
any of Prayers to ^aints to b^ sung publicly; and since it appears by Bid and
others, that the Opinion and Belief of the Saints Intercession was received and
held by the Saxons in those times, what reason can there be to doubt of the
Saxons praying to Saints, as their Intercessors with God? If they believed them
Intercessors at all, with whom could they think they interceded but with God?
And if they believed they interceded with God for them, what should hinder
their praying to them as their Intercessors with God? especially seeing that
Church from which they received both Doctrine and Discipline did so. But a
passage there is in Bede's Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 22. from which the judgment
of the Saxon Church, in the point of Intercession and Mediation of Saints, may
pretty well be guessed at, Adamnan a Scotch-Abbat coming Ambassador into
England about the Year 720. visited the Abbey of Wire in the Bishopric of
Durham, of which Ceolfride was then Abbat. The Scot it seems had the wrong cut
on his Crown, not after the Mode of St. P^ter, but after the fashion of Simon
Magus; which the English Abbat observed, and reproved the Scot for. He excused
it by the custom of his Country, protesting that although he was Shorn like
Simon Magus, yet in his Heart he abhorred Simon's Infidelity, and desired to
follow the steps of the blessed Princ^ of the Apostles St. Peter: To which the
English Abbat replied, That as he desired to follow St. Peter's Deeds or
Admonitions, so it became him to imitate his manner of Habit, whom he desired
to have for his Advocate with God the Father [quem apud Deum patre^ habere
Patronum quaeris] or, as Fox renders it, Whom you desire to have a Mediator
between God and you. On which word [Mediator] Fox in his Margin, (vol. 1. page
114.) gives this Note, There is but one Mediator between God and Man, Christ
Jesus; plainly showing he understood by this Sentence, the Saxons made other
Mediators between God and Man, besides Christ Jesus. But leaving this to the
Reader's censure, I proceed.

The Priest says, page 132. There is but one thing more wherein the present
Church of Rome is charged with Idolatry, and that is in adoring the Host or
Body of Christ, (which they say is Transubstantiate) in the Sacrament; but
neither in this (says he) were the Saxons guilty, for they did not believe
Transubstantiation, no not in K. Edgar's days, An. 9^5.

He said before, page 123. the Doctri^e of Transubstantiation was not received
for a point of Faith till the Lateran Council, above one Thousand two Hundred
Years after Christ; No wonder then if it were not believed by the Saxons. But
that will not ^cquit the English-S^xon Church from the charge of Idolatry, any
more then it will the Church of Rome, which has been by many sufficiently
convicted of Idolatry long before that ^a^eran Council in the Year 1215.
wherein Transubstantiation was made a point of Faith. And though the Priest
says, This is the only thing more wherein the present Church of Rome is
charged with Idolatry: yet doubtless he must be very forgetful, or much too
favorable to the Roman Church. For Rainolds, de Roman Ecclesia Idolatria,
against Bellarmine and others of the Popish Patrons, does charge the Church of
Rome downright with Idolatry, not only in the worshipping of Saints, Images,
and the Sacrament of the Eu^harist; but of Relics also, and of Water, Salt,
Oil, and other Consecrated things, which out of the Papists own Books he proves
in the assumption of his ^rgument, l. 2. c. 1. And that the Saxons followed the
Church of Rome in these things, is too well known to be denied.

22. More Instances, he says, he could give to prove that the Saxons were like
the Protestants in the most fundamental matters; but that two shall suffice at
present. 1. of the merit of good Works. 2. of the Canon of Scripture. For the
first of these, he offer^ some sentences out of Bid and Alcuin against the
merit of Works, which, if faithfully given, may serve to show the judgment of
those particular Men, but are not sufficient to prove the general received
Opinion of those times, much less of the after times wherein Ethelwolf lived
and gave Tithes; for Bed^ dyed in the Year 735. (120. Years before Ethelwolf's
Donation) as the Epitome of his Ecclesiastical History shows; and Alcuin was
one of Bede's Hearers, as Burdegalensis testifies. And if the private judgment
of some particular Men be made the measure of the general Opinion, he may
thereby excuse the Church of Rome all along from this and other unsound
Doctrines, since there is scarce a Century wherein some or other have not
delivered themselves contrary to the common received Opinions of that Church.
Stephen Gardener himself in Q. Mary's days, discovered to Dr. Day Bishop of
Winchester how he understood the Doctrine of free Justification by Christ, as
out of the Book of Martyrs is noted before, yet no man I think will question
whether the Church was then Popi^h or no, o^ whether the Popish Doctrine of
merits was not then commonly and generally received. That very Pope Leo the
fourth, whom Ethelwolf went in such devotion to see, toward whom he was so
liberal, and to whom he committed his Son Alfred to be brought up, being ready
to join Battle with the Saracens at Ostia, thus prayed, O God whose right Hand
lifted up St. Peter, that he was not dro^ned when he walked upon the Waves, and
delivered the Apostle Paul from the bottom of the Sea in his third Shipwreck,
hear us favorably, and for the MERITS OF THEM BOTH grant, etc. Plat. in vita.
Leon. 4. li. But what the common Opinion was of the merit of good Works among
the Saxons, may be collected from the Tenor of the Charters of their.
^eligious endowments, which as they often sprang from some flagitious
Wickedness, so they usually declare the intendment of the gift to be for the
Salvation or Redemption of the Donors Soul, or for the Remission of his and his
Ancestors sins, or some suchlike Expression as plainly imports an expiation or
satisfaction for Sin. And that this is not my judgment only, but that they were
thus understood by men of note in former times, hear the judicio^s Camden, who
in his Brittania, page 262. speaking of a Monastery founded by Q. Aelfrith,
says, Q. Aelfrith Built a Monastery to EXPIATE and make SATISFACTION for that
most foul and heinous Fact, wherewith so wickedly she had charged her Soul by
making away K. Edward her Husbands Son; as also to wash out the Murdering of
her former Husband Aethel^old, etc. And elsewhere (page 254.) speaking of
Ambresbury in Wiltshire, he says, In that place afterward Alfritha K. Edgar's
Wife, by Repentance and some good deed to EXPIATE and make SATISFACTION for
Muthering of K. Edward her Son in Law, built a stately Nunnery, etc. And Fox in
his Acts of the Church, Vol 1. page 120. enumerating the many Religious Houses
that were built in England in the sixth, seventh, and eighth Centuries, has
these words thereupon, Thus ye see what Monasteries, and in what time, begun to
be founded by the Saxon Kings, newly converted to the Christian Faith, within
the space of two Hundred Years; who, as they seemed then to have a certain zeal
and devotion to Godward, according to the leading and teaching that then was:
so it seems again to me two things to be wished in these foresaid Kings;
first, that they which begun to erect these Monasteries -- had foreseen the
danger, etc. -- secondly, that unto this their Zeal and Devotion had been
joined like Knowledge and Doctrine in Christ's Gospel, especially in the
Article of our free Justification by the Faith of Jesus Christ; because of the
LACK whereof, as well the Builders and Founders thereof, as they that were
professed in the same, seem both to have run the WRONG way, and to have been
DECEIVED. For albeit in them there was a Devotion and Zeal of mind, -- yet the
end and cause of their Deed^ and Buildings cannot be excused, being contrary to
the Rule of Christ's Gospel, for so much as they did these things seeking
MERITS with God, and for REMEDY of their Souls, and REMISSION of their Sins, as
may appear testified in their own Records, etc. Thus he. Whence its plain that
he (who undertook to write an History of the Acts and Monuments of the Church,
and may well be thought to understand something of those times as well as this
Priest) concluded that although the Saxons in those days (whom the Priest so
often calls his pious Ancestors, and famous Tyt^e^ givers) were Zealous
according to the teaching that then was, yet they had not the true knowledge
and Doctrine of Christ's Gospel, especially in the point of justifi^ation, but
for lack thereof were deceived, and ran the wrong way, seeking remedy of their
Souls, and remission of their Sins, by the merits of their works. And for proof
that they so did, Fox there sets down the very same Charter of Ethelbald which
this Priest brings to prove the Right of Tithes, page 94. which Charter being
by Fox set down, in the place forecited, toward the end of his second Book, he
there adds as follows, By the contents hereof, says he, may well be
understood (as where he says, Pro amore calestis party, proremedio animae,
pro liberatione animae, et absolutione delictorum, etc. i. e. For the love of
the Heavenly Country, for the remedy of my Soul, for the delivering of my Soul,
and for the pardon of my Sins, etc.) how great the IGNORANCE and BLINDNESS of
these men, was, who lacking no Zeal, only LACKED KNOWLEDGE to rule it withal:
seeking their Salvation NOT BY CHRIST ONLY, but by their OWN DESERVINGS and
MERITORIOUS deeds. And the same Fox but two pages further, entering upon the
Reign of King Ethelwolf, says, This Ethelwolf (as being himself once muzled in
that order) was always good and devout to Holy and Religious orders, insomuch
that he gave to them the Tithe of all his Goods and Lands in West-Saxony, with
liberty and freedom from all servage and civil charges. Whereof this Charter
instrument bears Testimony after this tenor proceeding, much like to the
De^a^ion of Ethelbald above mentioned. Then r^citing the C^arter (even that
v^ry Charter so hugged, and so ex^ol'd by these Priests) and therein fin^ing
these words [Pro remissione animarum et peccatorum nostrorum. i. e. For the
deliverance of our Soul^, and the remission of our Sins] he adds, Hereby it may
appear, how and when the Churches of England began first to be endued with
Temporalities and Lands; also with Privileges and Exemption^ enlarged:
moreover (and that which specially i^ to be considered and LAMENTED) what
PERNICIOUS Doct^in^ was this, wherewith they were led, t^us to set REMISSION of
their SINS, and REMEDY of their Souls, in this Donation and such other deeds of
their Donation, CONTRARY to the information of God's word, and no small
derogation to the Cros^ of Christ. Thus far Fox; which I have set down the more
largly that the Reader may see what his judgment was of the Religion of those
times, wherein this Donation of Tithes was made; and may himself be the better
able to judge, whether I here wronged the People and Clergy of those times in
calling them Papists.

The Priest's next and last instance of the Saxons not being Papists, is their
keeping the Canon of Scripture entire, and rejecting the Apocrypha from being
of divine Authority.

But this (if they did so) will not clear them from being Papists, since many
of the Church of Rome, yea, some of the Cardinals have done the like, as
Perkins shows, ^rob. page 48. And if it be true that he himself says, page
123. that the putting the Apocrypha into the Canon of Scripture, was never
decreed till the Council of Tren^, about a Hundred and Ten Years ago, then
before that time the Church of Rome it self had not the Apocrypha in the Canon
of Scripture, any more then the Saxons had; and yet I think he will not say the
Church of Rome was not Popish o^ Ido^atrous before the Council of Trent.

In the close of this Section he says, Finally, if T. E. have either shame or
grace, let him Repent of this foul Slander, which he has as falsely as
maliciously cast upon our Forefathers the pious Saxons -- But if T. E. will
not Recant, I shall leave it to the Reader to judge of his ignorance and
impudence, page 135.

Because there is nothing in this but Scurrility, and Railing instead of
Reason, I intend no Reply to it: but will take notice of another passage or two
in the same page.

23. First, he says, The Saxons were more Orthodox in SOME points then ROME it
self then was.

A goodly commendation! Was Rome it self so Orthodox then in his account, that
he makes her the ^tandard to measure others by? Rome it self no doubt was
somewhat less corrupt then then in after Ages she grew to be; yet he that with
an impartial Eye shall view the state of the Romish Church in those times, will
find her far enough from being Orthodox. And if the Saxon Church was not in ALL
points so depraved as Rome it self then was, yet was she also too unsound in
Faith to be reputed Orthodox. But secondly, the Saxons, says he, differed from
the present Papists in all the most material Articles of Faith, being nearer in
Opinion to the Prot^stant Church of England.

It seems then they are not one with the Protestant Church of England, but only
nearer in Opinion to it, then to the present Papists. Yet in page 102. he
say^^, The Clergy of that Age were Gods only public Ministers; and page 112.
he makes no doubt but they were the right Ministers of God: which if they were,
how comes it that they were not positively one with the Protestant Church of
England, but only nearer to it, then to the present Papists? But wherein were
they nearer to the Protestant Church of England then to the present Papists?
Not, I hope in their shaven Crowns, not in their Monkish Life, not i^ their
Vows of continency, not in their going on Pilgrimages, not in their belief of
Purgatory, not in their praying for the Dead, not in their sacrificing for the
Dead, not in the worshipping of Relics, not in the praying to Saints, not in
saying Mass, not in Latin service, not in auricular Confession, not in extreme
Unction, not in the use of Chrism, not in the use of Holy Water to drive away
Devils, or of ^onsecrated Oil to allay Storms and Tempests. In these, I ^row,
and such like things as these, they were nearer the present Papists then the
Protestant Church of England. But thirdly, He charges me with ignorance and
impudence, in supposing the Church so much corupted with Popery then, that
their very Donations were not fit to stand good or be enjoyed, no not by a
Protestant Ministry.

No sure, not by a Protestant Ministry of all other: for since it is
denominated Protestant from protesting against Popery, what can be more
unsuitable to it, then to subsist by a Donatio^ which was made to uphold that
which it has protested against. By a Protestant Ministry he means, no doubt, a
true Gospel Ministry, the nature and qualifications whereof if he rightly
understood, he would not think that such a Ministry has a greater liberty to
enjoy a Popish Donation then another, but a less: in as much as such a Ministry
ought more especially to abstain, not only from known and certain Evil, but
even from every appearance of Evil; and not only to avoid the works of the
Flesh, but to hate even the Garment spotted with the Flesh. So that I account
the Church so corrupted with Popery then, that their Donations of Tithes are
not fit to be enjoyed by any Ministry at all, much less by a Protestant
Ministry.

That the Church then was indeed greatly corrupted with Popery, is evident by
the many instances given of Doctrines and Practices received and held therein,
which beyond all contradiction have through the corruption of time prevailed in
the Church of Rome contrary to the true, ancient, Catholic and Apostolic
Church: Nor is it likely it should be otherwise, if we consider the
Constitution of the Church here in those times. For when Austin the Monk came
hither from Rome, and ^ound some reception here, he sent to the Pope for advice
and direction how to form, settle, and govern that Church which he then was
gathering; and from the Pope he received Instructions in all particulars he
desired to be informed in. From the Pope he received the Power he here
exercised, and the Pall of his Archbishopric, as his Successors generally
did. And the Religion and Worship which he brought with him from Rome, grew by
degrees to be the general Religion and Worship of the Nation. For although the
Profession of Christianity had been in this Island long before Austin came
hither, yet had it been much deprest by Heathenism, and the remains of it
shortly after extinguished by Austin and his Sectators. Austin being dead, his
Successors for a long time after were such, as the succeding Popes sent over
hither, Fox reckons them in this order Laurentius, Mellitus, Iustus, Honorius,
Deusdedit; Bed. l. 3. c. 29.
which last being dead, Oswi and Egbert, Kings of Northumberland and
Canterbury, sent Wighard a Presbyter to Rome (with great Gifts and Presents of
Silver and Golden Vessels to Pope Vitalianus) to be by him ordained
Archbishop; but he delivering his Message and Presents to the Pope died at
Rome before he could be consecrated; whereupon the Pope writes a Letter to King
Oswi, commending his zeal and care, and sends him some Relics of the Apostles
Peter and Paul, and of other Saints (as he calls them) and to the Queen his
Wi^e the Pope sent a Cross with a golden Nail in it: withal he acquaints the
King, that so soon as he could find a Man fit for the place, he would not fail
to send him an Archbishop. Accordingly, after much inquiry Theodorus at length
was found; but he being Born at Tharsus of Cilicia, l. 4. c. 1.
had his Crown clipped after the Eastern manner, in imitation (as they pretended)
of St. Paul, so that he was fain to wait four Months till his Hair was grown,
that he might have the right cut as they accounted it; that done he was
ordained Archbishop of Canterbury by Pope Vitalianus, and soon after he set
forward for England accompanied with Adrian and other Monks, about the Year
668. This is that Theodorus who Fox says was sent into England by the Pope,
and with him diverse other Monks of Italy to set up here in England L^tine
Service, Masses, Ceremonies, Letanies, with such other Romish ware, etc. Vol.
1. page 112. And Adrian, the chief of those Monks, was sent (as Bede observes)
not only to assist Theodore, but to have an Eye also over him, that he
introduced nothing after the Greek manner into the Church contrary to the Truth
of the Faith received then from Rome. Not long after, in the time of this
Theodore, came over from Rome John the Arch-Chanter or chief Singer, l. 4. c.
18.
sent hither by Pope Agatho, to teach them how to sing here after the same
manner as they sang in St. Peter's (as they called it) at Rome: besides which,
he had particular instructions from the Pope, to inform himself fully of the
Faith of the English Church, and at his return to Rome to give the Pope an
account thereof. Great care we see wa^ taken by the ^opes to frame the Church
of England by the Romish square; l. 5. c. 22.
and that the English-Saxons did imitate the Church of Rome, Bid shows, when
he says, that Naitan King of the Picts having a desire to reform the Church in
his own Dominion, that he might do it the more easily and with greater
Authority, sought the assistance of the English Nation, who he knew long before
had ordered their Religion according to the example of the Holy and Apostolic
Church of Rome; which was then had in so great veneration with the Saxons, that
many of the Kings of this Island laid down their Scepters, and went in devotion
to Rome, desiring to sojourn a while as Pilgrims on Earth, as near the Holy
places as they could, that they might afterward be received the more familiarly
in Heaven by the Saints: And this says Bid was so customary in those times,
l. 5. c. 7.
that many of the English Nation, both Noble and Ignoble, Laity and Clergy, Men
and Women seemed to strive who should get thither first. And that it was thus
in Ethelwolf's time, may appear by his going in great devotion (as Speed says)
to Rome, and there committing his youngest Son Alfred to the Popes bringing up
(as Fox Records) together with his liberal presents made to that Church. Thus
^eest thou Reader how devout the Saxons were to the Church of Rome, and how
solicitous and careful that their own Church might follow its example. If thou
would further know what the Church of Rome then was, which was cried up for
the Mother Church she was full of Superstition, Idolatry, Blasphemy; She was a
worshipper of Images, of Saints, and of R^licks; she prayed to Saints as
Intercessors and Mediators between God and Man; She prayed and sacrificed for
the Dead; She held the Doctrines of Purgatory, Indulgences, Merits,
Ear-Confession, Pilgrimages, and single Life of Priests. To mention all her
Corruptions and Superstitions were to write a Volumn. Then for the Popes
themselves, fit Heads enough they were for such a Body. Their own Writers are
not able to cover the infamy of their Lives. The Author of Fascicul. Temp.
confesses Constantine the second (whom he makes to have sat, Anno. 764.) to
have been the fifth infamous Pope, and Pope Ione he reckons for the sixth, who,
so far as I can gather, possessed the Roman Chair within a Year or two after
Ethelwolf was there, to the irreparable infamy of the Roman Church. And for the
other Popes who sat in the latter end of that Century in which Pope Ione f^ll,
and in the beginning of the next, nothing but what is scandalous can be said of
them, as Fascic. Temp. confesses. If we seek a Character of those times, not
only Fox in his Acts of the Church, dividing the time from Ch^ist's Incarnation
into diverse Periods or Ages, reckons the third Period of time from about 600.
to about the Year 900. (which comprehends most of the Saxons Reign, and the
earliest Tithe Donation) the declining time of the Church and of true Religion.
But even Platina in vitae Steph. 3. (well nigh a Hundred Years before
Ethelwolf's Donation) laments the Wickedness of the times, in these words, Nunc
vero adeo refrixit pietas et religio, non dico nudis pedibus, etc. i. e. But
now Devotion and Religion is grown so cold, that Men can s^arce find in their
Hearts to Pray, I do not say Barefooted, but even with their Hose and Shoes
on. They do not now Weep as they go, or while they are Sacrificing, as did the
holy Fathers of Old, but they Laugh, and that impudently. I speak even of those
of the Purple Robe; they do not sing the Hymns, for that they account Servile;
but they entertain one another with Jests and Stories to stir up Laughter. In a
word, the more prone any one is to Jesting and Wantonness, the greater praise
he has in such corrupt manners. This Clergy of ours dreads and shuns the
company of severe and grave Men. Why so? Because they had rather live in so
great Licentiousness, then be subject to one that counsels or governs well; and
by that means the Christian Religion grows every day worse and worse. Thus
Platina of the times before Ethelwolf. And of the times a little after, another
Popish Writer cries out, l^eu, heu, heu, Domine Deus, etc. i. e. Alas, alas,
alas! O Lord God, how is the Gold darkened, how is the best Color changed! What
Scandals do we read to have happened about these times even in the holy
Apostolic seat! -- What ^ontentions, Emulations, Sects, Envyings, Ambitions,
Instrusions, Persecution^! O worst of times! in which Holiness fails, and Truth
is cut of from the Sons off men, ^ascic. Temp. ad an. 884.

Thus have tho^ Reader, a short view off those times, those Popes, those
Churches: by which thou may perceive both the degeneration and Apostasy of
the Roman Church from the Simplicity and ^urity of the Gospel; as also the
dependence of the Saxon Church upon the Church of Rome, its continual recourse
and application to her, as to its. Mother and Nurse, from whose Breasts it
sucked that corrupt Milk, which filled it with putrefaction and unsoundness
ever after. And very little (if any whit at all) did the Saxon Church differ
from the Church of Rome, but as Superstitions and Idolatries increased in the
Church of Rome, so they were brought over hither and received here, as fast as
the distance of place would well permit. Judge then whether the Saxon Church be
not rightly called Popish, whether Ethelwolf, who gave Tithes was not a Papist,
whether the Clergy to which he gave them was not Popish, whether the Religion
which Tithes were given to uphold was not the Popish Religion, and whether it
becomes a Protestant Ministry, who are so denominated from protesting against
Popery, to receive and exact that Maintenance which was given by a Popish
Prince to Popish Priests to uphold Popery.

. 24. In his next Section the Priest urges tha^ Tithes were not Popish, because
received by some of the Martyrs, page 136.

T^is being offered by the former Priest, I had answered in my former Book, and
therein showed by plain demonstration the emptiness of that Argument, which
because this Priest has but superficially touched, and not endeavored by any
found Reason to refute, I think meet to transcribe hither. That these were
godly men, and worthy Martyrs I grant: yet will not their receiving Tithes make
them either lawful, or less Popish, in the Institution. The lot of those good
Men fell in the very spring and dawning (as it were) of the day of Reformation,
and it was their happiness and honor that they were faithful (even to the
Death) to those discoveries of Truth which they received. But all Truths were
not discovered at once, nor all Untruths neither. But it being a day of the
Infancy of Reformation, it pleased God in his infinite wisdom and tenderness,
to rend the Vail as it were by little and little, and so discover things
gradually unto them, that they might go cheerfully on in their Testimony, and
not come under tho^^ discouragements, which the sight of so many difficulties
at once, might not improbably have brought upon them. Nor will this seem
strange to any who shall seriously consider, that many of the blessed Martyrs,
who sealed their Testimony with their Blood, and entered cheerfully the fiery
Chariot, had not so full and clear a sight of All the Superstitions and
Abominations, which in the dark Night of Ignorance had crept into the Church of
Rome, as it has pleased God since to give. Yet they being faithful to the Lord
in what they did see, were accepted by him, and through Death received a Crown
of Life.

Neither is it a fair way of Reasoning, because some who lived but at the
Daybreak (as it were) of Reformation, did not, at that early Hour, discover
the whole Mystery of Iniquity (although they did a great part) or bore
Testimony against every particular Evil in the Church of Rome (although they
did against a great many) thence to argue, that the Mystery of Iniquity
extended no further then was discovered unto them, or that there was no other
Evil in the Church of Rome, but what they testified against, especially since
we find diverse things which they took little or no notice of, plainly
condemned, and zealously witnessed against by others, who are acknowledged to
have been in their respective times, Confessors of and true Witnesses for God
against the Corruptions and Superstitions of the Romish Church, as well as
they; so that what my Opponent says in another case (page 114.) You must not
Interpret one Scripture to overthrow other plain Scriptures: The same say I in
this, He ought not to instance these Men^ receiving Tithes to overthrow or
contradict the plain Testimonies of other faithful Servants of God, who denied
them, but rather as in the beginning of Christianity, the Apostles did not all
alike oppose the Ceremonies of the Law, Acts 16. 3. and 18. 18. and 21. 26.
but Circumcision and other Rites were born with, and for some time used by
some of them, which in process of time were utterly rejected and denied by all,
which yet neither ought to have been, nor was made use of by the rest of the
Apostles or Churches, as an Argument for the lawfulness and continuation of
Circumcision, or any other of the Jewish Rite^: So in the Testimonies of those
holy Martyrs and Confessors of Jesus, what was denied by some, and witnessed
against as Popish, superstitious and wicked, ought not to be received, and
defended now as not Popish or Superstitious (at least by such as pretend to
reverence their Testimonies) because the same things were not denied by all;
for God is not limitable to numbers of Witnesses, but he raised up one to bear
Testimony against one Corruption, another against another Superstition; some
stormed one part of Babylon, some another, but did not make their Batteries all
in one place. Now that Tithes were denied by m^^y of those Godly Men, Fox's
Martyrology assures us in the instances of Thorp, Swinderby, Brute, Wickliffe,
etc. some of whom complained of the abuse of Tithes, in that they were then
fixed and settled as a payment, whenas but a little before they were a voluntary
free Gift, disposable at the will and pleasure of the giver: Others utterly
denying and rejecting them, as no way lawful at all. Nay, Thorp says expre^^y,
That those Priests that do take Tithes, deny Christ to be come in the Flesh,
urging it as the Opinion of one of the Doctors, and as he thinks of Jerome. And
Br^te says, not only that no Man is bound to pay Tithes in Gospel-time^, but
that it is manifest and plain, that neither by the Law of Moses nor by Christ's
Law, Christian People are bound to pay Tithes, but by the Traditions of men.
Hence what Opinion these good men had of Tithes, the Reader may judge. But for
any now to urge, in defense and justification of Tithes, that Cranmer, Hooper,
Ridley, and other Godly Martyrs received them, what else is this, but to oppose
the Martyrs one to another, and render them as clashing and warring amongst
themselves, yea, and to endeavor, by the practices of some, to invalidate and
make the Testimony of others utterly void and of no force, which I am sure does
ill become any Protestant to do; and indeed I think none, that were truly such,
would ever have attempted it. This was my Answer to the former Priest, which
this latter Priest has not by any solid Arguments attempted to re^ute, but
catching here and there at a word, he quibbles on it to show his Wit and
levity, and besides that does little else but revile me, and vilify them whose
Testimonies I ^sed against Tithes. First he Ca^^s at those words [all Truths
were not discovered at once, nor all V^truths neither.] Upon this he says,
page 136. It is strange the Quaker should say so, who before declared himself
to be for unmediate teaching, and who, page 229. assirms, The very Babes in
Christ knew all things. In the first part of this Quirk, he only plays upon
the word [Immediate] which (being opposed to mediate teaching, as mediate
signifies means and helps) is understood of the inward ^^aching or speaking of
the holy Spirit in the Heart of man, without the help or use of outward means:
and so is called immediate in respect of manner, not in respect of time. But
he, that he might seem to say something, applies the word [Immediate] to time,
making immediate teaching to sound, not a teaching without means and outward
helps, but a teaching in an instant, or on a sudden. But if he please to be
less disingenuous, and remove his own mistake, he will find no incongruity in
my words. In the other part, he does not so much Carp at me, as Cavil at the
Apostle John, whose the words are, 1 Ioh. 2. 18, 20. But if in the foregoing
passage he dealt not fairly with me; in the following he deals most foully: for
he affirms that I say, page 230. If the Saints have not the Spirit in them, so
as to teach them all things, they have not the Spirit at all. These are not my
words (as he that will consult the place, may see) but an inference of his own,
made on purpose to abust me. And the other Priest (in his Vindication, page
284.) though he nibbles at the same passage, yet neither does he quote it as
this Priest does, nor charge me with affirming, that If the Saints have not the
Spirit in them, so as to teach them all things, they have not the Spirit at
all: But says, The Quaker seems to fancy, that if the Spirit be not with
Believers in this immediate manner, his is not with them at all. Observe now
Reader, how I am dealt with between these two Priests. One of them says
positively, that I affirm: The other says, The Quaker seems to fancy. The one
says I affirm, if the Saints have not the Spirit in them, so as to teach them
all things, they have not the Spirit at all. The other says, The Quaker seems
to fancy, that if the Spirit ^e not with believers in this immediate manner, he
is not with them at all. And yet these Priests both one and the other pretend to
repeat the self-same s^ntence out of my Book, and that in my own words. Is this
fai^ dealing? Yet upon this and his former mistake of immediate teaching, he
says, page 137. All that T. E. allows for Saints, got their knowledge in an
Instant, as the Apostles did.

This also I reject for a slander: Nor do I believe that the Apostles got their
knowledge, as he says, in an instant. But that they grew in Grace (by the
Grace) in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as the Apostle
Peter exhorted the Saints, 2 Pet. 4. 18. and as Paul did the Colossians, chap.
1. ver. 10. But from these false Premises he draws this lame Conclusion, Either
therefore he must deny these Holy men were taught immediately (and then by his
Rule they could have no knowledge in divine things) or else he must confess
Truths were not revealed to them by degrees.

But there is no necessity for this. For I will suppose those Holy men were
taught immediately in respect of the manner of teaching, not in respect of
time. They might be taught by the Spirit of God in their own Hearts, without
the help of outward means, and yet those Truths which they were thus taught
might be revealed to them by degrees. The Wind that blows where it li^teth,
blows also when it lifts: and ^e that turns the Key of David, opens and
shuts at his own pleasure.

Upon my saying, Those good men and Godly Martyrs lived at the very dawning of
the Day of Reformation, He thus sports himself. Very ple^sant! says he, Let
(...) then ask the Quaker what Hour of the Morning it was when his other
Martyrs (as he falsely calls them) Thorp, Swinderby, Brute and Wickliffe lived?
If it was but Daybreak in Cranmer's time, it was dark as midnight in
Wickliffe's; if Cranmer and Bradford had but little Light, Wickliffe and Thorp
had none at all; and therefore unless they had Cats Eyes they could not see
then, page 138.

Surely his flouting humor was up when he writ this, and he was resolved to
indulge his Genius, whom soever he spatter'd. But letting his unhandsome
expression pass, which is obvious enough to every Reader that has not Cats
Eyes, I reply to his question that what ever Hour Thorp, Swinderby, Brute and
Wic^li^^e lived in, or how dark soever it then was, they had light enough given
them to discover that Tithes were but an human Institution, and ought not to be
paid. And though they lived before Cranmer, in times of greater Darkness, and
not see so many of the Corruptions of the Church of Rome as Cranmer and his
Associates did, yet they saw some, and what they did see was as really a
Corruption, and their Testimonies against it ought as ^ell to be received, as
the Testimonies of those other Martyr^, against other Corruptions afterward.
Nor ought those earlier Testimonies to be weakened (much ^ess rejected) by the
example or practice of later Martyrs, since both the former and later are, by
the same Historian, recorded to be good and godly men, stout Champians and
valiant Soldiers for the Truth of Jesus Christ, all bearing Testimony against
the Corruptions and Superstitions of the Church of Rome, though not all against
the self-same particular Corruption. For Wickliffe inveighed against the Pride,
Pomp, Luxury and temporal Possessions of the Clergy; Brute denied all Swearing;
and Thorp denied to Swear upon the Bible; the evil of which was not seen by
many of the Martyrs that came after. And even among those of greatest note, and
eminency in point of Learning, who were not only contemporaries, but
Co-sufferers (as I may say) with respect both to cause and time, there was not
in all things an equal discovery, and sight of Corruptions and Romish
Superstitions. For ^ooper being elected Bishop of Glouster, in King Edward the
sixth days, when Cranmer himself was Archbishop of Canterbury, refused to be
consecrated in the Episcopal vestiments or habit, and to take the Oath used in
the Consecration of Bishops, both which he complained were against his
Conscience, and therefore petitioned the King either to discharge him of his
Bishopric, or to dispense with him in those things which were offensive and
burdensome to his Conscience. And although he thereupon obtained Letters from
the King and the Earl of Warwick to the Archbishop in his behalf, yet so
little did Cranmer an^ the other Bishops discern the Superstition and Evil of
those things, that as Fox observes, they stood earnestly in defense of the
a^oresaid Ceremonies, saying, It was but a small matter; that the fault was in
the abuse of the things, not in the things themselves; that he ought not to be
so stubborn in so light a matter; and that his wilfulness therein was not to be
suffered. Nor would they yield to his consecration but upon condition, that
sometimes he should in his Sermon show himself Apparrelled as the other Bishops
were, which Fox in plain terms calls a Popish attire, and says, that
Notwithstanding that godly Reformation of Religion that began in the Church of
England, besides other Ceremonies more ambitious then profitable, or tending to
Edification, they used to wear such Garments and Apparel as the Popish Bishops
were wont to do, which (he says) tended more to ^^perstition then otherwise;
and (says he) when Hooper was appointed to Preach before the King, he came
forth as a new Playe^ in a strange Apparel on the Stage, having for his upper
Garment a long Scarlet Chymere down to the Feet, and under that a white Linen
Rochet that covered all his Shoulders; upon his Head he had a Geometrial, that
is, a foursquared Cap, albeit that his Head was round. What cause of shame
(says Fox) the strangeness hereof was that day to that good Preacher, every man
may easily judge, Martyr. Vol. 2. page 1366. Thus see thou Reader that what
Hooper Conscientiously scrupled and refused, as an offense and burden to his
Conscience, and what Fox who wrote the Story affirms to be Popish and
Superstitious, Cranmer and other of his Associate Bishops saw no Evil in; which
I mention not with any design to detract the same of those worthy men, (whose
honor and true excellency stood not so much in knowing much (though much they
knew) as in being faithful to what they knew) nor to intimate any discordance
among them (who I make no doubt agreed full well in a good resolution to oppose
all Popish Errors, so far as they had a clear discerning of them; which
Apology, to men of candor needless, I am in some sort constrained here to make,
to obviate, and if it may be to prevent the unjust Cavillations of my very
disingenuous and captious Adversaries.) But I therefore instance this case of
Bishop Hooper, to manifest, that amongst such as to be sure were no Renegadoes,
but real Martyrs, all the Superstitions and Corruptions of the Roman Church
were not equally discovered to all; but that some saw that to be Popish, and
rejected it, which others, not seeing to be so, continued in: but their
continuing in it makes not the thing it self less evil, or the Testimony of
others who have seen and decry'd it, less considerable with those who look
through the Eye of Reason, not of interest; the like is to be said in the case
of Tithes. If some of the Martyrs did not see Tithes to be of Popish
Institution, and therefore did continue the use of them; that practice of
theirs does no more prove that Tithes are not of Popish Institution, then their
using and wearing the pontificial Garments, does prove those Garments were not
of Popish Institution, which Bishop Hooper denied as Popish.

. 25. The Author of the Friendly Conference, in his Vindication, page 306.
says, The Quaker should have told us what those many things are, which were
allowed by them (Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, etc.) and since plainly condemned by
others.

I con^ess I did not think it needful, in a thing so obvious, to have instanced
particular^; but since it seems he expected it, he may take if he please the
forementioned for some. But withal I would have him know I take notice how
unfairly he deals with me, altering my words that he may make an occasion to
abuse me. For whereas I said, page 307. We (...) diverse things which they took
little or no notice of, plainly condemned, and zealously witnessed against by
others: He pretending to repeat my words, says, The Quaker should have told us
what those MANY things are, which are allowed by them, and SINCE plainly
condemned by others. Where besides the manifest alteration of my words, he
thrust in the word [since] only that he might have a Stone to throw at me; for
thereupon he says, I suppose by these [others] (...) means such as himself, or
such factious and schis^atick Spirits.

Whe^eas my words in the place forecited do evidently refer to former times:
for after I had said, We find diverse things which they took little or no notice
of, plainly condemned, and zealously Witnessed against by others, I immediately
added, Who are acknowledged to HAVE BEEN in their respective times, Confessors
of and true Witnesses for God against the Corruptions and Superstitions of the
Romish Church, as well as they, How is it possible this man could thus have
abused me, if he had not designedly set himself to it. Yet this is the man that
in his Epistle complains of my dishonesty in mis-stating his Book.

But he will not allow Wickliff, Swinderby, Brute and Thorp the Name of
Martyrs, but says, page 309. of his Vindication, Never a man of these was a
Martyr. But why? Because a Martyr is one that seals his Testimony of the Truth
with his Blood; and Wickliffe not being burned till Forty One Years after his
Death, what Blood I pray (says he) was lef^ in Wickliffe's Bones, after they
had been Buried Forty One Years? The others he also denies to have been
Martyrs, because (as he says) their Ends were un^ertain, page 308.

The word Martyr properly signifies a Witness, and is applicable to them who
make confession of the Truth, and bear witness to it, but more especially (and
per ex^ellentia^) to them that suffer for the Truth. And though it is commonly
understood of them that suffer unto death, yet inasmuch as many Sufferings
which extend not unto Death, are as grievous and cru^l as death it self, I see
no reason why such as faithfully and constantly undergo such Sufferings, not
baulking their Testimony for fear of Death, should be deprived of their Palms,
and excluded from the Catologue of Martyrs, who it may be were as fully
resigned to Death, and could as willingly and cheatfully have undergone it (if
it had been inflicted) as they did those other hardships they endured, or as
others, who actually suffered Death. However, since no man ought to execute
himself, they who boldy co^fest the Truth, and faithfully bore witness to it,
pat^iently suffering whatsoever was laid upon them for the sake thereof;
whether he will allow them to be called Martyrs or not, their Testimony, I
hope, ought not to be rejected nor themselves despised, reproached and
villified, as we shall see anon they are. As for Wickliffe, Fox calls him a
valiant Champion; and though he died quietly at Lutterworth in Leicestershire,
yet great and grievous troubles underwent he, as Fox in his Sto^y repo^ts, and
as (...) in his Brittania intimates, page 518. Swinderby the Priest denies to
be a Martyr, because Fox says, Whether he dyed in Prison, or whether he
escaped their Hands, or was burned, there is no certain relation made. But he
conceals, that Fox in the same place adds* that a Law being made, in the
begin^ing of the Reign of Hen. 4. against the favorers of Wick^iffe, under the
Name of Lollards, certain Priest was thereupon Burnt in Smithfield, who by
diverse conjectures appears to him to be this Swinderby, Martyrol. page 4^8. who
was before condemned by the Bishop of Hereford, page 436. Brute is by the
Priest denied to be a Martyr, because Fox says, What and he had I find not
Registered. But Fox shows that although at that time when he appeared before the
Bishop of Hereford it is likely he escaped, yet a Year or two after by the
instigation of the Bishops, the King issued forth his Commission with great
sharpness and severity against the said Brute and his Abbettors, which argues
that the said Walter Brute did persist in his Testimony against the Church of
Rome. Thorp he will not admit be to a Martyr, because Fox says, his end was
uncertain: But Fox leaves not the matter so. For he says, By all conjectures
it is to be thought, that the Archbishop Tho. Arundel being so hard an
Adversary against those men, would not let him go. Much less is it to be
supposed, that he would ever retract his Sentence and Opinion, which he so
valiantly maintained before the Bishop; neither does it seem that he had any
such recanting Spirit. Again, neither is it found that he was burned: Wherefore
(says Fox) it remains most like to be true, that he being committed to some
strait Prison (according as the Archbishop in his Examination before did
threaten him) there (as Thorp confesses himself) was so straightly kept, that
either he was secretly made away, or else there he dyed by Sickness; as he
instances in John Ashton another of Wickliff's Followers, who was so served,
Martyrol. page 500. Now though the manner of these men's deaths cannot be
certainly known, yet certain it is that they were devou^ and godly men, and
zealous against the Romish Errors so far as they discerned them. And if we may
take his character of them, who writ their Sto^y, he calls Swinderby a worthy
Priest, and true Servant of Christ, Martyrol. page 437. Of Brute he says, that
In the tractation of his discourse may appear the mighty operation of God's
Spirit in him, his ripe knowledge, modest simplicity, his valiant constancy,
his learned tractations, and manifold conflicts sustained against God's
Enemies, page 438. Thorp he calls a good Man and bl^ssed Servant of God, page
500. A Warrior valiant under the triumphant Banner of Christ, page 485. And
tells his Reader, He shall behold in this Man the marvelous force and strength
of the Lord's Might, Spirit and Grace, working and fighting in his Soldiers,
and also speaking in their Mouths, according to the word of his promise, Luke
21. ibid. In all which, either Fox was much mistaken in the men, or this Priest
in his Right of Tithes has most exceedingly injured them: For he renders them
Apostates, calls them Renegadoes, scoff^ at their knowledge, and says,
Cranmer, Hooper, Ridley, etc. are much disgraced by the parallel, page 139,
140. Surely if the men (the times wherein they lived considered) were guilty of
some weaknesses or infirmities, it had much better become this pretended
Protestant, to have mentioned them at least with common civility, had it been
but for the Cause sak^ in which they were engaged, then thus to fall on them in
reviling Language, and defame them for Apostates and Renegado's. In which he
seems rather to exceed then imitate the foolish outrage of the Papists against
Wickliffe: for they burnt the Bones of Wickliffe only Forty One Years after he
was dead; but this Priest seeks to distain and blemish the Name, the Memory,
and the Testimonies of these four men together, which have flourished well nigh
three Hundred Years: And so angry is he at them, that I speed the worse at his
hands for having mentioned them. For forgetting in his heat that he said at the
beginning he would not meddle with scurrility, he here falls downright upon me,
and says, I am a manifest Liar in giving such Renegadoes the name of Martyrs;
which Language as it credits not him that gave it (without any provocation that
I know of from me) so it hurts not me to whom it is given; nor would I have
taken notice of it at all, but to manifest the temper of my Adversary, and the
liberty of nameless Writers. But he fathers one part of his calumny upon Fox,
and says, Most of these Opposers of Tithes recanted openly, and proved
Apostates, as Mr. Fox himself confesses. But in this he does Fox wrong: For,
first, he no where calls them Apostates, nor is it likely he thought them so by
the character he gave of them. Neither secondly, does he confess that most of
them recanted openly; for of Wickliffe and Thorp he mentions no such thing at
all. And what he speaks of Swinderby, it wa^ not so properly (if well
considered) a Recantation of what he held, as a Denial of Articles laid to his
charge in such terms as he did not hold them; which afterward himself explained
and maintained. As for Brute, Fox does not tax him with retracting any thing at
all; but only shows that he submitted himself principally to the Gospel of
Jesus Christ; and to the determination of Holy Kirk, and to the general
Council^ of Holy Kirk; and to the sentence and determination of the four
Do^tors of holy Writ, that is, Augustine, Ambrose, Icrom and Gregory, and to
the correct^on of the Bishop of Hereford, page 461. And surely the character
which Fox gives of Brute, and of the mighty operation of God's Spirit in him,
does not imply he thought Brute either an Apostate, or Renegado. But suppose it
had been so, as he opprobriously objects, that most of these Opposers of Tithes
had recanted their Opinions; yet if afterward they returned and stood to their
Testimony, must it not be received? If they had fallen by infirmity, might they
not rise again by Repentance? and must their after Testimony be rejected
because of a former slip? I could nam^ him the Man (if I judged it necessary)
who for his Testimony against the Church of Rome endured diverse Years
Imprisonment, sustained many a sharp Conflict, and bore the brunt of many an
hard ^attel against the Popish Bishops, yea, stood his ground against them,
even to sentence and degradation, and after all this, was drawn, either by
threats or flattery, to sign a Recantation, to the great di^^onour of his
Cause, and wounding of his Conscience: yet this Man shortly after retracted
that Recantation, resumed his Testimony against the Church of Rome, and died a
famous Martyr, doing himself an exemplary piece of justice upon that Hand with
which he had subscribed the Recantation. But notwithstanding this man's slip,
his Testimony for God against the Idolatries and Corruptions of the Roman
Church, are justly had in very great esteem. But to proceed.

The Priest says, Right of Tithes, page 139. As for the knowledge of T. E's
Martyrs, we may guess at the size th^reof by that senseless saying of one of
them, viz. That one of the ancient Doctors, S. Jerome (he thought) did affirm,
that those Priests who take Tithes, deny Christ to be come in the Flesh.

This which was spoken by William Thorp (whom Fox calls a good man and blessed
Servant of God, yea a valiant Warrior under the triumphant Banner of Christ)
the Priest calls a senseless saying, an idle thing, and in derision scossingly
says, We may guess at the size of their knowledge by this. But does this
become him? Is t^i^ at all like a Protestant? what could Harpsfield, Harding,
or any other of the Popish Champions have said more contemptuously? But he not
only denies this Sentence to be Hierom's, but that any ancient Doctor did ever
say so idle ^ thing.

In which he deals worse with Thorp then did Arundel the Popish Archbishop, to
whom Thorp urged it (and under whom he suffered) for the Archbishop did not
deny his quotation, but blamed him for picking such sharp Sentences out of the
Scriptures, and out of the Doctors against the Priests, which was an implicit
acknowledgment of the Truth of his Allegation. Thus, Reader, thou see the
contempt these Priests have of any that speak against their corrupt interest,
as these good men (for Martyrs, it seems, we must not call them) plainly did:
and yet the Author of the Conference, in his Vindication, page 307, 309. makes
as if they held no other Opinion of Tithes, then I represent him to h^ld.

In all which he wrongs both them and me, and tells his Reader a great untruth.
For neither did they hold Tithes to be due in that notion of a temporal Right
in which he claims them, nor did I represent him to hold that Tithes ar^ pure
and mere Alms, as they affirmed them to be. Wickliffe, he confesses denied the
Ius divinu^, or divine Right of Tithes.

It Is true indeed he did so, and the human Right too in that sense wherein this
Priest claims them, and therefore is a very proper witness against him. For
Wickliffe held Tithes to be pure Alms, disposable at the will and pleasure of
the giver. But this Priest calls Tithes his Freehold, and says, he looks upon
him^^lf to be no more obliged to the People for the payment of them, then a
Landlord is to his Tenant for the payment of his Rent, Conference, page 161.
(To the same purpose also (...) speaks in his Vindication, page 315.) which is
somewhat different, I wis, from mere Alms. And how contemptibly soever these
Priests think of John Wickliffe, it appears that the University of Oxford in
their public Testimonial, gave high commendation of him, not only as a man of
profound learning, but as a stout and valiant Champion of the Faith, Martyrol.
page 412. And that John Hus the Bohemian, by public Disputation in the
University of Prague, did maintain and defend the Articles of Wickliffe, and
particularly, that Tithes were pure Alms, and might be taken from the Clergy,
page 425. And though Wickliffe it s^ems be not thought worthy the Name of a
Martyr, yet Hus, I hope, I may adventure to style one, without the danger of
being called again a manifest Liar, since Hus was actually Burnt at Constance,
by sentence of the same Council which commanded the burning of Wickliffe's
Bones, and for maintaining Wickliff^'s Articles.

Neither did Swinderby, Brit^, or Thorp hold Tithes in that Notion of temporal
Right that these Priests do. For Swinderby held Tithes to be mere Alms, which
might lawfully be taken from the Priest. And in his seventh Article he says,
No Priest ought by bargaining and covenant to sell his Ghostly travel (that is,
his spiritual Service or Ministry) of which among many particulars he names
Prayers, Baptism, Confirming, Marrying, etc. Martyrol. page 431. Which Hus also
maintained, saying, It is no argument, that if the Curate do perform his
corporal Ministry, that he ought therefore to challenge Tithes by a civil
Title, because that as well on the behalf of him which gives the Tithes, as
also in the behalf of the Curate, every such Ministry ought freely to be given,
and not by any civil exchange, page 426. Brute also not only denied the divine
Right of Tithes, which he judiciously and plainly disproves, showing that
Tyt^^s under the Law were Ceremonial, and therefore ended by Christ, and not
being afterward commanded by Christ or his Apostles, Christian People are not
bound to p^y Tithes either by the Law of Moses or of Christ, page 446, 447. but
accounted Tithes mere Alms, as it seems by the Articles exhibited against him,
page 438. although he says, By the tradition of men they are bound to pay
them, page 447. yet by the word Tradition, that seems rather meant de facto
then dejure. As for Thorp, he denied not only the divine Right of Tithes, but
the temporal Right also that these Priests plead for; for he shows that the
Parishioners have power to detain their Tithes, The Parishioners (says he)
that pay their temporal Goods (be they Tithes or Offerings) to Priests that do
not their Office among them justly, are partners of every Sin of those Priests,
because that they sustain those Priests fully in their Sin, by their temporal
Goods, page 494. And being rebuked by the Archbishop for expugning the freedom
of holy Church, he said, Sr. Why call ye the taking of Tithes, and of such
other duties that Priests challenge now (WRONGFULLY) the freedom of holy
Church: since neither Christ nor his Apostles challenged nor took such Duties.
Therefore these takings of Priests now are NOT called JUSTLY the freedom of
Holy Church, but all such giving and taking ought to be called and holde^ the
SLANDEROUS COVETOUSNESS of Men of the Holy Church, page 495.

Thus have thou, Reader, in part, the Opinions of these Men concerning Tithes,
which it may be the Priest will call senseless Sayings, as he did before.
However, it is manifest by these sayings, that his was not a true saying, when
he said, those Men were no more against Tithes then I represent the Priest
himself to be.

CHAP. V.
HAving showed that Tithes were of Popish Institution, and as such denied by
many good men (not unworthy the Name of Martyrs) whom God raised up in former
Ages to bear witness against the Corruptions of the Church of Rome, and who for
such their witness-bearing did suffer under that Church; I come in the next
place to consider what t^ese two Priests have further offered concerning a
temporal Right to Tithes.

. 1. The Author of the Right of Tithes, to show on what ground our Kings and
Parliaments proceeded in estating Tithes on the Clergy, sets down (page ^4^.) a
Rule or Axiom of K. Edward the Confessor, viz. That it is the duty of a King
to preserve, ch^rish, maintain and govern the Churches of their Dominions,
according to the Constitutions of their Fathers and Predecessors.

If this was the Rule by which our Kings and Parliaments in the Reformation
have settled Tithes upon the Clergy; then are Tithes no clearer from Popery in
their settlement, then in their Institution: for if Edw. 6. settled Tithes
according to the Constitutions of his Father H^n. 8. and if Hen. 8. settled
Tithes according to the Constitutions of his Father Hen. 7. and so back; then
seeing it is certain that Hen. 7. and his Predecessors were professed Papists,
and devoted to the Church of Rome, and consequently that the Constitutions for
the maintenance of the Church made by or under them were fully and absolutely
Popish, it will follow that the settlement of Tithes, by which the Priests now
claim a temporal Right to them, was made according to Popish Constitutions,
which I think is not for the credit of their Claim.

But he says, If I would fairly have disproved this Temporal Right, I should
have showed there were no human Laws to estate Tithes on the Church, nor no
remedies in the Courts of Justice against any that detained them, etc. page 142.

That Is his mistake. If I had argued against Fact* the way he proposes had not
been improper: but arguing against his pretended Right, I conceive I took the
right method, and am well content to submit it to the sensure of every
judicious and impartial Reader, That they have Remedies in Courts against such
as do not give them Tithes, and that they are not backward to use those
Remedies to the utmost degree of Severity and Rigor, is a known and certain
Truth, confirmed by the ruin of many an industrious Family, and sealed with the
innocent Blood of many a Conscientious Man, who has dyed a Prisoner at their
Suit for Tithes. But I hope he will not argue from Fact to Right, and infer
that it ought to be so, because it is so. The Popish Priests (as I showed him
in my former Book, page 360.) had Law on their sides o^ce, in this Nation, as
well as he, and have it still elsewhere; and others of another Name, within our
own remembrance, had Law on their sides and the same Law too (and were forward
enough to use it) by which the present Priests recover Tithes. Had these
therefore, will he say, a right to Tithes? If he affirms it, he knows what
follows: if he denies it, the consequence is plain, That L^w and Right (...)
not inseparable. He says, To contrive by Sophistry and Probabilities to show a
thing cannot be, which we see with our Eyes, is to nibble, not dispute.

I did not go about to show that what he sees with his Eyes cannot be; but I
endeavored fairly and without Sophistry to prove, that what he sees with his
Eyes (in this case) should not be: not that it cannot be; but that it connot
rightly and justly be. And upon the Priest's comparing his Right with the
Parishioners, and making them to stand upon the same bottom, I argued for four
or five pages together, showing the ground of their Claims to be different, the
one temporal, the other spiritual; and plainly proving, that a temporal
settlement of Tithes is not sufficient to give the Priests a right thereto,
because Tithes ar^ claimed upon considerations that are not temporal, but
spiritual; see Truth prevailing, page 311, 312, 313, 314, 315. To all which,
the Author of the Friendly Conference in his Vindication, repeating these words
of mine, That I claim my Estate in a natural and civil capacity, without
relation to a ministerial Function, returns this Reply, page 310. This will
pass for an Argument, when he can prove that the Ministers of the Gospel ought
to be reputed Outlaws, and what is set apart for such ought to be exposed to
the Rapine of every sacriligious Ruffian. And if humane Laws be a good Plea for
other men, I do not know why they should be a bad Plea for us, and this (says
he) may serve to answer several of his pages, where he beats the Air with a
repetition of a company of vain and empty words.

Is not this a strange Answer? what part of it is either sober or at all
pertinent to the matter? But letting pass the former part of this Answer (which
bespeaks him a fitter man to wrangle with Ruffians, then discourse with sober
and civil people) since in the latter part he says, If humane Laws be a good
Plea for other men, he does not know why they should be a bad Plea for them, I
will adventure once more to incur his Displeasure, by telling him that one
Reason is, because his Plea being spiritual, grounded upon a spiritual
consideration, is not suitable to those humane and temporal Laws, as other men's
Pleas, which are not spiritual, but temporal, are. And when his Brother Priest
insists on the Divine Right of Tithes, and claims them by the Law of God, if
one of his Parishioners (or any Layman) should say as this Priest does, If
Divine Laws may be a good Plea ^or other men, I do not know why they should be
a bad Plea for me; and thereupon produce either the Law of Moses, or some Text
in the New Testament to prove his Title to the Estate he claims; would not he
be apt to smile at his Parishioner, and inform him, that he claiming in a civil
capacity, not upon spirit^al but temporal Considerations, must have recourse to
humane Laws for the Confirmation of his Claim, and not expect to have a civil
Claim grounded on humane and temporal Considerations, secured and made good
unto him by the spiritual and divine Law of God? With how much more Reason
might his Parishioner even laugh outright at him, who pretending to be a
Minister of Christ, and in that capacity or Qualification claiming Tithes as
due to him, not upon temporal but spiritual Considerations, betakes himself to
humane Laws to make his Title good?

But leaving this as a sufficient Reply to that little piece of insufficient
Answer, which he is pleased t^ afford to so many pages of mine, I turn me to
the other Priest, who I find uses many more words, though not much more to the
purpose.

. 2. In my Answer to the first Priest, page 311. I said, I shall discover his
Fallacy further, by telling him, not only that I enjoy my Estate as a temporal
Right, but also that I claim it in a natural and civil Capacity, without
relation to a ministerial Function or spi^itual Office, as a Man, not as a
Minister of Christ. But the Priest does not claim Tithes in this Capacity. He
claims in a spiritual Capacity (although his Claim be false) his Claim depends
upon a ministerial Function. He claims not as a Man, but as a Minister of
Christ (for such he pretends to be, though he be not.) His Claim therefore to
Tithes, and my Claim to my temporal Estate, differing in the very Ground and
Nature of them, that which will make good my claim to my Estate, will not make
good his Claim to Tithes. For my Claim to my Estate being grounded upon a
natural or temporal consideration only, a temporal Right is sufficient to make
it good. But his Claim to Tithes being grounded upon a spiritual consideration
(as he pretends to be a Minister of Christ) a temporal Right is no way equal or
suitable to his Claim. The first part of these words the Priest recites, and
thereto thus replies, (Right of Tithes, page 143.) T. E. does not claim merely
in his natural Capacity, nor barely as a Man (for all his talking) since many
wiser and better men then T. E. have no Estate at all, nor no Right to any:
Every m^n has a natural Cap^^ity, but that alone gives no Title to an Estate;
it is therefore as a man so qualified that T. E. ^laims, that is, as a
Purchas^r, or one to whom an Estate has been given, or as being descended from
some so qualified, or else as invested with some civil Office or Employment to
which such an Estate is annexed.

What I meant by a natural Capacity is explained by the word [civil] as also by
the following words [without relation to a ministerial Function or spiritual
Office] which plainly shows* I there opposed not a natural capacity to a civil
capacity (for I join them together) but a natural capacity to a spiritual
capacity; and therefore when I mention the Priests Claim, I say he claims in a
spiritual capacity, his Claim depends upon a ministerial Function. In like
manner, when I say I claim as a man, it is clear I there intend man in that
sense wherein Man is opposed to a Minister of Christ; and therefore afterward
speaking of the Priests Claim, I say, he claims not as a Man, but as a Minister
of Christ. Neither did I say as the Priest replies, that I claim merely in my
natural capacity, or barely as a man; nor could the Priest, in his right Wits,
understand me so to mean. But this is a mere Catch of his, to avoid the force
of my Argument, and make his less-observant Readers think he has said
something, whenas indeed what he has said is nothing at all to the purpose.
When I say I claim in a natural and civil capacity, I include those civil
Qualifications which may justly entitle to such a claim, whether they arise
from Purchase, Heirship, Free Gift, Civil Office, or any other of like nature:
and I show that the Priest not claiming in this capacity, no^ by virtue of any
of these or such like Qualifications, his claim to Tithes and mine to my
temporal Estate differ in the very ground and nature of them; not in the
several sorts of civil Claims, as if one claimed by purchase, the other by
descent, etc. but in the nature of the Claims themselves; one being natural or
civil, the other spiritual or religious. Now the Priest claiming Tithes, not in a
civil capacity, not upon civil qualifications, but in a spiritual or religious
capacity, upon religious qualifications, as a Priest and (pretended) Minister
of Christ, that which will make good my civil claim to my Estate, will not make
good his religious claim to Tithes. The difference between civil and religious
capacities and qualifications, and the Claims arising therefrom may appear the
more clearly, if we consider them both in one and the same Person. Suppose at
this time (as was formerly frequent) a Clergyman or Priest were Chancellor of
England, or invested with any other civil Office; he by virtue of that civil
qualification, would have a good claim to such temporal Estate as should be
annexed to that civil Office with which he is so invested; but he could not
claim that Estate by virtue of his Priesthood, or as a man religiously
qualified, any more then he could claim Tithes by virtue of his Chancellorship,
or as a man civilly qualified. Hence the necessary and unavoidable distinction
between civil and religious Qualifications and Claims is manifest. Now as he
that makes claim to an Estate by virtue of a civil Qualification ought to
prove, maintain, defend his Claim by humane Laws, as being suitable to the
nature of his Claim: so he that makes claim to Tithes by virtue of a religious
qualification, ought to prove, maintain, defend his claim by divine Laws, as
being suitable to the nature of his Clai^.

But the Priest, having wrested my words from a natural and civil capacity, to
a MERE natural capacity, void of all civil Qualifications, goes on to make what
Advantage he can by this unworthy Pervertion. Well, says he, the Priest has a
natural capacity also, as well as T. E. is as much and as good a man as he; but
this alone gives him no Title to his Tithes; he claims them in a spiritual
capacity, as T. E. claims his Estate in a civil capacity: and now, why is not a
spiritual capacity as good a ground of claim to an Estate legally settled upon
it, as a civil capacity? page 144.

If he means by [legally settled] settled by divine and spiritual Laws, as
Tithes were on the Jewish Priests, a spiritual capacity is as Good a ground of
claim to an Estate settled as a civil capacity is of claim to an Estate so
settled, by humane Laws; but a spiritual capacity is not so good a ground of
claim to an Estate settled by humane Laws, as a civil capacity, because a Claim
grounded on a civil capacity is of the same nature with humane Laws, and
properly determinable by them; but in a Claim grounded on a spiritual capacity
it is not so.

He says, page 145. An Estate in Land, Rentcharge, or T^lls and Customs, may
be settled on the Mayor of such a City, and on his Successors forever; and
then, whosoever sustains that Charge, and bears that Office, has as good a Claim
by Law to that In-come, as ^. E. has to the Estate he is born to. They claim
(says he) under different Qualifications; but one has as good a Temporal
Right for his time as the other,

He should have done well to have showed the different Qualifications under
which the Mayors of a City successively claim an Estate settled upon their
Office. I confess I do not see how they can claim under different
qualifications, since each of them claims as he is Mayor. But if the Priest has
any Croch^t in his Head (as his own phrase is) to help him out (as he seldom is
without a Meuse) and can find any difference in their qualifications, as
Mayors, or by which they claim, yet surely he will not find the difference
between Civil and Religious qualifications among them; whatever qualifications
the Mayors of a City may claim by, they are all Civil I trow; ne do, not mean
I suppose that some of the Mayors claim their Toll, etc. under civil
qualifications, and some under Religious qualifications. ^f not, how
impertinent is it to the purpose! how irrelative to the Case in hand! Neither
is what follows of any more force, or any whit more to the purpose. Why (says
he, ibid.) is not a Religious Office as endowable as a Civil Office? Sure his
being a Minister of Christ makes him not incapable of a temporal right; for St.
Paul says, the King is (...) the Minister of God, Romans 13. 4.

One's being a Minister of Christ does not make him incapable of a temporal
Right, nor any whit more capable of a temporal Right. If he that is a Minister
of Christ has right to a temporal Estate (patrimonial or other) which he claims
and holds in a civil capacity, his being a Minister of Christ does not divest
him of his Right to that temporal Estate, as it would not invest him with such
a Right, if he were not in such a civil capacity, and under such a
qualification, as does entitle him to it. Thus we see many of the Clergy have
temporal Estates, which they claim and hold in a civil capacity, as men under
such civil qualifications, without any regard to their Priestly Function; and
in their enjoyment of those Estates, no man I suppose impugns them. But to what
end does the Priest urge the words of St. Paul, that the King is (...) the
Minister of God? Methinks he should not mean, that the King is the Minister of
God in the same sense wherein he himself pretends to be a Minister of Christ.
But if he would needs make the King a Clergy man, he might, one would think,
have helped him to an higher Office among them then a Deaconship. The King is
indeed the Minister of God, but his ministerial function is civil; and
therefore he is called the civil Magistrate. And if we consider the time
wherein that Epistle to the Romans was written, we shall find no cause to
suppose the Apostle called the Magistrate the Minister of God in a Religious
and Spiritual sense: it being written probably about the beginning of Nero's
Reign, then whom that Age did not bring forth a greater Enemy to the
Christian-Religion. And being spoken of Magistracy in general, it cannot
without the greatest absurdity be understood in a Religious sens^. But if the
Magisterial Office be a civil Office and Function, to what end serves the
mention of it here? The Priest's is not such; it helps not him at all. He
says, By virtue of that Ministerial Function, his Majes^y claims many temporal
rights (besides the ancient Patrimony of his Family:) And will (adds he) this
faucy Quaker say, he has a better Title to his Estate, then the King has to
the Rights and Revenues of his Crown.

No, No: The Quaker will not be so ^aucy as the Priest -- would gladly have
him. The Quaker knows the King's Temporal Rights are Built upon a bottom as
fir^ and stable as the Priest's claim to Tithes is weak and feeble. And the
Priest knows too, that the King claims his Rights upon considerations of
another nature, then those upon which the Priest claims Tithes: for the King
claims his Rights in a civil capacity, and under a civil qualification, by
virtue of the administration of a civil Office; but the Priest claims Tithes in
a Religious capacity, and upon the account of a Spiritual Office. Judge now
Reader how very impertinently the Priest has urged this Instance, and how far
it is from helping him: After the same rate goes he on for several pages
together, offering nothing of solid Argument, but mee^ Sophistry. He undertakes
(page 146.) to evidence the Priests claim by a parallel. Suppose, says he,
some Prince or great Man did out of his own Inheritance make a donation of some
certain Lands or Rents to an Elwood, and entail it on the Family of Elwoods
forever; if T. E. be the Heir of that Family, he will say he has as good a
Right to this as if he had purchased it. And why may not, says he, the Priest
claim his Tithes as justly as T. E. claims this Donative?

There are many Reasons why he should not (both with relation to the Giver, to
the Gift it self, and to the considerations on which it is given) but that
which is most direct to the present case, is the different capacities of the
Claimers. T. E. if he should claim such a Donative, must claim it in a civil
capacity, under a civil qualification, without respect to any Religious Office;
but the Priest claims not Tithes so, but quite contrary: he claims on the score
of a Religious Office without respect to any civil capacity or qualification at
all. What can be more different then two such Claims, whereof one is merely
Civil, the other merely Religious? Now that Claim that is civil falls properly
under the cognizance of human Laws, which are of the same nature with it; but
so does not the other. Nor were the Religious Donations of Tithes accounted
cognizable by the civil Magistrate, or subjected to human Laws for many hundred
Years af^^r they were given.

In the winding up of this Section, he shows himself to be a man of a base
unworthy mi^d, who because he finds me fenced by Truth against the force of his
Arguments, lets fly one of his en^enomed Darts to wound the honor of my
deceased Mother. And rather then want an opportunity he sti^^^ not to make a
downright falshhood by which to make way for ^is slanderous insinuation. His
words are these, page 147. Though this bold Quaker do often say [we are no
Pr^ests] I must t^ll him, there is more fear he is no Elwood, then we no
Pries^s; and our Ordi^ation is easier to prove, the^ T. E's Mother's Honesty.

False man and most unworthy! Let him produce if he can that place in my Book,
wh^^^ I say they are no Priests. Do I not frequently call them Priests, and
seldom any thing e^se? And (...) so void of shame as well as honesty, to charge
me that I often say They are no ^ri^sts! But it is obvious that he forged this
falsehood only to usher in his slanderous suggestion. But I would have him know
he has hereby only discovered his own base and ungenerous Nature (in attempting
to defame the Memory of one whom probably he never knew, much less had ever
provocation from) but is not able to blemish her Reputation, who was well known
to be a modest, chaste and virtuous Woman, unstained throughout her Life with
any spot of In^amy, and having slept in Peace about some twenty Years, her
Memory is still fresh and sweet to all that knew her, and her good Name above
the reach of this Detractor's Tongue.

. 3. In his next Section, page 148. The Priest quotes me saying thus, page 314.
If the case of the Priest and of T. E as to Temporal Right be equal, then the
Priest must acknowledge he is no more a Minister of Christ then T. E. at least,
that he does not claim them as a Minister of Christ, any more then T. E. does
his temporal ^state; otherwise the parallel will not hold.

What a lame quotation has he here given! In the page out of which he has
taken this, I observed how willing the Priest was, for his own interest, to
parallel his cas^ with the Parishioners, as if there were no difference at all
in their Claims. One claims a temporal th^^^, and the other claims a temporal
thing. One claims by a temporal Right, and the other claims by a temporal
Right. One has no need of a Precept or Example in holy Scripture for what he
claims, no more has the other. Thus he takes his Parishioner by the ^ose, and
endeavors to cokes him into a conceit, that their cases answer pat to one
another, that their Right is all one, their Claim one and the same, their
pretensions just alike. But then (say I) they must not stay there, the Priest
must also acknowledge, he is no more a Minister of Christ then the other, at
least that he does not claim Tithes as a Minister of Christ, any more then the
other does his temporal Estate; otherwise the parallel will not hold. For if he
claims Tithes as a Minister of Christ, if he demands them in consideration of a
spiritual Office, I am sure then their Claims will not agree; and that which
will be sufficient to make good a Title to the one, will not be so to the
other. This I recite the larger, that the Reader may see upon what gr^^nds I
made this Conclusion. The Priest says, The maxim on which this inference is
grounded, is this wretched absurdity? That none can have equal temporal rights
by the Laws, unless they be equal in all Capacities.

But this (to use his own term) is a wretched untruth; for my Inference is not
grounded on such a Maxim: I said not that they must be equal in all Capacities;
but that if one claimed in a civil capacity and the other in a spiritual, their
Claims then would not agree, nor the pretended Parallel hold. There is a
difference between being equal in all Capacities, and claiming in quite
contrary Capacities. If one man claims in a civi^ capacity, and another in a
spiritual capacity, and both by the same human Laws; surely (...) that claims
in a spiritual capacity is therein opposite not only to him that claims in a
civil capacity, but to the Laws also by which himself claims, which are of a
civil Nature, and therefore cannot properly and rightly be made use of to
maintain a religious and spiritual claim. But he says, The same Laws do give
equal temporal Rights to persons of all kind of Capacities; for the same
Estate, he says, may be enjoyed by Judge first, then by a Soldier, then by a
Mercha^t, then by a Woman; and all these in their several (...) may have an
equal Right to this Estate, though they be every one of different Capacities,
page 149.

Though he says the same Laws give equal temporal Rights to Persons of all
kind of Capacities, yet among the Instances he gives to demonstrate his
Assertion, there is never an one of his Capacity; and therefore it reaches not
his case. His Instances of a Judge, a Soldier, a Merchant, a Woman, are all
civil, of the same Nature with the Laws by which they claim: but so is not the
Priest, he claiming in a capacity of a contrary Nature to the Laws by which he
claims: for the Laws are human and civil, but the capacity he claims in is
Spiritual and Religious. He has one instance more, but that no more to the
purpose then the former. Suppose (says he, page 149.) the King have by the Law
a temporal Right to one Estate, and some of his Subjects an equal Right to
another E^^ate; you shall hear (says he) T. E's wise way of arguing: The King
claims a temporal thing; so does the Subject: the King claims by a temporal
right; so does the Subject: the King has no need of Scripture to prove his
right; no more has the Subject: yet for all this, their Claim is not one and
the same, they must stay there; the King must acknowledge himself no more a
King then the Subject, or else the cases are not parallel.

In this, as in the next, his Sophistry is evident. This is not (as he
floutingly calls it) my wise way of arguing, but his foul way of perverting
Arguments. I argued not between a King and a Subject, but between a Priest and
a Parishioner* showing the contrariety of the Capacities in which they claimed.
This ^e turns off from the Priest to the King, as if the King's case and the
Priest's were so just alike, that whatsoever is said of the Priest's case must
needs agree to the King's; whereas the Priest's case is as contrary to the
King's, as it is to the Parishioners: for the King claims in a civil capacity
as well as the Parishioner, but the Priest claims in a Religious capacity
contrary to both. A King and Subject may well have equal right to their
respective Estates by the same Laws, because though the qualifications under
which they claim, differ in degrees, yet they differ not in Nature; they are
both civil, and both o^ the same Nature with those Laws by which they claim.
But with the Priest it is quite otherwise: The qualification under which he
claims Tithes, is quite contrary to that under which the Parishioner claims his
Estate, and no less to the Laws also by which himself claims Tithes.

The rest of this Section he spends in Railing, and most part also of the rest
of his Book; in which I do not intend to encounter him, as being neither able
nor willing to match him therein. His following Sections therefore, being
fuller of reviling Language then solid Arguments, and more repl^^e with ^ailing
then with Reason, I shall make the fewer Remarques upon; and the rather for
that I have, in a deli^erate progress through all his three Periods of time,
sufficiently disproved already all his pretenses of a divine Right to Tithes;
and made it mani^est that the Institution of Tithes, since the times of the
Gospel, was Popish, that Popery had made her encroachments in the Church before
Tithes were settled on it; that those settlements of Tithes that were
afterward made, proceeded from a blind zeal and superstitious Devotion,
grounded on Principles repugnant to the true Christian- Religion, which I
recommend to the consideration and Conscience of every serious Reader, and
proceed.

In his 27. Section he quarrels at three passages of mine; One is the
description of a Ministers maintenance from Luke 10. 7, 8. and Matthew. 10. 11.
Against which he objects, page 156. That if this order of taking Meat and Drink
then, were a perpetual and general rule to all Ministers to the World's end, so
must also all the rest of the rules their mentioned be.

That does not follow. If some of those Rules had relation to that particular
service only, yet this of maintenance was more general; and therefore he may
observe, that when our Savior afterward gave his more general Commission for
the preaching of the Gospel to all Nations, he made no new Provision for their
maintenance; which argues he intended the continuance of that which he had
before appointed; and this also is confirmed by the practice of the Apostles
afterward, especially of the Apostle Paul, who though he was not employed in
that particular Message on which the other Apostles were sent (for he was not
converted till some Years after) yet refers directly to the maintenance there
appointed [Have we not power to Eat and to Drink? 1 Cor. 9. 4.] So that we see
the Apostle understood that maintenance which Christ had at first appointed was
to continue, (and accordingly asserts his power to receive it, long after that
particular occasion, on which it was first given, was over) and yet he did not
observe those other directions which were given on that particular occasion:
for he both preached to the Gentiles, and had Money in his Purse, and that of
his own earning too.

The next passage is this, He says, page 157. I saucily ask Kings and Princes
where Christ gave them power to alter that Maintenance, and set up another in
the room of it? arrogantly telling them (...) Corah's phrase, they take too
much upon them, etc.

The sau^e is of his own making; the question only mine, and that made not to
Kings and Princes, but to the Priests: for when I had asked, Where has Christ
given power to any man to alter this Maintenance, and set up another in the
room of it? I add, Doubtless if any such authority were given, it concerns them
that claim thereby to show it, and they to be sure are the Priests. The other
part also of the sentence he carps at, wherein he says, I arrogantly tell them
in Corah's phrase they take too much upon them, unless they can show where
Christ gave them such authority) is of his own Cooking: for I told them not in
Corah's phrase They take too much upon them; but modestly asked, If Christ has
given no such power, whence then does man take so much upon him? And this
Inquiry too related to the settlement of Tithes in the time of Popery. But,
says he, page 158. let me ask this bold Questionist, Where Christ forbid them
to give a better Maintenance? He bid the Apostles be content with Meat and
Drink; but he did not forbid them to take more, if it were freely given.

Can a better Maintenance be given, then that which Christ himself appointed?
He who was Lord of all, if he had thought Tithes, or a^y other maintenance
better then this, could as well have appointed that. This Priest, I perceive,
measures the goodness of the maintenance by the greatness, and accounts that
best that is bi^gest. But doubtless the Apostle Paul went by another Rule; for
he accounted that best which was least chargeable to the Church, 1 Cor. 9. 18.
To show there needed no express command for making the maintenance better, he
tells me (page 159.) That an Hint is a Command to a Soul that loves God. Be it
so: yet not so much as an Hint shall he find throughout all the New Testament
for the payment of Tithes. But seeing he says Christ bid the Apostles be
content with Meat and Drink (which was somewhat more then a bare hint) methink,
if he (who pretends to be one of the Apostles Successors) were a Soul that
truly loved God, he should content himself with what he says Christ bid his
Apostles be content with; and not thus scrable after more. See now the man's
partiality, An Hint must pass for a Command to the People for giving: but an
express Command will not suffice to make the Priest content with what the
People give. Is this a sign of a Soul that truly loves God? It Is true, the
Apostles were not forbidden to receive more, nor Believers to give more:
neither lies the Objection in my Book against giving more, but against altering
the nature of the Maintenance, and setting up another Maintenance of a
different nature from that which Christ appointed: For that Maintenance was
free and voluntary, and so ought the Maintenance of Christian Ministers to be
always; but a Maintenance settled by humane Laws ceases to be free, and so is
not suitable to the Gospel, which it self is free.

But to render me ridiculous, the Priest says, ibid. No doubt he will ask the
primitive Believers, who gave them order to sell their Estates, and give them
to the Apostles? He will say, They took too much upon them. And hereupon he
says, Was ever so much Folly and Impudence conjoined?

No doubt he had had one sin les^ to answer for, had he left out this Abuse.
The Primitive Believers needed no Order for selling their Estates, any more
then Believers do now, nor in disposing the Money as they did. But if the
primitive Believers should have taken upon them to have enjoined all other
Believers afterward to sell their Estates too, and give the Money to their
Ministers, they would therein have taken too much upon them. Believers in all
Ages might be as liberal as they pleased to their Ministers; but they might not
make that which was Liberality in themselves, an Imposition and Burden upon
them that came after, who may justly and reasonably expect to enjoy the same
Liberty and Freedom to express their Liberality, as the others did who went
before. For as the Gospel it self, in its own nature, is equally free in all
Ages, and the Ministers of the Gospel are so too, in respect of its publication
(so as not to preach the Gospel because humane Laws command, nor to forbear to
preach it because humane Law^ forbid) so ought the Gospel-Maintenance also, o^
the Maintenance of this Gospel Ministry, to be in all Ages equally free; else
is it not suitable to the Ministry, and the Gospel to which it appertains. And
whenever it ceases to be free, by the interposed Injunction of paenal Laws,
it thenceforth ceases to b^ a Gospel-Maintenance. Now if we should suppose
Tithes a lawful Maintenance, (...) at the Donation of them was an Act of pure
Liberality and perfect Freedom in the first Donors (which universally
considered is far enough from probability) and upon that Supposition should
admit Tithes to have been then a free Maintenance; yet the settling of them as
a standing Maintenance, and compelling after Ages by P^nalties to pay them,
makes them not now a free Maintenance, if they had been so then; but the true
Gospel-Maintenance ought to be free in its Continuation as well as in its
Beginning; and Christians now may justly expect as much Christian-Liberty and
Freedom as others in former Ages had, which they do not enjoy who now stand
bound to the performance of that which others were at liberty to.

The third Passage that he cavils at in this Section, he thus gives, page 160.
For any Magistrate to set out Tithes for a Maintenance, is a direct Opposition
to Christ, because they were commanded in the Levitical Law, and Christ has
taken away Priest, Law and Tithes altogether. How proves he this, says he? by
Heb. 7. The Verse, says he, he cunningly leaves out, being conscious to
himself he had fathered a Lie on that Chapter, in which there is not one word
of Christ's taking away Tithes, no nor in any place of the New T^stament.

What himself is guilty of, that he charges upon me, viz. the ^unningly leaving
out of things: for he has cunningly left out a material Clause in that Sentence
of mine which he quoted, namely, that Christ has disannulled that Law by which
Tithes had been commanded to be paid unto the Leviti^al Priesthood; which makes
the taking away of Tithes a necessary consequent, when the Law was taken away
by which they stood. It Is true, I added not the Verse in Heb. 7. because the
greatest part of the whole Chapter tends to the proof of my Assertion, which
therefore I was willing the Reader should read throughout. But seeing my unfair
Adversary has made so Ill an use of my Good Meaning, I will add the verses, to
let the Reader see how much I am abused; Heb. 7. verse. 5. compared with verse.
12. and verse. 18. In the 5th verse the Apostle shows, that the Sons of Levi,
who received the Office of the Priesthood, had a Commandment to take Tithes of
the People according to the Law. In the 12th verse he says, The Priesthood
being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law; so that
here the Commandment, by which they took Tithes, was taken away, and the^e
remained no Commandment to take Tithes by. Then in the 18th verse he says
expressly, There is verily a disannulling of the Commandment going before, for
the Weakness and Vnprofitableness thereof: Now the disannulling the Commandment
by which Tithes were due, is a disannulling of Tithes. How did Christ take away
the Levitical Priesthood, but by taking away the Law by which that Priesthood
was made, and setting up another Priesthood in its room? In like manner he took
away the Maintenance by Tithes, by taking away the Law by which that
Maintenance was commanded, and setting up another Maintenance in its room. And
as the Apostles exercised the New Priesthood without regard to the Old: so they
also received the New Maintenance, and looked not after the Old; plainly
intimating they understood the Old Maintenance to be ended, as well as the Old
Priesthood. And Andrew Willet fairly argues it in his Synopsis of Popery, fifth
General Controversy, page 314. S. Paul (says he) says in flat words, If the
Priesthood be changed, of necessity there must also be a change of the Law,
Heb. 7. 12. But the Priesthood of the Law is alt^red and changed, Ergo also the
Law of the Priesthood, and so consequently the Ceremonial Duty of Tithes. Thus
he, wherein at once he both acknowledges Tithes to be Ceremonial, and proves
them ended with the Legal Priesthood.

. 4. In his next Section, page 161. the Priest charges me with evading all
serious Answers by some petty Cavil, for proof of which he gives this Instance;
That the Author of the Friendly Conference having asked, If men might not do
what they would with their own? I said, No, They might not spend it upon
Harlots, nor waste it prodigally, nor make an Idol of it.

That it may the better appear whether this was ^ petty Cavil to evade a
serious Answer, I will briefly set down the manner of it; The Author of the
Friendly Conference, page 154. having affirmed (not pro^ved) that Tithes and
other Church-Revenues have been settled by those that were actually seized of
them in Law, adds thus; Now if the Quakers can prove from the Laws of God or
Right Reason, that it is not lawful for every one to do what he will with his
own, and consequently, that he may not settle Tithes, Lands or M^neys upon the
Clergy, then they do something to the purpose. Hereupon in my Answer, page 320.
I say, That I may be sure to do something, even in his sense, to the purpose, I
will prove both from the Laws of God and Right Reason, that it is not lawful
for every man to do what he will with his own. Accordingly I there prove (page
321.) first in general, That a man may not employ his Estate to an Evil Use:
then more particularly, That he may not spend his Substance upon his Lusts;
That he may not bestow it among Harlots; That he may not make an Idol of i^ nor
uphold Idolatry with it. Now in the General Exception and this last Particular,
I had direct relation to the Settlement of Tithes, having proved before, that
Tithes were employed to an Evil Use in maintaining a Corrupt Clergy, and that
it was an Idolatrous Worship which Tithes were given to uphold. And to
manifest, that I did not leave my Argument to catch at or play upon a Word or
Phrase (as the Author of the F. Confer. falsely charges me in his Vindication,
page 310.) but prosecuted my Argument fairly, to prove that the settlement of
Tithes on the Clergy was evil, in order thereunto I thus reasoned, (page 321,
322.) Will any Protestant be so inconsiderate as to say, that it is lawful for
a man to lay out his Money in Beads, Crosses, Crucifixes, Agnu^ Dei's, and such
like trumpery? Will he say it is lawful to buy Masses, Prayers, Pardon^,
Indulgences, etc? Will he say it was lawful, by the Law of God, for Ethelwolf
at Rome to give two hundred Marks a year to buy Oil, to keep S. Peter's Lamps
and S. Paul's Lamps burning? If he thinks this justifiable, let him defend it;
if not, he may in this very instance see, both that it is not lawful for every
man to do what he will with his own; and also, that Ethelwolf, his great Donor
and Patron, did that with his own that was not lawful for him to have done,
namely, uphold Superstition and Idolatry. Thus having proved both that a man
may not do what he will with his own, as also that Ethelwolf in his other
Church-Donations did that with his own which it was not lawful for him to have
done (and in which the Priests, neither one nor the other, says any thing in his
Defense (though fairly invited to it^ but leave him under the Judgment of
having done Evil therein.) I go on there to show, that He did not transgress in
this Instance only, of giving that yearly Pension to Rome, but in his Donation
of Tithes also: for it is evident he gave them to maintain a Popish Clergy,
degenerated from Apostolical Purity, and f^ully corrupt both in Doctrine and
Practice, in upholding of which he di^ that which was Evil, and therefore to be
sure unlawful. Judge now, Reader, whether this be leaving my Argument to catch
at or play upon ^ word or phrase, whether this be to (...) all serious Answers
by some petty Cavil (as my cavilling Adversaries cry out) or whether it be a
fair prosecution of my Argument, and a solid serious Answer, proving that it is
not lawful for every man to do what he will with his own, and that by an
Instance in Ethe^wolf himself.

But I perceive the Priest had covertly grounded his Proposition upon the words
in the Parable, Mat. 20. 15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with
(...) own? which, because spoken by our Savior, he expected perhaps should
have born out his mis-application of them: but finding his Expectation
disappointed in the Answer, both he and his Brother Pri^^^ are enraged, and fly
upon me with open Mouth: One saying, If the Quaker can but spit his Malice
against me, he cares not, though it fly in our Savior's own Face, whose very
words I used -- Is it not lawful for (...) to do what I will with my own, etc?
Vindication, page 311.

The other saying, If the Quaker had been one of the Laborers in the Vineyard,
it is like he might have drolled thus upon the Master thereof, who (in the
Person of God) says, Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with my own?
Right of Tithes, p. 162.

But I would wish the first of these Priests to take notice, that his Tongue
slipped when he said just now, he used the very words of our Savior; for our
Savior said, Is it not lawful for ME to do what I will with mine own? but
instead of (...) the Prie^^ put in [every one] If the Quakers can prove -- that
(...) is not lawful for EVERY ONE to do what he will with his own.

There is some difference sure between him of whom that Parable was spoken, and
every one. Because God (in whose Person, as the latter Priest says, the Master
of the Vineyard speaks) may do what he will with his own, to whom it is
impossible to do amiss; may every one therefore challenge to himself the same
Liberty and Power? That Is not to make me^ Servants and Stewards to the great
Householder, but Lords and Masters. But a^ to the Case of Tithes, I have proved
that Ethelwolf in the settlement of Tithes, did that with his own which was
evil. in upholing a false Religion, which it more concerns the Priest to clear
him from, then thus without cause to cavil.

. 5. In my Answer to the Friendly Conference, I said, page 323. Suppose that
Ethelwolf had an ample Power of disposing what he pleased, or that the People
had by consent joined with him in the D^nation, every man according to the
Interest he had; yet neither could he single, nor he and they conjoined, grant
any more then belonged to themselves. This was too plain to be denied, being
grounded on a firm Maxim, Nemo plus juris ad alium transfer potest, quam ipse
haberet; i. e. No man can transfer more Right to another then he himself has;
therefore they seek ways to evade it. The Author of the Conferen^e says,
Suppose I grant it; wh^^ then? His Parishioner answers in my Name, To make ^
Grant of the tenth part forever is (in his understanding) utterly (...) to
Reason. The Priest replie^, Is it reasonable wholly to pass an Estat^ from the^
and their Heirs forever, and yet repugnant to (...) grant but a part of that
Estate forever?

By this I perceive he has taught his Parishioner to use as little Honesty as
himself. The Parishioner has learnt of the Priest to chop and mangle Sentences,
and cunningly leave out what he likes not. He makes me here say. To make a
Grant of the tenth (...) forever is (in my understanding) utterly repugnant to
Reason. This goes clearer with the Priest, as if I had said it was repugnant to
Reason to grant the tenth part of an Estate forever, and accordingly he argue^*
whereas I say plainly, They might have disposed of what part of the Land they
pleased, they might have given the tenth part of the Land, the tenth Acre, etc.
But that which I said is (to my understanding) repugnant to Reason, Justice and
Equity, is for the^ to make a grant of the tenth part of the PROFITS of the
Land forever. (These words [of the profits of the Land] he leaves out in
reciting my words, thereby drawing it from the profits of the Land to the Land
it self) which alters the case: for as I showed, the profits of the Land
forever could not be said to belong to them, because it depended on the stock,
labor, etc. of another, which they had no interest in no^ right unto. But if
the profits of the Land forever did not belong to them, and they had no power
to grant any more then did belong to themselves, it follows that they had no
power to grant the Tithes of the profits of the Land forever. [They endeavor
to weaken the force of this Argument by comparing Tithes with a Rentcharge,
urging, That the owners might as well make a grant of Tithes forever, as set a
Rentcharge upon their Lands forever.] This the Author of the of Tytth Rhgies
talks much of, and fills many pages (...) in Sect. 30. and 38. shifting the
same matter into diverse dresses by variety of expressions, to make the fairer
show and greater appearance of saying something. But he that shall impartially
consider the nature of each, will find a vast difference between a Rentcharge
and Tithes: for a Rentcharge is paid by reason of the Land on which it is
charged, which it is to be supposed ^e that charged it had at that time ^
property in; but Tithes are not paid by reason of the Land, but by reason of
the stock and labor, etc. employed thereon by him that occupies it, which
appears by this, that they who have no Lands, are as well charged with the
payment of Tithes out of the improvement or increase of their stocks and
labors in their Trades and manual Occupations, as they are who occupy Lands.
So that Tithes lie properly on the stock not on the Land; but a Rentcharge
lies properly on the Land, not on the stock; and therefore although there
should be no increase at all, no profit made, no Crop pl^nted, nor any thing
renewing upon the Land, yet the Rentcharge must be paid, because it is charged
in consideration of the Land it self: but it is not so in the case of Tithes.
If there be no increase, no profit made, no Crop planted, nor any thing
renewing upon the Land, no Tithe can be demanded, because Tithe is charged in
consideration of the increase and improvement made of the Stock. And for the
Non-payment of a Rentcharge, he on whom it is settled, may enter upon and
possess the Land which is charged with the payment of it. But in the case of
Tithes it is otherwise. For non-payment of Tithes, he who claims them, cannot
enter upon or possess the land, but is made whole out of the stock of the
Occupier. All which demonstrates that it is the stock, not the land, of which
the Tithe is paid. If a Tradesman hold a ^arm (as many d^) and dividing his
(...), he (...) one part of it in his Farm, and the other in hi^ Trade, he is
liable to the payment of Tithes out o^ each. But if he should draw his Stock
out of (...) Farm, and employ it all in his Trade, letting his Farm lie
unstocked, and so receive no profit from it, he would not be chargeable with
Tithes for his Farm, but only for the improvement of his Stock (...) his Trade:
Yet if there be a Rentcharge upon (...)* Farm, he is chargeable with that
nevertheless, and liable to pay it, whether he employ his Farm or not. Whence
it is still more evident, that a Rentcharge being a charge upon the Land, ^ot
upon the Stock; and Tithes being a charge upon the stock, not upon the land,
though our Ancestors had power to lay a Rentcharge upon their own Lands, in
which they had a property, yet they could not have power to grant Tithes out of
other men's Stocks, in which they had no property. Now since Tithe is not the
tenth part of the Land, but the tenth part of the increase of the Stock,
howsoever employed, whether upon Land or otherwise, and seeing the labor,
care, skill, industry and diligence of the Occupant, whether Husband man or
Tradesman is involved and necessarily included in the Stock, as instrumental
means and causes of producing the increase, a perpetual grant of Tithes implies
a grant not only of other men's Stocks, in which the Granters had no property,
but of other men's labors, care, skill, diligence and industry also, long
before they were begotten, upon which supposition, all men but Priests, since
Ethelwolf's time (...) be born Slaves, under an obligation to employ their
time, pains, industry and skill in working for the Priests. But whether it be
rational to admit in Ethelwolf, or any other, a power to impose the necessity
of such a servile condition on their Po^^erity, let the free-spirited Reader
judge. Against this the Priest objects thus, Does not the raising the sum of
Money (settled by Rentcharge) include the labor, sweat, care, charge, skill
and industry of the Husbandman, as well as the preparing of Tithe* page 168.

The case of a Rentcharge even in this Respect is greatly different from that
of Tithes. For a Rentcharge is a burden, fixed upon the Land, and according to
the maxim, The Burden descending with the Inheritance, he that (as the Priest
says, page 170.) will not have the encumbrance, must not have the benefit. He
therefore to whom such Land descends on which the burden of a Rentcharge lies,
finding he cannot enjoy the Land without performing the condition (which is to
pay the Rentcharge) subjects himself unto the burden, and that he may enjoy
the Estate undertakes the performance of the Condition, which thus becomes his
own act. So that this man's Ancestors do not take upon them to give away his
stock, labor, skill and industry (for they only charge a burden on their own
land, which he is at liberty to take or leave.) But he himself gives away his
own stock ^abour, skill and industry, that he may enjoy the Estate. But it is
far otherwise in the case of Tithes: for Tithe (though a Burden and a grievous
one too) is not fixed upon the Land, nor descends with the Inheritance: for they
who have no lands nor inheritances, are liable, if they have personal Estates,
to pay Tithes as well as they that have Lands; and they that have Lands are not
liable to pay Tithes, unless by employing a Stock or personal Estate upon them,
they make an increase, or have something renew upon the Land. Nay, it has been
held possible so to order the matter, as to reap the benefit of the Lands, and
yet (...) fre^ from the encumbrance of Tithes. However, if (...) to whom the
Land descends, refuse to pay the Tithes, yet he is in no danger of loosing the
land. So that he has not the Land under condition of paying Tithes, (...) the
other has under condition of paying a Rentcharge, and therefore neither needs
nor does subject himself to the burden and encumbrance of Tithes. Here the^ in
short lies the civil difference between a Rentcharge and Tithes. A Rentcharge
is a burden charged upon the land, Tithe is a burden lies upon the stock. A
Rentcharge is laid upon the lands by them that had a just Propriety therein;
Tithe is laid upon the stock by them that had no Propriety at all therein; the
stock and labor, etc. of the present Possessor is not subjected to the
Rentcharge unless by his own consent and undertaking; but the stock and
labor, etc. of the present Possessor is subjected to the burden of Tithes*
without his own consent or undertaking, yea against it. By this it appears,
both that a Rentcharge and Tithes are very unlike, and that it is utterly
repugnant to reason, to suppose that Ethelwolf and his People had power to load
their Posterity with the burden of Tithes forever. And indeed if we consider
the practice of our Ancestors, in their Donations of Tithes we may find, that
they did not look upon Tithes to be at all of the Nature of a Rentcharge; for
they took great care by legal settlements to secure and assure those
Rent-charges; but made no provision (for some Hundred Years) for the payment of
Tithes, save by Ecclesiastical Censures; nor was the kn^ck of Suing for Tithes
in temporal Courts found out, till o^ late Years. Which argues, that as they
gave (...) they intended the continuance of them should have ^epended on
^^votion also.

He objects again in page 170. That seeing the present Possessor derives his
Right to his land from his Forefathers, who might have sold off what part of
the Land they pleased; and since they transmit it (...), ^ay they not leave a
charge upon it? And if the ^eir (...) not pay the charge, he must renounce the
Land (...).

As they might have sold off what part of the Land they pleased, so they might
have laid a charge upon the Land, because the property of the Land (...) in
themselves, but they could not have subjected the stock and labor of the
present Occupant to that (...), because they had not a property in the stock
and labor of the present Occupant. And though he says, If the Heir will not
pay the charge, he must renounce the land also; yet in the case of Tithes, he
knows full well it is not so: for if the Heir will not pay Tithes, he is not
bound to renounce the Land, nor does he forfeit it by the non-payment of
Tithes. But he possesses and injoyes the Land, whether he pay Tithes or no.
Which shows, he did not receive the Land under any condition of paying Tithes;
for then he could not enjoy the Land without performing the condition.

But he says, page 171. The Quaker's Argument is, Protestatio contra factum
(i. e. A Protestation against Fact) and so signifies nothing at all: It is an
(...) to prove that cannot be done, which is done, as (...) in this, as in the
like ^ases; And that ought not to (...) done, which has been done a thousand
times, and (...) by the (...) of all Christian Laws.

That (...) nothing at all, is more then I understood before. The intent of my
Argument is not to prove that that c^^not be done, which is done; but that that
should not be done, which is done; or, as his after words are, That (...) not
to be done, which is done, although it had been done ten thousand times, and
approved (...) by such Law^ as he, for his profit sake, will call Christian.

. 6. For want of strength of Reason and force of Argument, he falls now to
downright Railing, having a mind (I suppose) to try if he can daunt me with
blustering words, and therefore exhibits a charge against me of no le^s nature
then Blasphemy. He grounds it upon my saying, That for any one to tell me that
Ethelwolf (or some other) has given him my labor, pains, charges, care,
skill, industry, diligence understanding, etc. seven or eight hundred Years, it
may be, before either he or I was Born, is a thing most ridiculous, and utterly
inconsistent with Reason. Upon which he says, page 172. It is no great wonder
he should call all men Fools, when as this blasphemous Argument ^^ies in the
face of God himself, who (even by the Quaker's own confession) in the Levitical
Law did assume a power to enjoin all the Owners of Canaan to pay to the Priests
the tenth part of those profits which did arise from their sweat and pains,
charge and care, and that from one Generation to another. God (says he) did
make over to his Priests these Tenths of the profits of many men's Sweat and
Labor, etc. many Hundred Years before they were Born. Now (says he) this the
Quaker says is a ridiculous and unreasonable thing. O bold blasphemer! etc.

And in page 173. he adds, Because God once made this Grant, we dare be
confident the act is lawful, and wise, and just; and that T. E. is a
blasphemous Wretch, (...) it by this wicked and silly way of reasoning.

In this charge it is hard to say whether he shows more envy or ignorance:
however to be sure there is but too much of both. He says, God made over to his
Priests the tenths of the profits of many men's Sweat and Labor, many Hundred
Years before they were Born, and that I call this a ridiculous and unreasonable
thing, and thereupon he calls me a bold Blasphemer! But what a bold --
Slanderer is he to say I call it a ridiculous and unreasonable thing for God to
do thus, when I spoke it of Ethelwolf by name! Can nothing then be ridiculous
and unreasonable in man, but it must be so in God also? or must the same thing
needs be ridiculous and unreasonable in God, which is ridiculous and
unreasonable in man? Has man then an equal power with God? and is his
Soveraig^ty as universal? Let me tell him, it is a ridiculous and unreasonable
thing in men to take upon them the disposing of any thing which is not in their
power to dispose: but it were impiety to infer the same of God, since nothing
can be above his Power, who is himself the highest Power. It was just and
reasonable in God, to ass^me a power to enjoin all the owners of Canaan to pay
to the Priests the tenth part of those profits which did arise from their Sweat
and Pains, Charge and Care, and that from one Generation to another; because he
had a Right to all the Sweat and Pains, Charge and Care of all the Owners of
Canaan throughout all Generations. And as he gave that People their Land, so he
gave them also their life, their health, their strength their wealth, their
skill, their care, ability and understanding, and whatsoever else was necessary
or conducible to the producing those profits, of which he enjoyed them to pay
the Tithes. They received all of him, they owed all to him: justly therefore,
and very reasonably might he require of them what he pleased, and lay upon them
what charge he pleased, in respect either of their Land, or of their Stocks, or
of their Labor, or of their Skill, etc. all which were his free Gifts to them.
But I pray now, had Ethelwolf or any other of the Tythe-givers, the same power
over their Posterity as God had over the Jews? Do we owe our health, strength,
ability to labor, skill, understandings, stocks, etc. to them, as the Jews did
theirs to God? If not, then let the Priest know, That for any one to say
Ethelwolf (or some other) has given him my labor, pains, charges, care, etc.
seven or eight Hundred Years before either he or I was Born, is a thing most
ridiculous and unreasonable, and for him to call this Blasphemy is ridiculous
and unreasonable also. And it is so much the more unreasonable in him, in that
he first calls me a bold Blasphemer, and then examins whether I am so or no.
For after his saying this blasphemous Argument flies in the Face of God
himself, and after his vehement Exclamation [O bold Blasphemer!] he adds, If he
says the thing be ridiculous and unreasonable in it self, then this Quaker
charge God with f^lly and injustice, who does enjoin it.

If he says, why does he go upon If's then? sure it had become him to have
inquired that, and been certain of it too, before he had shot his overhasty
Bolt, and set his foul Brand of bold Blasphemer on me. But he has learnt it
seems to Hang men first, and try them afterward: Nor slipped this from him
through inadvertency only, but premedittely and with a malicious design of
mischief; for he saw the reason on which I grounded my saying, as his following
words manifest, which are these, Nor can he be excused by saying, God has more
power then men.

Which words declare he understood well enough in what sense I spoke, and that
I therefore called it a ridiculous and unreasonable thing, because it supposed
a Grant of that, which the Granter had no right in, nor power over. Wilfully
therefore, and against the Light of his own understanding and Conscience, has
he thus abused me, perverting my words, to a quite contrary sense to what he
knew I spoke them in. He says, In evil, foolish, and unjust things God has no
power at all.

But man has: else had not this man dealt so evilly, foolishly and unjustly by
me, as he has done in this matter. God (he says) cannot Lie, he cannot do
anything ridiculous or unjust.

Does it therefore follow that men cannot lie neither? or that men cannot do
any thing ridiculous or unjust? And may not men be charged with doing a thing
ridiculous and unjust, but presently the charge must be transferred from Men to
God? how ridiculous and unjust is such an Inference! But says ^e, Because God
once made this Grant, we dare be consident the act is lawful, and wise, and
just; and that T. E. is a blasphemous Wretch, to censure it by this wicked and
silly way of reasoning, which condemns Almighty God, as much as it does King
Ethelwolf.

He Is very daring sure, and wants modesty more then confidence. Because God
once made this grant, may Men take upon them to make such another? and is the
Act lawful, wise and just in men, because it was lawful, wise and just in God?
may men then lawfully, wisely and justly do whatsoever God has lawfully,
wisely and justly done? A notable Position to bring in Judaism! and a fine
defense he has helpe^ the Pope to, for the many Jewish Rights, and Ceremonies
wherewith the Romish Religion abounds, who may learn of this Priest to say, We
dare be confident the use of these things is lawful, and wise, and just,
because God once commanded the use of them. And on the same reason also might
men return to Circumcision and Sacrifices, and justify the Act. But to come a
little closer to the Priests interest (in which, how dull soever they are in
other parts, they are usually very quick of sense) I would ask this Priest,
whether if the King should make a Law that no Priest should have any
inheritance amongst the People, he would dare to be confident that that were a
lawful, wise and ^^st act, because God once made such a Law amongst the People
of Israel? I am apt to think if he were put to (...) trial, he would tell
another Story. His calling me a blasphemous Wretch, and my way of reasoning
^icked and silly, discovers the rancour of his own Spirit, but no way weakens
my Argument. But in saying my way of reasoning condemns Almighty God, as much
as it does King Ethelwolf, he either pr^sumptuously exalts King Ethelwolf into
an equal power with God, or impiously debases God to such a scantling of power
as Ethelwolf had, or was capable of, in either of which he has been too daring,
and a great deal over confident. My Argument however [that it is a ridiculous
and unreasonable thing for any man to undertake the disposing of that which
himself has nothing to do with; and that that man, who takes upon him (...)
make a perpetual grant of Tithes, does thereby ^^dertake to dispose of that
which himself has nothing to do with, namely, the labor, pains, charges,
care, skill, industry, diligence and understanding of another.

This Argument I say, remains firm and sound, not weakened or any way impaired,
by any thing the Priest has alleged against it; but his false application of
it to God, and his malicious reflections upon me, are sufficiently exposed, to
make him ashamed of what he has writ, if he be not wholly past shame^

. 7. As I argued it unreasonable that such a grant should be made, so I showed
it was not agreeable to Justice and Equity that it should be continued, because
the consideration was taken away for which the grant was made. If (said I, page
326, 327.) Ethelwolf a Papist gave Tithes to the Romish Clergy, he did it upon
a consideration, for the health of his Soul and remission of his Sins, which he
believed he might obtain in that Church, and by the help of that Ministry to
whom he gave his Tithes, and mediation of those Saints in honor of whom he
granted th^s Charter* -- Now if the consideration be taken away, why should the
charge be continued? To this the Priest answers (Right of Tithes, page 174.) I
have already proved that T. E. falsely supposes King Ethelwolf to have held all
the Opinions of the present Church of Rome.

I reply, that the Priest falsely charges me with supposing so, and cunningly
urges this both here and elsewhere to acquit Ethelwolf from being a Papist; as
if a man could not have been a Papist unless he held ALL the Opinions of the
present Church of Rome; whereas ALL the Opinions of the present Church of Rome,
were not then held in the Church of Rome it self: but there were enough held
then in the Church of Rome (of which Ethelwolf was a zealo^s Member, and to
which he was a liberal Benefactor) to make it an Erroneous, Corrupt,
Superstitious and Idol^trous Church. He endeavors also to clear Ethelwolf and
the Saxons from the Popish Doctrine of Merits; using thereto, as before, the
Testimony of Alcuin. But he does but, for his profit sake, set a fair gloss on
a foul matter. That they were corrupt in the Doctrine of Merits, both the
express words of their own public Instruments do declare, and the Testimonies
of learned men concerning them do confirm, which having insisted on largely
before, Chap. 4. Sect. 18. I refer the Reader thither for a more full Answer,
that I may not too much swell this Treatise by needless Repetitions.

Concerning Ethelwolf's obtaining Remission by the help of that Ministry to
which he gave his Tithes, the Priest says, page 175. No wise man will deny,
but that there was a true Church in England in th^se days: and if in that
Church, and by that Ministry, no pardon could be had from God, then there was
no Salvation to be had in this Nation at all in that Age, no nor in any Nation
in Christendom; which is a strange Assertion.

A strange Assertion indeed! Because there was a true Church in England in
those days, must the Popish Church needs be it? He Will say perhaps, There was
no other: How knows he that? If there were but two or three that held the Faith
of Jesus Christ in a pure Conscience, and did not join with the Abominations of
the times, in which they lived, they ^ere a true Church: for neithe^ numbers
nor visibility make a true Church, as himself knows, if he understands
Protestant Principles. God had a true Church all along the Apostasy, even in
the thickest time of Popish darkness, before Luther began to Reform; will the
Priest thence infer, that the Church of Rome was a true Church all that time?
Let him carry on his Argument from Ethelwolf's time to Luther's, and say no
wise man will deny, but that there was a true Church in England all that while:
and if in that Church (referring to the National church) and by that Ministry,
no Pardon could be had from God; then there was no Salvation to be ^ad in this
Nation at all in those Ages, no nor in any Nation in Christendom; which is a
strange assertion indeed. Salvation doubtless was obtained in those times, as
well in this as other Nations in Christendom; (though not by the help of a
false Ministry) but what then? must those indirect and wrong means, contrived
to obtain Salvation by in those times, be therefore still kept up? and ought
the charge to be still continued, when the consideration for which it was
given, is taken away? But the Priest I think is almost ashamed of the
consideration for which Tithes were given; and therefore he shuns it as much as
he may, and when he cannot avoid it, he smooths it over as fairly as he can.
Did that good King (says he, page 176.) covenant with God, or his Priests,
that they should give him* remission, or else this gift to be of no effect? Was
it inserted as a condition or Proviso? He hoped indeed Remission of Sins might
follow, through Christ's Merits, Gods mercy, and the Churches prayers; but he
did not indent with God for it.

By his leave, there is not a word of Christ's merit^ in all the Charter, nor
of God's m^rcy neither, in any of the Copies that I have seen; but that he gave
Tithes for the remission of his Sins, is expressly set down. And the Bishops
with their Abbats and the rest of the Clergy engaged on their part to sing
fifty Psalms and say two Masses every Wednesday for the King and his Nobles,
both during their Lives, and after their Deaths. By this Reader thou may a
little judge what the Religion of those times was, and what it was he calls the
Churches prayers, which were Popish Masses to be said for his Soul after he was
dead, which the Priest confesses he hoped R^mission of his Sins might follow.
As for the Saints, he says, T. E. is mistak^n, in thinking they then did
believe the Saints usurped Christ's Office.

Whether they thought so or no, let Perkins speak Prob. page 93, 94. Veteres
(says he) praesertim post an 400. Invocatione Sanctorum peccarunt, imo
sacrilegij sunt rei. Nam aliquando spem, fidem, fid^ciam in ijs collocant. i.
e. The Ancients, es^^ciall^ since the Year 400. have sinned, yea, and are
guilty of Sacrilege too, in praying to Saints. For sometimes they place their
Hope, Faith and Confidence in them; of which he there gives very many
Instances, showing that the Saints were prayed to as Intercessors and
Mediators, which is Christ's Office, which having mentioned before, c. 4. S.
18. I omit here. But in the Charter it self the Grant is made to God, and St.
Mary and all Saints together; and Ingulf (who relates it) says it was made for
the honor of Mary the glorious Virgin and Mother of God, and of St. Michael
the Archangel, and of the Prince of the Apostles St. Peter, as also of our
holy Father Po^e Gregory, of whose Saintship let the Reader judge. But says
the Priest, page 177. If we suppose Ethelwolf as much a Papist as King Stephen,
yet his Donations to pious uses must stand good, even though the Opinion of
merit it had been the motive to him to make them* or else (says he) T. E
revokes all the Charters and Donations made in those really Popish times, to
never so good and pious uses.

The donation of Tithes was not to a pious use, unless he will call it a pious
use to uphold Impiety: for it was given to maintain and uphold a corrupt and
false Worship and Ministry. For (not to run over again all the Errors,
Corruptions, Superstitions and Idolatries, that were then crept into and
received in the Church) were not saying Masses for the Souls of the dead one of
the uses he calls pious? For Ethelwolf ^o give two Hundred Marks a Year to burn
Daylight at Rome, and one Hundred Marks more to the P^pe; were not these pious
uses indeed! T^ou may judge Reader by these, of what kind and nature his
pious uses were, which he so often talks of. But this is an old Popish trick,
to cry out Holy Church, Holy Church, and pious uses, to keep simple People in
awe, that the matter might not be inquired into. Thus no doubt all the rest of
the lik^kind of donations, given in old time to the Popish Priests: to pray for
the Souls of the Donors, and deliver them out o^ Purgatory, were set off by the
Priests with the specious Titles of Donations to pious uses, and endowments to
Holy Church: But, as many of them, notwithstanding their specious pretenses,
have been long ^ince alienated from those uses, and yet other donations that
were made to uses truly good and pious, although by Papists, were no way
thereby hurt or impaired; so likewise may this Donation of Tithes, given to an
evil use, be right^y and justly made void, and yet other Grants, Donations and
Charters, made by Papists also, to uses truly good and pious, not thereby be
revok^d, or any way infringed.

. 8. The foul stains of Popish Corruption and Superstition, which stick upon
this Donation and Charter of Tithes, are so visible and obvious to every Eye,
that the Priest is greatly troubled at them, and fain would he wipe them off,
if he could. He rubs and scrapes hard to get them out, but still the Spots
remain. And indeed, as well might he undertake to wash a Brick white, or change
the Color of an Ethiopian's Skin, as hope to clear the Donation of Tithes from
the just imputation of Popish Corruption. Fain he would persuade his Reader
that Ethelwolf's Clergy was not Popish. But Popery is writ upon them in such
Capital Letters, by Historians of all sorts that speak of those times, that if
he expects to gain belief, he must first persuade men to shut their Eyes, and
utterly abandon the use of their understandings. The gradual creeping in of
those false Doctrines and superstitious Practices, in almost every Century
after the Apostles days, which afterward obtained the Name Popery, is so
particularly set down, and plainly proved by Protestant Writers of no mean
credit, that there is no room left to doubt it. Nay, the other Priest, in his
Vindicatio^ of the Friendly Conference, page 277. forgetting perhaps that
Ethelwolf's Donation bares date in the Year 855. has unluckily dated the
entrance of Popery in the Year 700. no less then 155. (...) before Ethelwolf's
Charter of Tithes was made. His words are these, We may observe, says he, that
when by the furious inundation of the barbarous Nations into the Roman Empire,
learning fell into decay; and when Arts and Sciences were discouraged and
neglected, at the same time all manner of Corruptions crept into the Church;
and as ignorance increased, Errors multiplied; So that most of the present evil
Opinions of the Church of Rome, had their Original in those unlearned Ages,
from about the Year of Christ 700. till about the Year 1400. about the
midnight of which Darkness, there was scarce any Learning left in the World --
These were (says he) the unhappy times, which b^^d and nursed up Invocation of
Saints, Worship of Images, Purgatory, with all the fana^ical Visions and
Revelations, Miracles, etc. Then began Shrines, Pilgrimages, Relics,
purchasing of Pardons, and the Popes attempts for an universal Monarchy.

Thus he.* Wherein, though he mention but few of the many particular Errors and
Corruptions which in those times were grown up in the Church; and though he
mistake in point of time, in saying these which he has mentioned were bred and
nursed up about or after the Year 700. most of them if not all being of older
standing, as I have already showed; yet he has said enough to disprove all his
Brother Priest has said or can say toward clearing Ethelwolf's Clergy from
being Popish. For if these Errors and Corruptions had sprung up no earlier th^n
the Year 700. yet consider I pray to what a height such weeds were like to
grow, in the fruitful Soil of superstitious Devotion, and cherished with the
warmth of a blind and mis-guided Zeal, in the space of an Hundred and Fifty
Years.

Yet the Author of the Right of Tithes, page 178. denies again that Tithes were
given to the Popish Priests; and says, King Ethelwolf's Clergy agreed with the
Protestant Church of England in more points t^an with the modern corrupt Church
of Rome.

If this were true, it were more to the discredit of the Protestant Clergy,
than to the credit of Ethelwolf'^ C^ergy. But I deny his Assertion, un^ess he
mean it of those who, as his Brother says (Friendly Conference, page ^1.) for a
corrupt Interest intrude themselves into the Ministry; of which number himself
is very likely to be one. But he that diligently shall observe the accounts
these Priest^ themselves give of those times, will see they writ^ not plainly
and ^airly, but strive to color over a corrupt Interest, and that is the Reason
they neither agree one with another, nor with themselves. The Author of the
Fri^ndly Conference, page 148. says, Tithes were settled upon the Church,
before Popery had made her (...) in it; for Popery is not of that Antiquity,
etc. And he refers to Ethelwolf's Donation for the settlement, page 146. which
was made in the year 855. Yet the same man (if he be the same that writ the
Vindication, as is pretended) makes Popery as ancient as the year 700. above
one hundred and fifty years older then Ethelwolf's Charter. Most (says he) of
the present Evil Opinions of the Church of Rome, had their Original in those
unlearned Ages, from about the* year 700. till about the year, 1400. Vind. page
277. Thus he one while makes the s^ttlement of Tithes older than Popery,
another while Popery older than the settlement of Tithes. In like manner the
other Priest in his Right of Tithes, page 102. says, The Clergy of that Age
were God's only public Ministers. And page 112. The Donors intended Tithes to
the Right Ministers of God; and I make no doubt they were such to whom they
gar^ them. Again, page 178. King Ethelwolf' s Cl^^gy ^greed with the
Protestant-Church of England in more points, than with the modern corrupt
Church of Rome. And yet the sa^e Priest says, page 99. The benefit of this
Don^ti^n of Tithes has been enjoyed for eight hundred years by those to whom
the Donation was made. Now certain it is that the benefit of this Donation was
enjoyed by the Popish Clergy all the time of Popery, till the very latter-end
of Hen. 8. or the beginning of Edw. 6. and afterward again in Queen Mary's
time; and if all this while Tithes were enjoyed by them to whom the Donation
was made, then it must needs be made to a Popish Clergy, or e^se there never
was such a thing as a Popish Clergy in England. Now though it be thus plainly
proved from his own words, that Tithes were given to a Popish C^ergy, yet so
daringly confident is he, to say they were God's only public Ministers, and
that he makes no doubt they were the Right Ministers of God. Were they God's
own public Ministers, were the^ the Right Ministers of God who enj^yed the
ben^fit of this Donation of Tithes, all along from Ethelwolf's time to the
Reformation? If so, then the Popish Clergy all that while, even in the most
idolatrous times, yea Bonner, Gardner, and their Associates, who drunk so deep
of Protestant Blood, were in his account Right Ministers of God. But if they
who e^joyed the Benefit of this Donation of Tithes all along from Ethelwolf's
time until the Reformation, were not the Right Ministers of God, but a corrupt
popish Clergy; then were not they (even by his own Argument) the Right
Ministers of God, but a corrupt popish Clergy to whom this Don^tion of Tyth^s
was made; for he says expressly, the Benefit of if was enjoyed for eight
hundred years by those to whom the Donation was made. This is unavoidable: and
therefore his saying King Ethelwolf's Clergy agreed with the Protestant-Church
of England in more points, than with the modern corrupt Church of Rome, may
cast an imputation on him and his Brethren, but cannot clear Ethelwolf his
Clergy from Popery.

But what he cannot prove he is very forward to take for granted, and therefore
says, page 178. Since the Donors gave them not to a Popish Clergy, but to God
and his true Ministers; our Kings and Parliaments, that took them away from the
corrupt Clergy (who were fallen into Popery) and settled them on the true
Protestant Ministry, did observe therein the Intention of the Donors, and did
apply Tithes to the Right Use for which God intended them.

He talks idly. God never intended Tithes to any such use in the times of the
Gospel; let him prove it if he can. And for observing the Intention of the
Donors; it is manifest the Donors intended their Tithes to such a Clergy, as
would SAY MASS for their Souls when they were DEAD. Is he one of them? or are
his Brethren such? or was that one of the Points in which he brags King
Ethelw^lf's Clergy ^greed more with the Protestant-Church of England, than with
the modern corrupt Church of Rome. However, by his own confession here, that
Clergy from whom Tithes were taken, was corrupt and fallen into Popery. Seeing
then Tithes were taken from the same Clergy to which they were given (for the
benefit, he says, was enjoyed eight hundr^d years by those to whom the
Donation was made, page 99.) was not Ethelwolf's Clergy corrupt and fallen into
Popery too?

Again, he says, page 178. Since the first Donors did not settle them on the
Popish Clergy, and the present Laws have given them to the Protestant Clergy, I
know not wh^t Title the Popish Priests can justly have to them.

Nor I neither; not that the first Donors did not settle them on them (as he
begs) but because that settlement was not just, and with what either Justice or
Credit a Protestant-Minister can thus creep in, and plead a Right to Tithes by
a Donation Fraudulently obtained by a popish Clergy, I leave the Reader to
judge.

To supply his defect of Argument he betakes himself here again to his usual
course of Railing, and because he cannot fairly answer, he sets himself f^ully
to bespatter me and the Quakers, page 179. calling us the very Darlings of the
great ^gents for Rome; saying, we learn our Lesson from the Papists, and are
doing their Work for them, calling me a Iourney-man to the Popish Priests, and
much more of the same bran. All which savouring so strong of Ignorance and
Envy, and being as far from Truth as from all manner of likelihood and
probability, I will not give so much Countenance to his Charge as to think it
worth an Answer.

And whereas he says, Their Doctrine of Perfection, despising the Letter of
Scripture, pleading for Ignorance, relying on the merit of following the Light
within, etc. are Popery in disguize.

I shall only tell him at this time, that his so saying is downright Falsehood,
and open Slander without disguise; a further account of which he may expect in
Reply to his Brother's Vindication.

. 9. He is offended at my saying, That if Tithes were a suitable Maintenance
for a Protestant-Ministry, yet the Clergy now do nothing for the People (nor
indeed have any to do) which can deserve so great a Compensation. This was
spoken upon occasion of the other Priest's saying, Friendly Conference, page
86. Their only work is to explain the written Word of God, and apply the same;
and yet a little after, p. 92, 93. acknowledged that whatsoever is necessary to
Salvation either to be believed or done, are in some place or other in holy
Scripture fitted to the most vulgar capacity and ^hallowest understanding, etc.
But this Priest not willing to take notice of this, which he knew would be an
hard knot to untye, looks over it, as if he had not seen it, and says, page
180. Certainly we do (...) much for the People as ever was done by any Clergy
in the World: We pray for them, preach to them, administer the Sacraments duly
among them, we marry and bury, we visit the Sick, relieve the Poor, comfort the
Sad, reprove Sinners, confute Her^ticks, and show the Folly of Ellwood, etc.

If they perform the rest no bette^ then this last, they little deserve the
Wages they receive. But do they perform these particular Services for the
Tithes which they receive? If not, it is but a false pretense to urge these as
the Works for which Tyth^ is a Compensation. Let us examine the matter a
little. They administer, he says, the Sacraments* but are they not paid for it
beside? Will they baptiz^ the Child of him that pays Tithes without being paid
distinctly for that? Do they not make their ^arishioners that pay Tithes, pay
them over and above for giving them Bread and Wine, though the Parishioners buy
the Bread and Wine themselves, and pay for it besides out of their own Purses?
Will they marry a man that pays Tithes, unless he gives them a sum of Money on
purpose? or will they bury any of the most zealous Tythe-payers, and not be
paid distinctly for it? What mere deceit is it then to name these things as
Services, for which they deserve Tithes, when, let their Tithes be never so
great, they will not do any of all these without being paid for it over and
above. Then for the other Particulars named, as Visiting the Poor, etc. It is
too notorious that many of them spend more Time and Money in Taverns and
Alehouses then in Visiting the Sick and Relieving the Poor. Instead of
Comforting the Sad, they make many sad by their Exactions and Extortions upon
the people, under the specious pretenses and gilded names of sacred Revenues
and Rights of Holy Church. If they Reprove some Sinners by Words, they
Encourage more by Example; and what he calls Confuting of Heresies, proves
oftentimes Opposing of Truths. Lastly, He says, They show the F^lly of Ellwood,
etc. Indeed! Is this then one of the Works for which they receive Tithes? Is it
the general Service and universal Labor of the Clergy? I confess I have heard
they had private Cabals, and several little Committees about my Book (wherein
he that gave the Occasion of writing it, received no Thanks for his Labor, and
wished he had never meddled) and that after many consultations and Debates about
it, they at length resolved to divid^ it into several parts, some being
appointed to answer one part, and some another; which the event does somewhat
confirm. But I never understood before that they had a general Convocation
about it, and that it was undertaken as a National Service, for which all the
Parish Priests in the Nation must have Tithes. But truly, had I thought there
had been so many Heads engaged in the Work, I should have expected st^onger
Reasons, and more forcible Arguments then I find in the Replies. But we must
take them as they are now.

He says, page 181. They are always ready to perform any Di^ine Office which
their people need or require.

He should have added [for Money] for notwithstanding their Tithes, those other
Offices which he calls Divine must be sure to be paid for distinct.

Here the other Priest puts in a word, Vindicat. page 314. where his
Parishioner citing those words of mine, If Tithes were a suitable Maintenance,
the Clergy now does nothing for the people which can dese^ve so great a
Compensation; he replies, That is, if his Worship may be judge.

Is not this a learned Answer? and a notable Demonstration that the Clergy does
something for the people, which deserves Tithes for a Compensation? The Reader
perhaps may think this is not the Answ^r it self, but a Preparative only to an
Answer; take therefore his following words, thus, But what I wonder do the
Impropriators for the people, which deserves so great a Compensation?

Truly nothing that I know of; nor do they pretend to do any thing: but what is
that to the purpose? does that excuse the Priest? or is this any Answer at all
to my Objection? He adds, Besides, its all one to the people, whether they pay
Tithes or no: as I shall show you anon.

This is his Answer to a syllable: In which, judge Reader whether there be any
thing serious, any thing argumentative, any thing pertenent to the purpose; and
whether he has not here evaded a serious Answer by a petty Cavil against the
Impropriators.

Again, The Pa^ishioner urging that from his saying, Our only Work is to
explain the written Wo^d of God, and to apply the same; I concluded, that what
they do for the people is not suitable to the Reward of Tithes; the Priest
replies, Does not this Quaker (think you) ins^ruct the people very graciously?
As if Tithes were of more real value to them, tha^ the Word of God explained
and applied?

That Is not my Instruction, but his Mis-construction of my words. I neither say
nor intimate that Tithes are of more real value to the people than the Word of
God explained and applied. But that Tithes are of more real value to the people
than the Priest's Labor in explaining that which he tells them himself, i^ s^
plain already that it needs no Explanation: which if it be not true, he was too
blame to say it; but if it be true, then have they no need of his help therein,
and consequently pay him Tithes for nothing, or at least for that which does
not deserve so great a Compensation.

But he complains I have done him wrong, and says, I must not let the Abuse
pass, which he has put upon me in this Quotation. He so states my words, as
his Reader must understand him, that I make explaining and applying the Word of
God, the sole and the only Work of a Minister. -- And a little after, -- [only
Work] related to the particular which I was there disco^rsing of, and not to
the general Office of a Minister.

Neither did I so represent it: for I know there are several other things which
they take into their Off^^e; but then they have distinct Rates and Prices set
on them, and they are paid for them in Money over and above the Tithes.

But to return to the other Priest, the Author of the Right of Tithes.

. 10. In his next Section he taxes me with many Mistakes in point of Law,
wherein if I am defective it is no great wonder, having never been educated in
that Study. He begins with a great deal of Mirth and Ioke, according to the
levity of his Mind, and by and by slips into his usual strain of profane
Ieering and Flouting at Revelation, and Immediate Teaching, calling me an
Inspirado, etc. All which I let pass as the froth of his Wit, in which no
Argument lies. The first Mistake he charges me with is in saying, The Stature
of 27 of Hen. 8. is the first Parliamentary Law for payment of Tithes; wherea^
(says he, p. 183.) the very first Law in the Statute-Book is a Grant for the
Church's enjoying her Rights inviolable.

I was not altogether so confident and positive as he reports me, but said,
This is the first Parliamentary Law that I find amongst our Statutes for the
payment of Tithes; which words [that I find among our Statutes] he leaves out
in reciting my words. Now if it had, so happened that his sagacity and
industrious Diligence had chanced to have found out another ^tatute of elder
date than that I gave, yet met^inks the Modesty and Wariness of my Expression,
might have won upon him to have pardoned such an Omission, and thereby have
obliged me to have done him the like Kindness another time. But since he
stands so upon it, let us see what other Statute he has brought, and whether I
am guilty indeed of a Mistake in this case or no. He says, The very first Law
in the Statute-Book is a Grant for the Church's enjoying her Rights inviolable.

What then? Is there any mention of Tithes in that Grant? or was it a Law made
for the payment of Tithes? Not a Tittle of Tithes is in it. How then was this a
Parliamentary Law made for the payment of Tithes, when neither Tithes nor
Payment are so much as mentioned in it? This was a Confirmation of Liberties to
the Church, but not a Law made for the payment of Tithes; nor do I yet think
the Priest will find (though he turn the Statute Book over again) any Law made
directly for the payment of Tithes, before that which I have quoted; which if
he do not, instead of fastening a Mistake in this case upon me, he will find a
Charge of a wo^e nature return upon himself.

The next Mistake he charges me with is, that I say, This Statute of 27 Hen. 8.
was made by a popish King and Parliament; Whereas (says he) that very Statute
declares the King Supreme Head of the Church of England, as T. E. may see if he
read it over: And how they can be Papists that have renounced the Pope's
Authority, I cannot well understand, says he, ibid.

He needed not have taken the pains to inform me that Hen. 8. had assumed the
Supremacy before the making of that Statute, since I had advertised him of that
in the same page out of which he pretends to pick these mistakes (page 333.)
where I say, Henry 8. being more Papist then Protestant (though he had
transferred the Supremacy from the Pope to himself) and believing, as most of
the other Doctrines of the Church of Rome, so that of Tithes being due to God
and Holy Church, in the twenty seventh Year of his Reign made a Law for the
payment of Tithes, etc. But that which he either cannot or will not understand
is, how they can be Papi^t^ that have renounced the Popes Authority.

Truly though he has not deserved much kindness of me, yet I will take a little
pains to inform him how this may be; and in order thereunto I will begin with
the definition of Popery which his Brothe^ gives in his Conference, page 149.
Popery is suc^^ Doctrines and superstitious Pra^tices, which by the Corruption
of time, have prevailed in the Church of Rome, contrary to the Tr^e, Ancient,
Catholic, an^ Apostolic Church. As this is Popery, so ^e tha^ holds, believes
and uses such Doctrines and P^actice^ is a Papist; but so did Hen. 8. after he
had reno^nced the Pope's Authority, and assumed the Supremacy to himself. And
if Herbert (who writ his Life) may find credit with the Priest, he will tell
him, page 369. that though he separated from the obedience o^ the Roman Church,
yet not from the Religion thereof, some few Articles excepted: Of which more
full Te^^imonies we may find in Fox's Acts and M^numents, and in Speed's
Chronicle. The six Articles were ^na^ted after the Popes authority was
^e^ounced, (and after this Law for the payment of Tithes was made also) which
Articles were for the establishing of Doctrines grossly Popis^, viz.
Transu^stantiation, the half Communion, the single Life of Priest^, Vows of
perpetual Chastity, private Masses, and auricular Confession, and stood in
force all his time. And many suffered Ma^tyrd^m under him after he had
renounced the Pope's Supremacy, as Laubert, Barns, Askew, and many others, who
to be sure were no Renegadoes, but such as certainly sealed their Testimony
with their Blood. Besides, he might have learnt from his Brother Priest, that
Hen. 8. did establish the six bloody A^ticles, to show himself as ill a friend
to Protestants as to Tithes, Vindication, page 305. which if he had considered
might perhaps have helped to open his understanding a little in this dark and
difficult point. However, by that time he has read and weighed what has now
been offered concerning it, I hope he may begin to understand how they could be
Papists that had renounced the Popes authority; and then I expect he should
withdraw his action, and not charge me with a mistake, in saying the Statute of
27 Hen. 8. for the payment of Tithes, was made by a Popish King and Parliament.
But he says, I mistake a Statute made in 32* Hen. 8. c. 7. for a Statute made
in 37. Hen. 8.

Who but would take this man to have been Domitian's Scholar, he is so
ready-handed at catching Flies? What a grand mistake was this to set 37 for 32!
A mistake it was however. But common ingenuity would rather have imputed it to
the Printer than the A^thor, especially considering how ill the Book is Printed
throughout. He knows well enough that till he had made a second Correction of
Errors, his own Book was not free from such mistakes, if it be yet. And if I
could have taken the same Course, (...) had not had this Straw to stumble at.

He adds, that I bring in Protestant King Edw. 6. for a Popish confirmer of
Tithes.

He wrongs me in that. My words are these (page 334.) In pursuance of these
Laws of Hen. 8. ^is Son and Successor Edward 6. made another, grounding is upon
those which his Father had made before. This is not calling Edw. 6. a Popish
confirmer of Tithes.

. 11. But he takes great pains to prove Tithes a Freehold, and spends several
pages about it, using great earnestness therein, and calling me Heretic for
but so much as questioning it. I do not profess my self a Lawyer, and therefore
will not take upon me to Answer all his Law-quotations, lest I should need the
same Excuse that he at last is fain to make, page 188. [Ne suitor ultra
crepida^.] But I observe he says, page 185. that In the very Statute of 32.
Hen. 8. There is mention made of an Estate of Inh^ritance or Freehold in
Tithes.

By this I perceive he confounds the Clai^s of Priest and Impropriator: for
that Clause in the Statute has plain relation to the Impropriators, a
directing how and where Laymen possessing Tithes, and being thereof disseized,
may have their Remedy. The words of the Statute run thus, And be it further
enacted, etc. that all cases, where any Person or Persons, which now have, or
which hereafter shall have any Estate of Inheritance, Freehold, term, Right or
Interest, of, in or to any Parsonage, Vicarage, Portion, Pension, Tithes,
Oblations, or other Ecclesiastical or Spiritual profit, which now be, (...)
which hereafter shall be made temporal, or admitted to be, abide and go to or
in temporal Hands, and lay uses and profits by the Law and Statutes of this
Realm, shall hereafter fortune to be disseised, etc. It is plain that by an
Estate of Inheritance or Freehold the Statute here intends those Tithes that
then were or after should come to be in the possession of Laymen, and
appropriated to Temporal or Lay uses; which implies it did not account Tithes
an Estate of Inheritance or Freehold to the Priests, for then this distinction
had been needless. Besides, the Statute says, The Person or Persons so
di^^eised, etc. their Heirs, Wives, etc. shall have remedy in the King's
temporal Courts, etc. and, amongst other Writs by which they may proceed,
directs Writs of Dower; All which have manifest Relation to the Impropriator's
Tit^e, not to the Priest's* for what Priest (as a Priest) can make his Wife a
Dower of Tithes? Or what has a Priest's Heir or Wife to do with Tithes, when
he is dead? But this Priest would gladly strengthen his Claim, by twisting in
the Impropriator's with it. Therefore he says, page 186. Those very Laws which
made the A^^enation, did not give the Lai^y any other Estate in Tithes, than
such as the Clergy had before, and such ^s the rest of the Clergy had then to
the Tithes remaining in Ecclesiastical Hands.

This is disproved by an Instance which himself gives, page 185. which is ^f a
Writ of Dower of praedi^l Tithes brought in the Countess of Oxford' s case, 5.
Jacob.

By which it appears that Tithes were settled in Dower upon that Countess (as
he styles her) which they could not have been, if her Husband had not had
another Estate in Tythe^ than such as the Clergy then had or now have. For no
body, I suppose, ^^magins that the Clergy have such an Estate in Tithes as by
virtue of which they can settle Tithes in (...) upon their Wives. He that will
take the pains to consult that Statute (32 H. 8. 7.) will find that what it
speaks of Estates of Inheritance, Free-h^ld, etc. has respect to Laymen, not
to the Clergy. For although, in the second and last Paragrap^s, where it
directs the remedy for recovery of Tithes, in case of substraction or detention
thereof, it expressly mentions Ecclesiastical as well as Lay Persons,
restraining the remedy for both to Ecclesiastical Courts and Laws; yet in the
seventh Paragraph, where an Estate of Inheritance or Freehold in Tithes is
spoken of, there is no mention made or notice taken of the Clergy, not a word
of any Ecclesiastical person, but those Terms [Estate of Inheritance,
Freehold, etc.] are expressly there applied to such Tithes, etc. as then were
or should afterward be made temporal, or admitted to be, abide, and go to, or
in temporal Hands and lay uses and profits, etc. And in case of di^^elsure of
such Estate of Inheritance, Freehold, etc. the Remedy was not restrained to
the Eccesiastical Courts (as in the other case wherein Ecclesiastical persons
were concerned) but left to the King's temporal Courts. From all which I
gather, that those words in the Statute [Estate of Inheritance, Fr^^hold, etc.]
have no relation at all to the Clergy, no^ do any way concern Ecclesiastical
persons, but were inserted purposely for the sakes of those ^ay-persons, into
whose Hands such Estates were then already come, or likely to come: And that
the Lawmakers then did understand the Laity to have another Estate in Tithes
then the Clergy had.

The Author of the Conference, in his Vindication, page 316. has another trick
to prove Tithes a ^ree-hold, and that is this; He asks his Parishioner, Who
elect the Parliament Men that serve for the Coun^y? The Parishoner answers, The
Freeholders. And did you never (says he) see Clergy men's Votes entered at one
of those Elections? Yes many a time, quoth the Parishioner. That very thing
(replies he) proves them Freeholders.

But, by his leave, the proving some Priests Freeholders does not prove Tithes
a Freehold. Many of the Priests have temporal Estates, Lands of Inheritance or
purchase, which gives them a Right of suffra^e in such Elections. But then it
must be considered, that in such cases, though they are Clergy Men, they do not
Vote as Clergy men, but as men possessed of such temporal Estates or Free-holds.
Be^ides, most of the Priests have G^ebe-Lands, which may with less ^epugnancy
to reason be called a F^ee-hold, than Tithes. And this Priest has not
expressed upon which of these considerations it is that his Clergy-mens Votes
are entered. Now if he intend^d to have prove^, by this Medium, that Tithes are
a Freehold to the Clergy, he should have demonstrated that every Priest that
takes Tithes is thereby enabled to give a Voice in the Election of Parliament
Men: Which if they are not, it is rathe^ an Argument against him then for him,
and shows that Tithes are not a Free^hold to the Clergy. But of that let
Lawyers judge: I only add, That as the Priests are unlike the Ministers of the
Gospel in taking Tithes at all, so they are much more unlike them in claiming a
legal property and Freehold therein: And if Tithes may in any Notion of Law be
called a Freehold, they are (as I said in my former Book, page 331.) such a
Freehold, as hold^ the greatest part of the Nation in bondage.

^ut he is angry that I say, These Statutes for Tithes were grounded on a false
supposition, That Tithes were due to God and Holy Church. This he calls a
repeating of old baffled falsehoods; page 188. and says, he has proved this was
a true supposition, and maintained by the Primitive Orthodox Fathers; adding,
that nothing is more false than my saying, This was a Doctrine purely Popish,
and hatched at Rome (he leaves out [and here preached up with thundering
Excommunications by the l ope's Emmissaries and Agents] which he knew could not
be denied, and wo^ld h^lp to discover where the Doctrine was hatched) However,
he makes the validity and force o^ the Statutes to depend on the Truth of this
supposition, That Tithes are due to God and Holy church: for he says, Since
these Statutes were grounded on a Primitive and Protestant Doctrine, the
Statutes are therefore good, page 89. But by the rule of contraries, If these
Statutes were not grounded on a Primitive and Protestant Doctrine, the Statutes
are not therefore good. Now that this Doctrine, of Tithes being due to God and
Holy Church, was not a Primitive Doctrine appears, in that ther^ is no mention
of this Doctrine in any of the Writings of the New Testament, wherein the
primitive Doctrines of Christianity are delivered. This Doctrine is no where
there to be found. Nor i^ the more simple, and le^s corrupted Ages of the
Church, and nearest to the Apostles times, was this Doctrine received. But in
the more distant Ages from the A^^stles, when the Church became greatly
corrupted both in doctrine and practice, sprung up this Doctrine of Tithes
being due to God and Holy Church, and may truly be reckoned amongst those
Doctrines and superstitious Practices, which by the corruption of time, have
p^evailed in the Church of Rome, contr^ry to the true, ancient, Catholic and
Apostolic Church; which the Priest calls Popery, Conference, page 149. And as
this Doctrine sprang up in corrupt times, so it grew up together with the
Corruptions of those times; and the more corrupt the Church grew, and farthest
off from the purity and truth of the Gospel, the more credit and belief this
Doctri^e obtained, and was the more generally received. And when, through the
prevalency of Popery, the Church was most of all defiled and polluted with
Idolatry and Superstition, and in its worst estate, then was this Doctrine in
greatest repute, and in fullest force and strength. By all which let the Reader
judge whether this was a primitive Doctrine. And as this was not a primitive
Doctrine, so neither was it a protestant Doctrine: for the Bohemians (whom Fox
calls Protestants) when they renounced the Popes Yoke, took away Tithes from
the Clergy, and reduced them to certain Stipends, as Seldom out of Io. Major
notes, Hist. Tithes, page 167. which they would not have done, if they had
believed that Tithes were due to God and Holy Church. Thus it appears that this
Doctrine, of Tithes being due to God and Holy Church, is neither a primitive
nor Protestant Doctrine; and that the Statutes grounded thereon, are built upon
a false supposition.

He excepts against my saying, For a man to claim that by a temporal Right,
from a temporal Law, which the Law he claims by commands to be paid as due by a
divine Right, is (...) juggling. To which he replies, page 189. All the World
knows, two Titles to the same thing, being subordinate to one another, do
strengthen each other.

This is a mere shift: for it is evident those Statutes do not intend to make
the Priests another Title then what they claimed by before, but only to appoint
the payment of Tithes upon the old Title of being due to God. So that these
Statutes do not make the Priests a temporal right, nor was it the design of
them so to do, for the Statute of 32 H. 8. 7. speaking of Tithes impropriated,
says, Which now be, or which hereafter shall be made temporal; which implies
plainly, They understood all Tithes, before such Impropriations, in no other
Notion then Ecclesiastical or Spiritual: and that they accounted all other
Tithes, which were not so impropriated, but remained in the hands of the
Clergy, Ecclesiastical or spiritual profits still, not temporal. Now for the
Priests to claim a temporal right to Tithes by those Laws which declare the
Right they have to be spiritual; this is the Juggle. If they will claim Tithes
by these Statutes, they should claim them in that notion wherein the Statutes
suppose them due, which is as a spiritual Right, not as a temporal. The Priest
says, A Father (having a maintenance reserved (...) of his Sons Estate,
mentioned in those deeds which settle the said Estate on the Son) though he had
a right to be maintained by his Son, jure divino, may claim a maintenance by
virtue of these deeds, jure humano; and the second Title strengthens, but does
not destroy the first.

This is quite beside the case: for (besides that the comparison will not hold
between a Father and a Priest, unless any in the darkness of their ignorance
should so far mistake as to own the Priests for their spiritual Father: nor in
that case neither with respect to Tithes, but to a Maintenance only) here are
(in the case of a Father) two distinct Title^, independent one of the other;
and the Deed of settlement, in which such maintenance is reserved, does not
express the reserved maintenance to be due, jure divine, but declares it to be
a temporal Right settled upon civil and temporal considerations. But how remote
is this from the Priest's case! The Statutes mention no temporal Right of
Tithes to the Priests, but suppos^ a divine Right, and upon that supposition
command the payment of them, as so due: This Deed of settlement mentions
nothing of a divine Right, but acknowledges a civil and temporal Right to the
maintenance therein reserved. As well then may the Father claim a divine Right
to this maintenance by virtue of this Deed; as the Priest claim a temporal
Right to Tithes by virtue of these Statutes; and both alike unreasonable.

12. In my former Book, I inquired two things page 335, 336. first, What it is
the Priest claims a property in? secondly, Where this property is vested? in
the person of the Priest, or in the Office? To the first the Priest gives no
Answ^r here, only in another place, page 196. he says, We grant Tithes are due
out of the profits only, and with this answer he contents himself, overlooking
the Arguments I offered in page 335, 336, 338, 339. to prove the
unreasonableness of such a claim; particularly, That if Tithes be the tenth of
the profit, or increase of the Land, and they that settled Tithes (as he says)
were actually sei^ed of them in Law, then surely they could settle (...) more
than they were so seized of; and they could be actually seized of no other
profits, or increase, than what did grow, increase, or renew upon the Land,
while they were actually seized of it. So that such settlement how valid soever
while they lived, must needs expire with them. This and much more such plain
an^ serious argumentation, tending to prove the emptiness and unreasonables of
their plea to Tithes from the Donation of Ethelwolf and others, the Priests,
both one and the other, pass by unanswered. The Reader may guess why.

The second thing inquired was, Where this property is vested, in the person of
the Priest, or in the Office? This I perceive they are wonderful wary how they
answer. One Priest says, An Office is capable of being vested in a property;
and the present person who sustains that Office, has this property vested in
him during his Life, with remainder to his Successors forever, Right of Tithes,
page 190.

This, as doubtfully and darkly delivered as might be, seems in the first part,
to affix the property to the Office; but in the latter part, to the person that
sustains the Office: For he says, The present person who sustains that Office,
has this property vested in him (not during his Office only; but) during hi^
Life, which may extend far beyond his Office. For if the present person who
sustains the Office be an ignorant, vicious, debauched, scandalous Priest (as,
alas! too many of them are) if he be one of them, who the Author of the
Conference says, page 11. will for a corrupt interest intrude themselves into
these sacred Offices, he not only may but ought to be ejected. They that for
co^rupt Interest thrust themselves in, should for their Corruption be th^ust
out again. But what mean while becomes of the property? If (as this Priest
says) the present person who sustains the Office has this property vested in
him during his Life, the divesting him of the Office does not divest him of the
property, because (according to this Priest) the property depends not on the
Office, but on the person's Life that bears the Office. And the Remainder of
this property, which the Priest says is to his Successors forever, can take no
place till the death of the present person who sustains the Office. So that
when he who sustains the Office comes to be turned out of his Office, his
Successor in the Office can have no property at all, until he that is so
turned out be dead, because he has the property vested in him during his Life.
Thus stands the case according to this Priest, wherein how consistent he is to
himself the Reader may observe. Now let us hear what the other Priest says to
this matter, in his Vindication of the Conference, page 317. This property
(says he) does not belong to either of them apart, but the property belongs to
the person, as qua^ified by holy Orders, and put into actual possession by
Ins^itution and Induction. This quite contradicts the other Priest: for if the
property does not belong to either of them apart, then the present person who
sustains the Office cannot have the property vested in him during his Life, but
during his Office only. For if he might have it during his Life, he might then
have it apart from his Office; which this Priest denies, in saying, This
property does not belong to either of them apart. But if the property does not
belong to either of them a part, what becomes of the property when they are
parted? The Priest it seems (according to this Priest) has no property any
longer than he is in Office (though, according to the other Priest, he has it
vested in him during hi^ Life) turn him out of Office, and his property is
gone, because this property does not belong to either the person or Office
apart. On the other hand, The Office has no property any longer than it has a
Priest in it, because the property does not belong to either of them apart.
Where then rests the property when the Office is void? Does the property
cease? They had best have a care of that, for that will shrewdly endanger the
Title. Thus, Reader, thou see, after all their blustering big words for a
property in Tithes, they cannot agree where to fix it. A property they would
fain have (and nothing less, says one of the Priests, will serve my turn,
Vindication, page 317.) but where to place it they do not know. To leave it in
the Office they know is dangerous, because the Office was notoriously Popish
when Tithes were first settled on it. To fix it to the persons sustaining the
Office is no less hazardous, because some, at least, of t^ose persons are
acknowledged by the Priest to be Intruders for a cor^upt interest. But leaving
the Priests to consult anew about the settlement of their conceited property,
since Tithes have so great a dependence on the Office, let us again consider
the nature of that Office when Tithes were settled on it. The Priest says,
Right of Tithes, page 190. I make my self sure of that which none but a wild
Quaker, would ever so much as once suppose; viz. To be sure the office of
Priesthood was Popish; and the Office it self being n^w laid aside, the
property vested in it must be gone along with it. Thus he quotes my words; but,
as his usual manner is, very defectively, that he may thereby find means either
to abuse me, or avoid an Answer. My words are these, p. 336. It was to be sur^
a Popish Office when Tithes were first paid to it in this Nation, an office set
up by the Pope, and that not as a secular ^rince, but as a ^ope (as a spiritual
Father: for such he pretends to be) but if their had been a property in the
office, yet seeing the office it self is laid aside, and the Pope, who was the
author ^f it, ^ast off, surely whatever property was in the office, must ^eeds
be gone along with it. This has it seems put him so out of patience, that he
returns this Answer, H^ must be under some degree of frenzy, who can perswad^
himself, that there are no Priests now, or that the Reformation laid the office
aside. That had been a reformation as wild as a Quaker could project. Does he
think that any body will grant these doting falsehoods? No Protestants (that
ever I knew) held the office of Priesthood to be Popish. And truly, T. E. thy
suppositions will not be granted by any, but those who are as senseless as thy
self, page 191.

This is his full Answer; in which I think no sensible man can find any thing
argumentative, reasonable, or civil. Wherefore waving this, I will first
inquire somewhat more particularly into that Office on which it is pretended
Tithes were settled, and then take notice of his Answer.

First then for the Office. It was (I said) to be sure a popish Office, when
Tithes were first paid to it in thi^ Nation, an Office set up by the Pope, etc.
Austin the Monk coming over hither from Rome, by Authority which he received
from Pope Gregory orda^ned Bishops and Priests here. And this was long before
Tithes were paid in England. After Austin's death, his Successors were
c^nsecrated Archbishops of Canterbury b^ the succeeding Popes, or by their
Authority, by virtue of which p^pish Consec^ation re^eived themselves, they
took upon them to or^ain new Priests as occasion seemed to them to require.
Thu^ was that Prie^^^ood in its Ordination entirely popish: A Priestly Office
set up and held up by the Power and Authority of the Popes of Rome. And as its
institution, so its work and service, the End and Intention of it was popish:
and so much worse was it in its progress, then in its institution, as the
latter times were worse then the former, and as the Church of Rome grew daily
more depraved and corrupt, out of which it sprang, by which it was nursed up,
and to which it was subservient. And at the time when Tithes were settled on
this Office (and before) the Work and Service of it was to say M^sses for the
Soul^ of the Dead (thus did the Clergy engage to do, even in that very Charter
of Ethelwolf) to pray for the Dead that their Souls might be delivered out of
Purgatory, to receive Auricular Confession, to absolve the people from their
Sins, etc. These things are too certain and known to be doubted, much less
denied, and too plain and evident to leave any question, whether this Office
was at that time popish or no. Now though this Office continued long, yet at
length it came to an end in this Nation. The Pope, who set this Office up, was
cast off; the Service of this Office (viz. the Masses and popish Prayers)
ceased; the Opinions of Purgatory, Auricular Confession, etc. were disowned,
and the Office it self was laid aside.

Now let us take notice of the Priests Answer, H^ (...) be (says he) under
some degree of Frenzy, who can perswad^ himself, that there are no Priests
now, or that the Reformation laid the Office aside.

If the Reformation did not lay the Office aside, the Reformation was therein
too short; for the Offic^ was undoubtedly evil, and did deserve to be laid
aside. But the laying of that Office as^de does not infer that there are no
Priests now: Unless he thinks that all Priests are of one and the same Office,
and so puts no difference betwixt Light and Darkness, Good and Evil. If he
think so, I must then ask him whether he exercises the same Office that the
popish Priests now do at Rome and elsewhere. What their's is, is pretty well
known, and if his be the very same with their's, it will not be hard to guess
what his is. But if he will reckon his not the same with their's, but another
and better Office, he may thereby see that there may be Priests now, although
that Office which was once exercised here, and is still in diverse popish
Co^ntries, be laid aside. Does the erecting of a false Office make void the
true? or cannot the right Office of Priests remain, if the wrong be taken away?
Or will he say that was a right and true Office which was exercised here by the
popish Priests, till the time of the Reformation? Then he justifies the same
Office still, which is yet exercised by the popish Priests in Italy, Spain, and
other Countries. Certain it is that no such Office was ever appointed by
Christ, or known among the Apostles. They had no Office for saying of Masses,
for praying for the Dead, that their Souls might be delivered out of Purgatory,
for receiving Auricular Confession, and for many other things which were the
peculiar Services of this Office. These things were not known amongst them, but
sprang up after the Apo^^olical Times, in the Apo^^acy, and continued till the
Reformation. But i^, as he says, the Reformation did not lay the Office aside,
what is become of it? by whom is it executed? Do the Priests who receive Tithes
now in England perform the sam^ Office that those popish Priests did then? Do
these say Masses, and pray for the Dead? Do these receive Auricular Confession,
and take upon them to absolve the people from their Sins? This was the Office
of those Priests; but none I hope of these Priests will acknowledge this to be
their Office: how then are the Offices the same? But that that Office of
Priesthood to which Tithes were given, and by virtue of which Tithes were so
long held and enjoyed in England before the Reformation, was a popish Office,
and as such laid aside by the Reformation, no man I think, that understands
those times, and has not an Interest to serve, can doubt. And if the Office was
laid aside in which the pretended property was vested, how should the property
remain, and not be laid aside together with the Office? But what Shifts will
not Priests make for their Profits sake!

13. His next Cavil is at my saying, The Priest's Title lies in the Gift of the
Owner, which I showed by this, That the Priest has no power to take one Sheaf
or Ear of the Husbandman's Corn from o^^ his Ground, until the Owner has
severed it as Tithe from the remainder, and thereby first disseized himself of
that part, and by his own Act given the Priest a Title thereunto. And although
the Law, supposing Tithe due to God and Holy Church, enjoins the owner to set
it out, yet if he refuse, he incurs the Penalty of that Law for his refusal,
but the Property of the Tithe remai^s entire in himself. To this the Priest
says, page 191. It is an odd kind of property which we have to a thing, that we
may not keep in our Possession; and a strang^ Gift, which we must give whether
we will or no, and be punishe^ if we do not give it.

He might better say, It is an odd kind of Property the Priest claim^ to a
thing he never had in possession, nor they from whom he claims it; and which
there is no certainty in, nor knows he whet^er it be much or little. As for the
Owner, he may keep in his possession the thing in which he has a Propriety,
viz. Tithes, and the Priest cannot dispossess him the^^of, although by Laws
grounded on a Religious Mistak^ he may cause him otherwise to suffer for not
dispossessi^g himself.

But he says, page 192. he will give a parallel case, There are (says he) many
free R^nts and (...) Payments, which the person charged with them must bring to
such an House, in such a Town, as such a day, and then and there disseize
himself of the said ^oney, by a tender thereof to the Lord or his Assigns;
which Lord need never de^a^d this Money, and yet may take the forf^iture, if it
^e not brought to him, and tendered.

This is not a parallel Case to Tithes: for in this Case of Rents and Customary
Payments, the Lord or other person claiming them, may for default of payment
either enter upon the Lands out of which such Rents and Payments issue, or
bring his Action of Debt against the person charged therewith; which argue^ he
has a Property in the thing he claims. But it is not so in the Case of Tithes.
If the Owner refuse to set them out, the Priest cannot enter upon the Land, nor
regularly bring an Action of Debt against the Owner: but can only recover the
Penalty of the Statute for his not making him a property by setting them out.
Which plainly shows the Priest has not any property in Tithes, nor is by the
Statutes themselves understood to have any civil or Temporal Right thereto; but
is only supposed to have a divine Right, and upon that mis-supposition the
Statutes enjoin the Owners to make the Priest a temporal Right by setting out
of Tithes. Besides, Free Rents and Customary Payments are certain, and not in
the power of the Occupant to extinguish or alter. But it is far otherwise in
the Case of Tithes. It is in the power of the Occupant to make the Tithes much,
little or nothing (and that without any Fraud to his Ancestors) for if a man
stock his Land with Horses, he is liabl^ to very little Tithes, if any (and I
think not to any, un^ess it be by particular Custom of the place.) But if he
plant Woods, and let them stand for Ti^ber, no Tithe at all can be demanded;
and what then b^comes of the Priests Property? has not he a fine property the
mea^ while, which another man, without any Fraud or Indirect Dealing, may
extinguish when he pleases? Is it not plain by this, that the Priest's Title
lies in the Gift of the present Owner, who may choose whether the Priest shall
have any thing or nothing? And is the Case of Free Rents and Customary Payments
a parallel to this? Can he who stand^ charged with those Payments extinguish or
alter them at his pleasure? Can he make them more or less as he sees good? If
not, how then is that a parallel Case (...) this o^ Tithes?

The Parson (says Shepherd in his Grand Abridge^^nt, (...). Tithes, page 101.)
has a good property in the Tithes where they are set out by the Owner^ not
where they are set out by a Stranger. Does not this prove that the Parson's
Title lies in the Gift of the Owner? If the Owner sets out the Tithes, he
thereby disseizes himself thereof, and gives the Parson a Property in the
Tithes so by him set out: but if the Tithes are not set out, the Parson has no
Property therein; nay, if they be set out, and not by the Owner, but by a
Stranger, the Parson will be to seek of a Property notwithstanding such setting
out. By all which it appears, That the Parson has no Property in the tenth patt
of another's Crop, until the Owner sets out that tenth part, and thereby gives
the Parson a property in it. Nay further, says Shepherd, ibid. Tithes are not
due, nor is it Tithe within the Statute of 2. Edw. 6. until severance be made
of the nine parts from the tenth part. So that to make it Tithe within the
Statute, it must be severed: and to make the Priest a Property in it, it must
be set out as Tithe by the Owner. Judge now Reader, whether the Priest has any
other Property in Tithes then what the present Owner gives him.

14. Here again, page 193. the Priest is gravelled with an Argument, which he
knows not how to answer, and therefore having first stuck an ugly (...) or two
upon it, to scare common Readers from observing it, he makes a show as if he
would repeat it, and sets down something that looks a little like it, and then
without more ado cries, I have sufficiently (...) it before, 30. and so takes
his leave of it^ He sets it down thus, That it is ridiculous and unre^sonable
for any to pretend a Power to dispose of th^s^ Profits, or any part of them,
which arise from the Labor, Stock and Care of another, especially after their
own decease; for which he quotes page 338. of my Book.

This he calls an old, silly and blasphemous Argument, and so lets it fall. But
questionless the man being conscious to himself, that his Claim to Tithes is
ridiculous and unreasonable, these two words did so run in his mind, that he
fancied he read them in that place of my Book out of which he pretends to take
this Quotation: whereas indeed neither of those words is to be found in all
that page, no^ any Argument in those terms wherein he gives this. But that the
Reader may see there was in that page such matter as might justly deserve, as
well as require an Answer (an^ which he in his thirtieth Section, to which he
refer^ did not reply unto) I will repeat an Argument out of that page, with the
occasion of it, which was this. The Author of the Conference had said, page
154. That Tithes were settled by those tha^ were actually seized of them in
Law. Whereupon I thus argued, If Tithes be the tenth of the profit, or increase
of the Land, and they that settled Tithes (as he says) were actually seized of
them in Law, then surely they could settle no more than they were actually
seized of, and they could be actually seized of no other Profits, or Increase,
than what did grow, increase, or renew upon the Land, while they were actually
seized of it. So that such settlement, how valid soever while they lived, must
needs expire with them. Hence I further reasoned thus, Is any one so void of
Reason, as to imagine that they who were possessed of Land a Hundred Years ago,
could then settle and dispose of the Profits and Increase that shall grow and
arise upon the Land a Hundred Years hence; which Profit cannot arise barely
from the Land, but from the Labor, Industry and Stock of the Occupier. Were
ever any actually seized of the Labor at the Husband-man's Hands, of the Sweat
of his B^ows, of the judgment, understanding and skill that God has given him,
of the Stock he imploys, the Cost he bestows, the Care, Pains, Industry and
Diligence he exercises for the obtaining of a Crop? etc. This solid Argument
and sober reasoning he calls an old, silly, and blasphe^ous Argument. But
whether it be either silly, or blasphemous, I willingly submit to the impartial
Reader's judgment. And whereas he pretend^ he has sufficiently baffled it
before in Sect. 30. I desire the Reader to compare that Section with my Reply
to it, Chap. 5. Sect. 5, 6. and judge as he find^ cause.

But though the Priest was not willing to handle this Argument, yet he gladly
catches an occasion from hence to complain again of me to the Impropr^ators;
and he takes a great deal of needless pain to inform them, of what their own
experience has long since taught them, viz. that the Quakers deny their Right
to Tithes. The Quakers do indeed deny Tithes to be due to any one under the
Gospel-state; And for that cause have suffered and do, by Impropriators as well
as by Priests. Nor is there any thing (...) my Book, relating to the
Impropriators, which may any whit exc^se, much less justify, his ^anderous
reflections on me. Well may I pity them, but never shall I flatter, muchless
^law them, at least in that sense wherein they are sure enough to be clawed, if
ever they come under the Priests Claws, or fall within their Clutches. His
scurrilous Language, and foul Epithets of double-tongued and false-hearted,
with his ^^ye Insinuations of my flattering and clawing the Impropriators,
argue nothing else to me, but that he wanted other Arguments to fill up this
Section, and thought it best to make a noise, that vulgar Readers might (...)
he had said somethin^. But for all his Clamor, many of the Impropriators I
doubt not discern, both that it is Conscience makes the Quaker refuse to pay
Tithes, and Covetousness makes the Priest so greedy to get Tithes, not only
from the Quaker but Impropriator also.

15. He says, page 195. As for Artificers paying Tithes of their gains, it is
no more than what they are obliged to by S. Paul's Rule, Gal. 6. 6. (...) give
their Pastor a share of all good things.

This is not true. That Rule of St. Paul does not determine the proportion, but
leave Artificers and all others to their Christian-liberty, in point of
quantity. Therefore to oblige Artificers to pay the Tithes of their Gains, is
more than St. Paul's rule obliges them to; Finally, says the Priest at the
close of this Section, page 196. We grant to T. E. Tithes are due o^t of the
Profits only; and therefore of God give no Increase, or the Husbandman have
nothing grow, we expect no Tithes at all.

Where Is his Freehold then! But if Tithes are due out of the profits only, why
are you Priests so unreasonable to require Tithes where there is no profit,
yea, where instead of profit there is apparent loss, as it is certain you
frequently do. The Priest here says, If God give no Increase, they expect no
Tithe at all; but it is easy to perceive what he means by Increase, by his
adding [or the Husbandman have nothing grow] There is some difference sure
between Increase, and having something grow. He that sows ten Bushels of Seed
in a Field, and receives but eight again (which that it often proves so many
men to their loss know to be true) is far enough from having increase, when he
decreases two in ten. Yet such is the Conscience of these Priests, that they
will have the Tithes of that Crop, though they see apparently there is not only
no Profit or Increase, but a certain loss and decrease even of the Seed,
besides all the Husbandman's other Charge and Pains. So that it is not as the
Priest says, If God gives no increase, that they expect no Tithe at all; but
if there be an utter and total decrease, if the Husbandman have nothing grow,
i. e. if there be nothing at all for them to have, then they expect nothing,
but if there be any thing at all, if the Husbandman have anything grow, though
never so little, if his loss be never so great, and he reap ^ot again the one
half of what he sowed, and clearly lose the other half with all his Charge and
Labor, yet will the Priest make his loss so much the greater, by taking from
him the tenth part of that (...) Crop he ha^, and have the Face when he has
done to look the poor Man in the Face, and tell him th^s (...) according to St.
Paul's Rule. But long enough may the Priest say so before any wise man will
believe him.

16. In his next Section, page 196. he alleges (...) my A^guments for taking
away Tithes, tend to destroy Hospitals and Donations to the Poor; which
supposition in my form^r Book I had denied, and disproved by several Reasons,
one whereof he, after his imperfect manner of quoting, thus sets down, Because
in that of the Poor there is a settlement of certain Lands, in which the Donor
had a legal property at the time of the gift^ but in the increase of the
Occupiers Stock, he that gave Tithes neither had, nor never could have a
pro^erty, and therefore no power to give. This is the Reason, as he has maimed
it, but in my Book it stands thus; In that of the Poor, there is a certain
settlement of Lands and Tenements, in which it is to be supposed, the Donor had
a legal property, or of which he was actually seized at the time of the Gift.
But in the case of Tithes, here is no gift of Lands and Tenements, but of the
Increase growing and arising through, and by reason of the Labor, Care,
Industry and Stock of the Occupier, which he that gave the Tithes neither had,
no^ could have any property in, nor was, or could be actually seized of, and
therefore had no power to give. This Reason is firm and solid, and will endure
a Shock; And I observe, that though he had peeled it as much as he could, and
brought it in too, with a scornful [forsooth] yet he was quickly contented to
leave it, and take up one of his old Notes; for he immediately says, page 197.
We have noted before, That by his Rules framed against Tithes, all Donations
made by Papists, on consideration of meriting, and expiating their Sins
thereby, are void: And this will destroy a great many of these Hospitals, and
Gifts to the Poor.

That is not the consequent of my Aguments against Tithes, but an inference of
his own making to shelter Tithes under. All Donations made by Papists are not
void, because some are. The Donations of Tithes were designed to uphold and
maintain a Worship and Ministry that were false and Antichristian: but
Donations to Hospitals for the Sustenance of the Poor, had no such intendment.
The Papists (as I observed before, Chap. 4. Sect 12.) in their ^ivil and
politic capacity did many things well and commendably, but what they did in
their Religious capacity was stark naught.

But he says, ibid. By my own confession, all Hosp^tals endowed out of Tithes,
and all Gifts to the Poor granted out of Tithes for perpetuity, are void.

What then? If men will give that which belongs not to them, the fault is in
themselves. Though Charity be an excellent virtue, yet it may not patronize
^njustice: Nor indeed is that to be acounted Charity which is repugnant to
justice. Now if the Donors of Tithes ^ad no power nor right to make such
perpetual Donations of Tithes as are now claimed, but that such Donations do
violate the Rights of others, (as in my former Book, I have argued at large,
page 323, 324, 325, 338, 339, 341. and also in this, Chap. 5. Sect. 5. then may
not any pretense of Charity be urged to justify such violation.

Athird sort, he says, ibid. of these charitable Donations, consist of
perp^^ual Rent-charges, and certain sums of Money to be paid Yearly forever,
out of the Profits of some certain Estate. Now, he says, the Occupiers of the
Lands thus charged, must sell such part of the Profits produced by their
Labor, Sweat, Stock, Skill and Industry, and when it is turned into Money, ^ust
pay it entirely to the Poor, etc. page 198.

This he would make a parallel case to Tithes; but it is not, as I have already
showed, Chap. 5. Sect. 5. For this Rentcharge does not lie upon the Stock, nor
upon the Occupier, unless he be Proprietor of the Lands, or by particular
contract with the Proprietor has taken it upon himself. But it lies upon the
Land, being charged thereon by him that was then actually seized of the Land,
or had at that time a legal property therein, and the burden descending with
the Inheritance, the Heir is fain to undertake the burden, because he cannot
else enjoy the Land. But the Tenan^ who Occupies this Land and imploys his
Stock upon it, is no way at all concerned in this payment, because it goes out
of the Rent, unless it be otherwise provided by private agreement between the
Landlord and him. But there is no proportion between Tythe^ and this, for
Tithes is a burden lies upon the Stock^ (which the Donors of Tithes were not
actually se^zed of, nor had a legal property in) and goes not out of the Rent,
but out of the Stock, and the Landlord is not concerned in it, but the Tenant.
And if the Proprietor occupy the Land himself, it is by reason of the Stock he
uses upon the Land that he pay^ Tithes, not by reason of the Land; for if he
has the Land in his Hands, and has no Stock upon it, but lets it lie and
makes no Profit of it, he has no Tyth^ to pay for the Land; though if at the
same time he employ his Stock any other way, he is liable to pay Tithe of the
profit of his Stock. But though he make no Profit of his Land at all, yet the
Rentcharge he must pay.

The Priest says, He knows an Estate of forty Pounds per annum, charged with
the payment of ten Pounds per annum forever, to the Poor.

Suppose the utmost Profits of that Estate should some Years (through ill
Seasons, Blastings, or other accidents) fall under ten Pounds, shall the Owner
be excused from paying ten Pounds? If not, he may see thereby that the charge
lies upon the Lands, not upon the Profits: for what if the Owner make no
Profits at all, that will not destroy the Rentcharge. If he can improve his
forty Pounds a Year to an hundred, he shall pay but ten Pounds out: And if he
should make less then ten Pounds of it, yet ten Pound^ he must pay. This shows
it to be of a quite different Nature from Tithes, and therefore not (as the
Priest suggests) in any danger of being destroyed by the downfall of Tithes.

Having now removed the Priest's Objections, and ^lear'd my Argument against
Tithes from being destructive of Rent-charges, and other sums of Money given to
relieve the Poor, I cannot but take notice of the seeming compassion the Priest
shows of the Poor, and the care he pretends to have of their Rights: And
considering withal, how great a self-interest ^^es at the bottom, it brings to
my remembrance the Story of Judas, Ioh. 12. 3, 4, 5. and the account the holy
Penman gives of him, ver. 6. viz. This he said, Not that he cared for the
Poor, but because -- etc.

17. The next thing the Priest quarrels with, is a Position (he says of mine)
That Tithes are a greater Burden than Rents.

This he pretends to take out of page 343. of my Book, in which there is no
such. Possibly he might deduce it from my Arguments in that place: but then he
should have so represented it, and not have called it my Position. The truth
is, the Position is in it self so (...) (saving that it seems to make Rents a
Burden, which simply they are not) that I cannot but like and defend it; though
I blame his over-forward and unwelcome boldness in making Positions for me. But
hear what he says to this Position, of his own making, page 199. It would seem
a Paradox, that Two Shi^^ings is a greater Burden than Twenty, but only that
nothing is so easy, but it seems difficult, when it is done unwillingly.

As he has stated it, it may well seem a Paradox: but state it aright, and it
will not seem any Paradox at all. It is not the unwillingness in paying, but
the injustice in requiring, that makes the payment a Burden. In claims equally
unjust, the greatest Claim is the greatest Burden: but where one Claim is just,
and the other unjust (as in the case of Rent and Tithes) the unjust Claim is the
greatest burden, be the sum more or less. Two Shillings exacted where it is not
due, is a greater burden than twenty Shillings demanded where it is due. Two
Shillings for nothing is a greater burden, than Twenty Shillings for Twenty
Shillings-worth. This is no Paradox at all, but plain to every common capacity.
And thus stands the case between Tithes and Rents. Tithes are a Burden, because
they are not just, not duc: Rents are not a Burden, because they are just, they
are due. Tithes are a Burden, because they are exacted (of the Quakers at
least) for nothing: Rents are not a Burden, because they are demanded for a
valuable consideration. Thus his Paradox is opened.

But he is highly offended with me, for saying, I doubt not but, if every
Englishman durst freely speak his own sense, Nine parts of Ten of the whole
Nation would unanimously cry, TITHES ARE A GREAT OPPRESSION. This has so
incensed him, that, not able to contain, he calls me a seditious Libeller
(forgetting perhaps, that his own Book is nameless) and says, page 200. T. E.
not content to discover his own base humor, measures all men's Corn by his own
Bushel; and (as it is the manner of such as are Evil themselves) he fanci^s all
men pay their Tithes with as ill will as the Quakers, and impudently slanders
the whole Nation.

I step over his Scurrillity and ill Language, and tell him, first, If this be,
as he says, a Slander, himself has made it a tenth part bigger than it was,
by stretching it to All men and the whole Nation, which he himself acknowledges
wa^ spoken of but nine parts of the Nation. I did not say All men and the whole
Nation would call Tithes a great Oppression: for I suppose some, in a devout
mistake, may be as ready to pay, as the Priest is greedy to receive them.
Secondly, I am not at all Convinced that it is a Slander, but do believe it a
real Truth. And though he says, Common experience proclaims me a Liar herein,
there being very few Parishes, where Nineteen parts of Twenty, do not pay their
Tithes freely as any other due.

I dare appeal to eighteen parts of his Nineteen, whether this be true or no.
But since it is hard to take a right measure of Peoples freedom and willingness
herein, while the Lash of the Law hangs over them, it were greatly to be wished
that our Legislators, in whose power it is to decide the doubt, would be
pleased to determine the Controversy, by taking off those Laws and Penalties,
by which the People are compelled to pay Tithes, and leave them wholly free in
this case, to exercise their Liberality toward their Ministers, as God shall
incline and enlarge their Hearts. And truly if the Priest dislikes this
Proposition, it is a very great Argument, either that he does not believe what
himself said but now (viz. that nineteen parts of twenty pay Tithes freely) or
that he does greatly distrust the goodness of his Ministry.

At length he takes notice of the Reason^ I gave why Rents are not a Burden as
Tithes. The first Reason he thus gives, The Tenant has the worth of his Rent
of the Landlord, but of the Priest he receives nothing at all. To this says
he, I answer, The Heir of an Estate charged with a perpetual payment to the
Poor, receives nothing from the Poor to whom he pays the Money; yet this is no
Oppression, page 201.

Though the Heir receives nothing from the Poor, yet he receives the Estate
which is so charged, under that Condition of paying so much Money to the Poor,
which Estate otherwise he should not have had. The He^^ then does not pay for
nothing, although he has nothing from the Poor to whom he pays; for he has
that very Land in consideration, on which the payment to the Poor is charged.
Thus the Heir is safe. Then for the Tenant, he is not at all concerned in the
matter (unless it be by private contract) it goes out of the Landlord's Rent,
not out of the Tenant's Stock. And if the Tenant, by the Landlord's o^der, pays
it to the Poor, he does it in his Landlord's name, by whom it is accepted as so
much Rent paid. But Tithe is quite another thing. For first, the Heir does not
receive the Land under condition of paying Tithe, nor forfeits ^e the Land for
not paying it, neither is Tithe charged upon the Land, as the payment to the
Poor is, (of which see before, Chap. 5. Sect. 5. and Sect. 13.) Then secondly,
The Tenant is liable to the payment of the Tithe, not out of his Rent, but out
of his Stock, over and above his Rent and the Landlord is not concerned about
it, unless any private agreement antecede. Thus it appears his Instance of a
Rent charge to the Poor is quite beside the business, and his Answer is no
Answer to the Reason I offered.

But he seems to have another. Again, says he, The Tenant receives as much
from God, as he does from his Landlord: for we think, that Land is not more
necessary to the increase, than God's blessing, ibid.

Nor so necessary neither, say I, since increase may be without Land, but not
without God's blessing. The Tenant therefore receives more from God, than he
does from his Landlord: for from his Landlord he receives Land only, and that
upon a Rent; but from God he receives All he has, his Stock, his Crop, his
Health, his Strength, etc. and that freely. As therefore he receives All from
God, so unto God ought All to be returned. God's wisdom, counsel and holy fear
ought to be waited for, and regarded in disposing and employing those things,
which God has been pleased to give. But what is this to the Priest or to
Tithes? Why, says he, upon that consideration our pious A^c^stors obliged their
H^irs forever to give God his part of the Pr^fits, because both they and their
Heirs were Yearly to receive all their Increase from his Blessing, ibid.

What is God's part of the Profits? If all the Increase be received from his
blessing, how comes he to have but a part of the Profits? Where has God, under
the Gospel, declared the tenth part parti^ularly to be his? or who had power to
assign that p^rt to him that is Lord of all? He urges for a Law, the saying of
King Edward the Confessor, Of all things which God gives, the tenth part is to
be restored to him, who gave us the nine parts together with the tenth, page
202.

Whence ^dward the Confessor learnt that Do^trine, may easily be guessed, if we
consider in what time he lived. Speed says he was Crowned King of England in
the Year 1042. And says the Author of the Conference, in his Vindication, page
277. Mo^^ of the present evil Opinions of the Church of Rome, had their
Original in those unlearned Ages, from about the Year 700. to about the Year
1400. About the midnight of which darkness, there was scarce any Learning left
in the World; -- These (says he) were the unhappy times, which bred and nursed
up Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images, Purgatory, (...) all the Fanatical
Visions and Revelations, Miracles, etc. Then began Shrines, Pilgrimages,
Relics, purchasing of Pardons, and the Popes attempts for a^ universal
Monarchy. And though he here mentions some particulars, yet he said but a few
Lines before, At the same time (that Learning fell into decay) all manner of
Corruptions crept into the Church, etc. Now according to his computation of
time (for the Rise and growth of Popery, and of all manner of Corruptions) from
about the Year 700. to about the Year 1400. his midnight of Darkness must fall
about the Year 1050. and this K. Edward the Confessor entering his Reign in the
Year 1042. it is manifest that this Law of his for Tithes was made in the very
midnight of Darkness. Hence the Reader may observe, that although this K.
Edward, to whom (as Camden observes (Brittania, page 377.) our Ancestors and
the Popes vouchsafed the Name of St. Edward the Confessor, was a man of great
justice, temperance and virtue, but especially Continency (for which it seems,
in that incontinent Age, he was Sainted) yet that he learnt this Opinion (of
the tenth part being due to God) in the midnight of Darkness, when there was
scarce any learning^ est in the World, when all manner of Corruptions were
either crept or creeping into the Church, and wherein most of the present ^vil
Opinions of the Church of Rome had their Original; which makes the quotation
not much for the Priest's credit. And truly, if it had been, as he intimates,
an act of Piety in our Ancestors to give Tithes and that upon that
consideration, that both they and their Heirs were Yearly to receive all their
Increase from God's blessing: they had done I think but equally, to have left
their Po^^erity at liberty, to have acted in like manner from the Impressions
of Piety, rather than for the necessity of Paternal Obligations, supposing
their Injunctions (in this case) obligatory. As for what the Priest here takes
for granted, that the tenth is God's peculiar part, it is but an old Popish
Opinion (by which the World has been too long gulled) which never was, nor
ever can be proved, with respect to Gospel Times. And to be sure, when ever he
pleads God's Right, he makes himself God's Steward and Receiver. He says here,
Now the Priest is but God's Steward and Receiver; and if it were true, that the
Tenant did receive nothing from the Steward of God, yet he might justly pay him
Tithes for his Masters sake, from whom he receives all.

There were some of Old, who, with as much con^idence and little Truth,
affirmed themselves to be the Children of God, as this Priest does, that he and
his Brethren are God's Stewards and Receivers. But the Answer which Christ gave
unto them, John 8. 44. is very observable, and no less applicable. The Tenant
(says the Priest) receives nothing from his Landlords Steward, and yet he pays
his Rent to him, or to any other whom his Landlord assigns to re^eive it.

True: but two things first he makes himself sure of. One, that the sum
demanded is indeed his Landlords due. The other, that the person demanding is
indeed his Landlord's Steward, or by him assigned to receive it. The Tenant,
though he pays his Rent to the Steward, contracts with the Landlord; and if at
any time any doubt arises about the Rent, they rec^^^ to the Lease for
Decision. Now if the Priest would make any advantage of his S^mile, he should
prove if he could) that God has any where declared under the Gospel the tenth
to be his peculiar part, which the Priest has often b^g'd a Concession of, but
has no way to prove: for if we have recourse to the holy Records, the
Scriptures of the New Testament, from thence to be sure he can fetch no proof
that Tithes are God's peculiar part, since by his own confession, page 67.
Tithes are not mentioned in the Gospel or Epistles to be the very part.
Besides, the Tenant, though the Rent be certain and acknowledged, is not
forward, if wi^e, to part with his Money to every one that calls himself a
Steward, and takes upon him to be his Landlord's Receiver. But he expects a
plain and satisfactory proof that the Person so pretending is indeed deputed by
his Landlord to that service. Now then, if, according to this Simile, the
Priest would say or do any thing to the purpose, let him first prove Tithes or
the Tenth part to be Gods peculiar due under the Gospel; and when that shall be
agreed on, we will, if he please, in the next place examine his Deputation, and
see how well he can make it appear that God has appointed him for his Steward
and Receiver. In the mean time his precarious and petitionary Pleas are neither
helpful to him nor creditable to his Cause.

But (he says, page 202.) after all this, the Quaker is a notorious Falsifier,
in saying, The Tenant receives nothing from the Priest: for he receives his
Prayers and his Blessing, his Preaching, and other Administrations.

If the Tenant be a Quaker, the Priest is a notorious Falsifier; for he knows
full well the Quaker receives none of all these of the Priest. The Quaker does
not be^ieve the Priest's Prayers or his Preaching either to be worth receiving.
And for his Blessing, as the Quaker does not desire it, so he is so far from
receiving it, that he seldom goes without his Curse. Then for his other
Administrations (as he calls them) it is well known, they that receive them, pay
roundly for them over and beside their Tithe.

He comes now to my second Reason, which he thus gives, page 203. Rent is a
voluntary Contract, and volenti non sit injuria; but Tithe is not voluntary
now, but taken by force. To this he thus answers, Very good! By this Rule then
it appears, that Tithes are not (as he falsely affirmed but now they were) a
general Oppression: for the generality pay them willingly; and many Thousands
contract with their Landlord and their Parson to pay them as voluntarily, as
they do to pay their Rents.

That the generality pay Tithes willingly, is a confident Assertion
contradicted by common experience, scarce any one thing producing so many Suits
at Law, and so much strife and contention as Tithes. In one sense I confess
they may be said to pay willingly; that is, they are willing to pay the Tenth,
rather than have three Tenths taken from them. So that being under a necessity
of bearing one, they choose that which they take to be the lightest Burden, and
least Suffering. And if in this sense he means they pay willingly and contract
voluntarily; such Contracts and Payments are much-what as voluntary as a
Traveller's delivering his Purse to an Highway Man p^esenting a Pistol to his
Breast: Or as some Schoolboys putting down their own Breeches, not out of any
great willingness sure, they have to be Whipped, but because they had rather by
that means come off with three lashes, than by refusing so to do, suffer three
times as many.

But says the Priest, ibid, All things are not Oppressions that are paid
involuntarily; for some Knaves will pay no just dues to any without compulsion,
etc.

It is not the unwillingness to pay, that makes the Oppression; but the
injustice and inequality of the payment. Just dues are no Oppression: but his
supposing Tithes a just due, is a begging of the Question. Rent is a just and
equal payment, for which the Tenant receives the value of what he pays. And
t^ough the Priest says, page 205. No doubt the Quakers could ^ish rather there
were no Rent to be paid neither, and they voluntarily covenant to pay Rent,
because they cannot enjoy the Farm without that charge.

Yet no doubt he is conscious to himself that he slanders the Quakers in this
also: for it is very well known the Quakers are as willing to pay their Rents,
(or any other just d^es) and are as good Tenants to their Landlords, as any
others are, to say no more. The Quakers know Rents to be just and reasonable:
and they do not desire to reap the benefit of other men's Lands for nothing, as
they are not willing the Priests should reap the benefit of their Labor for
nothing. In short, the Quakers do Conscientiously pay Rents (and all other just
dues) from a Principle of equity and justice; as well as from the same
Principle they do Conscientiously refuse to pay Tithes, which are against
Equity and Justice.

The Priest undertakes to make it appear, that the Quakers did voluntarily
contract to pay Tithes. If (says he, page 204.) Tithes be not mentioned in the
contract, then the Laws of England suppose that the Tenant consents to pay them.

This is a supposition of his own supposing, which he grounds upon this Reason,
that Tithes are a known charge upon all Land; whereas Tithes (as I have proved
before) are a charge upon the Stock, not upon the Land, and are paid out of the
Profits of the Stock, not ^ut of the Rent of the Land. But if Tithes were a
charge upon the Land, as Rent-charges, Annuities and other customary Payments
are, they would then issue out of (...) Rents, and the Landlords, not the
Tenants, would be (...) ^hereto. Thus his Reason being removed, (...)
Supposition ^alls together with what was built upon it.

18. In his next Section the Priest says, T. E. comes ^o his last Reserve.

I wish be were come to his last Falsehood, that after that I might expect Truth
from him. That which he calls my last Reserve he thus gives, page 205. viz.
That Tithes were really purchased by the owners of Estates: for which he quotes
page 344. of my Book, and gives this for my proof, viz. They purchased all that
was not excepted out of the Purchase: but Tithes were not excepted; therefore
the Purchasers bought them, and may sell them again; and says, If I can make
this out, this alone will do my business.

Although I doubt not this passage in my former Book will give satisfaction to
any indifferent Reader, yet seeing the matter is proposed anew, I will
^ndeavour to open it a little further. First therefore I desire the Reader to
consider What it is the Purchaser buys. 2. What it is Tithes are demanded of.
The Purc^aser buys the Land, and that he buys entire: no Tythe-Land, no tenth
Acre is ever excepted expressly or implicity; but he buys the whole Field or
Farm, the tenth part as well as the nine. But in this Purchase he buys the
Land, not the Profits or Increase which by Husbandry and Manuring may arise
upon the Land in time to come; for they are uncertain, and the seller who makes
him an Assurance of the Land, will not undertake to assure him a future
Increase and Profit from the Land; nor were it reasonable to expect it. Since
then this is a Purchase of Lands which the Priest does not lay any claim to,
let us next enquire what it is the Priest demands Tithes of. The Priest himself
shall answer this, who in his Right of Tithes, page 196. says expressly, We
grant to T. E. Tithes are due out of the Profits only; and therefore if God
give no Increase, or the Husbandman have nothing grow, we expect no Tithe at
all. Hence then it is clear he claims no Tithes of that which the buyer has
thus purchased; he lays no claim to any part of the Land. Thus far then the
Buyer has purchased all, the whole, every part: and the Priest does not so
much as pretend a Right to any of the Land he has bought. Now then let us come
to the other purchase (if I may so call it) that out of which the Priest claims
Tithes, viz. the Profits and Increase. Of this in my former Book, page 345. I
said thus, When he has this Land, if he will have Profit and Increase from it,
he must purchase that after another manner. He pays for that (and many times
dear enough too) by the Labor and Charge he bestows in Tilling, Dressing and
Manuring it. And if in this sense he may be said to purchase the nine parts of
the Crop or Increase, in the same sense he purchases the tenth part also: for
he bestows his Charge and Pains on all alike; and the tenth part stands him in
as much as any one of the nine. Thus then the Buyer first purchases the Land:
and afterward the Occupier, whether Owner or Tenant, purchases the Crop. The
one buys the Land by laying down so much Money: the other obtains the Crop by
bestowing so much Charge, and so much Labor, etc And as in the purchase of the
Lands, the Buyer does as really buy the tenth Acre, or tenth part of the Lands,
as the ninth, or any other part of the nine: so in the purchase of the Crop,
the Occupier does as really purchase the tenth part of the Profits and
Increase, as he does the ninth, or any other part of the nine; and after the
same manner he lays his Dung on all alike, he sows his Seed on all alike, he
Plows all alike, he bestows his Pains and Charge, and exercises his Skill and
Care equally on all. Thus it appears that Tithes are really purchased by them,
by whom the nine parts are purchased, and do really belong to them to whom the
nine parts do belong; whether Tithes be understood of Lands, or of Profits. If
of Lands, the Purchaser does as really buy the tenth Acre, as any of the nine,
and gives as much for it: Nor does the Priest claim any Property therein. If of
Profits, the tenth Sheaf, or tenth part of the Crop, does cost the Occupier as
much to the full, as any other of the nine parts. Now seeing the Priest says,
If I can make out this, this alone will do my business: I hope the Reader will
find it here so plainly made out, that he will be satisfied my business is done.

What the Priest urges as the Opinions of some Lawyers concerning Tithes, is of
the less weight, because they are grounded on this Mistake, That Tithes are of
Divine Institution; which Error has misled too many. His Reflections on me (of
Insolence and Novice) I regard not at all; but pass from his Railing to see if
I can find any Reason from him. He puts a Case (page 206.) thus, A. purchases
an Estate in B, of C, the Tithes whereof are impropriatc, and belong to D: Now
will the Quaker say that A. purchases D' s Estate in the Tithes, without his
Knowledge or Consent, by virtue of the general words in the Co^veyance from C?

He takes for granted what I deny, viz. that the Tithes belong to D. The Tithes
belong to the Occupier of the Land, to him to whom the other nine parts belong;
and he has the same Right, in Justice and Equity, to the tenth part as to the
other nine. If C. sells his land, what is that to D? D. does not claim the
Tithe of that land, nor pretend a Right to any part of it. What Wrong does C.
do then to D. in this sale? or how can C. be taxed with selling D's Right,
whenas D. neither has, nor pretends to have, a Right to any part of the Land
which C. sells? The Claim that D. makes is not to the Tithe of the land, but to
the Tithe of the profits; which Profits C. neither did sell nor could. But
after A. has bought the Land, he must to purchasing a new for a Crop, if he
expects to have one; else he may be sure to go without. He therefore to obtain
a Crop, lays out his Stock, bestows his Labor, takes Pains and Care, early
and late; and in due time, by God's Blessing upon his honest Endeavors,
receives a Crop, sometimes with Advantage, sometimes with Loss. But although
the Priest says (page 196.) Tithes are due out of the Profits only, yet
whether there be gain or loss, whether there be increase or decrease, whether
there be profit o^ no profit; no sooner is the Crop made ready, but in steps
the Priest or Impropriator, and sweeps the tenth part of it clear away;
although A. had laid out his Money and Labor upon all the parts of his Crop
alike, had paid as dear for the tenth part as for any of the nine, and has
thereby, in Justice and Equity, as good a Right to that which is thus taken
from him, as to any of the rest which is left behind. Thus the Priest's Case
being opened and answered, it appears that neither A. nor C. do any Wrong to D;
but that D. does Wrong to A. in taking from him that which he has honestly
ear^ed and dearly paid for. And now the Priest may return, if he please, to his
A. B. C. anew.

But he says, The Quaker fraudulently leaves out those words of the Conveyance
which would have discovered his Knavery in this false Assertion.

I thus expressed the words of the Deed, viz. That the Seller doth'grant,
bargain, sell, etc. ALL that, etc. with its Appurtenances, and EVERY PART and
parcel thereof (the tenth, said I, as w^ll a^ the nine) and also ALL the
Estate, Right, T^tle, Interest, Property, Claim and Demand whatsoever, etc.
There (says the Priest) he stops with an (...) ^^cause his shallow Reader
should not see what follows in the Deed, viz. [ Estate, Right] -- which I the
said A. have or ought to have in the Premises: which words (says he) do
manifest, that the Purchaser buys no more Estate or Right than the Seller had
to or in the Premises, p. 208.

He must doubtless have been a shallow Reader indeed, that should have thought
I intended the Purchaser had bought more of the Seller, than the Seller had to
sell; and I take it to be no Argument of the Priest's depth to suggest it. The
Seller had a sufficient Right to the whole Estate, to every foot of the Land he
fold; and the Buyer has the same.

But (saye^ the Priest) the Seller did not purchase the Tithes himself, nor did
they descend to him from his Ancestors, etc.

Tithes are not claimed of the Land, but of the Profits only, or of the yearly
increase of renewing, which the Occupier of the Land purchases another way. If
the Seller, before he sold, had the Land in his own Occupation, he then
purchased the Tithes himself, as much as he did the other nine parts of his
Crop. But to talk of Tithes descending from Ancestors, argues the Priest does
not well understand what it is himself claims. Tithes did descend to the Seller
from his Ancestors, as much as the other nine parts of the Profits. But neither
one nor the other can properly be said to descend from the Ancestors to the
present Possessor, seeing both the nine parts and the tenth are the yearly
increase, produced (instrumentally) by the yearly Labor, Charge and Care of
the present Possessor. That which descends to a man from his Ancestors, is what
his Ancestors were possessed of, or had a Right unto: But no man's Ancestors
could be possessed of, or have a Right unto those Profits of yearly increase
which in their times were not in being, but are since produced by the Labor
and Charge of another.

But he says, page 209. If T. E. would know the Reason why Tithes are not
excepted in the Purchase by name, as Free Rents and Rent Charges sometimes are,
I answer, (says he) Free Rents and Rent Charges, etc. are laid upon Land by
private Contracts, and could not be known (unless they were by Name excepted)
to be due out of such an Estate: whereas Tithes were a public Donation, etc.

This with some may pass for a Reason; but if he were willing to give the true
Reason, he knows that as Free Rents and Rent Charges are laid upon Land, and
are paid out of the Rent of the Land, without regard to the Increase that is
made: so the Burden of Tithes lies upon Stock, and is due (as he says) out of
the Profits only (without regard to the Rent of the Land) which Profits are the
Improvement of the Husbandman's Stock, through God's B^essing on his
industrious Diligence and Labor: It were very improper therefore to except
Tithes out of a Purchase of Land, seeing Tithes are not charged on the Land,
nor claimed of the Land.

19. He quarrels next with a Demonstration of mine, the occasion whereof was
this. The Author of the Conference, page 156. said, Though the Tenant pays
Tithes, yet are they no inconvenience to him, because he pays less Rent in
Consideration thereof. To show the Fallacy of this Position, I urged that if it
should be granted, that the Tenant pays less Rent in consideration of Tithes
(which yet I said is questionable) yet the aba^e^ent, which ^e is supposed to
have in Rent, is not proportionable or answerable to the value of the Tithes he
pays; and thus I undertook to demonstrate it. Suppose a Landlord lets a Farm
for 90 l. a year, which if it were Tythe-free would yield 100 l. the Tenant, to
pay his Rent, defray all his Charge of Husbandry, and have a comfortable
Subsistence and Maintenance for himself and his Family, must (according to the
computation of skilful Husbandmen) by his Care, Industry and Labor, together
with the Employment of his Stock, raise upon his Farm three Rents, or three
times as much as his Rent comes to, which will make 270 l. and the tenth part
of 270 l. is 27 l. so that if the Tenant should have 10 l. a year abated in his
Rent because of Tithes, and he pays 27 l. a year because of Tithes, then does
he pay 17 l. a year in 90 l. more than he is supposed to be allowed in his
Rent. Against this the Priest both cry out, and make no little Noise. And
first, the Author of the Conference in his Vindication, page 321. would ^ain
from hence infer, That Tenants have really Abatements in their Rents in lieu of
Tithes: and therefore having first (to show how copious he can be in
Scurrilities, and what variety of ill Language he has to express himself by)
said, I perceive the Quaker begins to sneak; he adds, An Abatement it seems
there is.

But how does it seem there is an Abatement? why he is willing to turn my [if]
to an [is] and strain a Position out of my Supposition. But these shifts
discover the strait he was in, and how near he was sinking, that would catch at
such a twig to hang by. Then he excepts at the Demonstration for uncertainty,
because I did not say whether the Farm of 90 l. a year consisted in Tillage, or
in Pasturage: yet he acknowledges, that the Tithes of a Farm of that value (90
l. a Year) consi^^ing in Tillage may be worth 27 l. a year. On the other hand,
the other Priest, in his Right of Tithes, page 212. says, I believe all the
Parsons in England would compound with the Quakers after this rate that the
Landlord allows (that is, supposing the Landlord did really allow 10 l. in 100
l. Rent.) And in page 213. he says, What Parson did ever receive 27 l. per
annum for a 90 l. Farm? Experience, says he, teaches us, that -- we scarce
every get so much as 20s. for 10 l. Rent, unless where there is very much Corn,
but take the Church Livings one with another, and there is not above 9 l. a
Year made of a Farm upon the improved Rent of ninety Pound per annum.

Thus they contradict one another. Neither is this last Priest any more
consistent with himself: for among the reasons he gives why they scarce ever
get so much as 20 s. for 10 l. Rent, he mentions ill payments, and conc^alment;
forgetting it seems, that he had said but a few Leaves before, There are very
few Parishes, where nineteen parts of (...) do not pay their Tithes freely as
any other dues, page 200. How ill do these two sayings hang together! Nineteen
parts in twenty pay their Tithes fr^^ly as any other d^es, and yet the Priests
can scarce ever get so much as 20 s. for 10 l. Rent, by reason of ill ^ayments
and conc^alment. Thus he contradicts himself, as before he did his Brother. But
he says, page 214. I will not like T. E. make suppositions at Random, but give
an Instance of my own knowledge.

It seems then he understood the Case I proposed to be but a supposition, and
accounted it a supposition at random too; yet so little ingenuity had both his
Brother and he, and so much need of Shifts and contriviances, that they were
willing to take this random supposition (as he calls it) for a positive
con^lusion that the Landlord does abate 10 l. in 100 l. in consideration of
Tithes, and make what advantages they could therefrom, as if it were a real
and certain thing. Nay, he thereupon asks if the Quaker be not a Knave, for
putting this 10 l. per annum in his own Pocket, which the Landlord abated in
consideration of be paid.

But did he ever know a Quaker that desired an abatement of Rent in
consideration of Tithe to be paid, or that accepted an abatement from his
Landlord, upon that consideration? If he knows any such, let him not spare to
name him: if not, it will appear his suggestion is both false, and pro^eeded
from an evil mind. The Instance he ^ets against my Supposition, is this, page
214. The Parish of A. yields in Rents to the Landlords at least 1000 l. per
annum: but in the best Years, the Tithes there are not worth 80 l. per annum.

He did warily not to name this Parish, lest he should be convicted of
falsehood. But seeing he says they scarce ever get so much as 20 s. for 10 l.
Rent, unless where there is very much Corn: and that, take the Church Livings
one with another, there is not above 9 l. a Year made of a Farm upon the
improved Rent of 90 l. a Year made of a Farm upon the improved Rent of 90 l. a
year, and gives the Parish of A. for an Instance: to Answer his Instance, I
return him a Case which his Brother Parson gives in his Vindication, page 322.
and says it is a ^eal Case, if they dare believe one another. It is of a Farm
Rented at 30 l. a year, which the Priest himself (as he says) being to purchase
for another chose two Neighbors to view and value. They, comparing it with
other Farms in the same Village, found it worth but 25 l. a year, according to
the Rates that other men paid. This being objected to the Seller, he replied
that he who paid 30 l. a year was discharged from Tithes, whereas he that paid
but 25 l. had Tithes to pay. Hence it appears, that the Tithe of this 30 l. a
year was rated at 5 l. by which proportion (according as the Priest himself
has stated his Case) the Tithes of a Farm of 90 l. a year come to 15 l. So
that the difference is but 6 l. in 15 l. between one Priest's account and the
other's, unless we take in the Parish of A, and then the odds is above half in
half. Some other trifling Objections the Priest urges against my supposed Case,
as first, that I suppose Landlords better than usually they are. Secondly, that
I suppose the Tenants get more profit than any of them actually gain, or then
(says the Priest) it is reasonable they should: for (says he, Right of Tithes,
page 212.) if the Landlord receive only one 90 l. the Tenant has another 90 l.
to repay him for his Charge, Care, and Pains in managing, and a third 90 l. the
Tenant has remaining clear Profit to himself, etc.

He reckons wrong: for if he thinks 90 l. will repay the Tenant his Charge,
Care and Pains in managing a Farm of 90 l. a year in Tillage, and keep his
House beside, he is greatly mistaken; but if he would have it that this 90 l.
will defray his Charge of Husbandry only, and lay the Charge of his
Housekeeping on the third 90 l. which he fancies the Tenant has remaining
clear Profit to himself, he will find that by that time all Household Expenses
are defraid, for the maintaining such a Family as the management of such a Farm
will require, there will not be much clear profit remaining. And yet I think,
how unreasonable soever it may seem to the Priest, all reasonable men will
judge it reasonable, that the Tenant should have some clear profit remaining to
himself, to support him against acciden^^l l^sses, to enable him to exercise
Charity toward others, and to make such necessary provisions for his Family,
as may be suitable to his condition. But not to insist too particularly hereon,
I let the Priest know, that his Brother Parson (the Author of the Conference)
is in this Case on my side, and against him. For he says (in his Vindication,
page 321.) A Far^ of that value (viz. 90 l. a Year) consisting in Tillage may be
worth (as he says, meaning me) 27 l. per an. -- to the Parson. This first,
confirms my computation, namely, that upon a Rent of 90 l. a Tenant had need
make 270 l. how else should the Tithe be worth 27 l. which is but the tenth
part of 270 l. unless the Priest takes more for the Tithe than the full tenth
part of the Profits? Secondly, this shows the falsehood of the other Priest, in
setting the Tithe of a 90 l. Farm at but 9 l. a year. Thus these Priests fall
one against another.

But (says the Author of the Conference) Suppose a Quaker enjoy a Farm of 90 l.
per annum Rent, and the Landlord abate 10 l. a Year in consideration of Tithes.
Or be it questionable whether he abate any thing upon that consideration. I Will
tell you what is not questionable, that the Quaker will pay nothing, and will
pay this neither to the Landlord nor Priest, Vindication, page 323.

This? what this? this abatement? why himself makes it questionable whether
there be any abatement upon consideration of Tithes, or no: and if there be not
an abatement upon that consideration, what has the Quaker to pay? or how is
either the Landlord or the Priest cozened by the Quaker (as he unfairly
suggests one of them shall be s^re to be?) The Landlord is not ^ozened by the
Quaker's not giving Tithes to the Priest: since the Quaker did not receive any
abatement from the Landlord upon consideration of such a gift. Nor would the
Quaker accept an abatement upon those terms, were the Landlord never so willing
to make one. The Landlord, if he has a mind to bestow any thing on the Priest,
may take his own course therein, but the Quaker will have no hand in it. The
Priest is not cozened by the Quaker's not giving him Tithes, and indeed it were
strange to think he should, since in that respect he has nothing to be cozened
of; for the Quaker owes him nothing, nor has any trading with him, by means
whereof he might come into his Debt. Thus neither Landlord nor Priest sustains
any wrong by the Quaker: for the Quaker pays the Landlord du^ly for what he
receive^ of him, according to the contract between them. And if he pays nothing
to the Priest, it is because he owes him nothing, nor receives any thing of
him. But if no gentler word than Cozenage will serve the Priest's turn, I leave
it to the Reader's consideration, whether of the two is in reallity the
Cozener, the Quaker in refusing to give away the tenth part of his Labor and
l^st Profits to the Priest, to whom he knows he owes nothing, and from whom he
receives nothing: or the Priest in getting away, by one means or other, the
tenth part of the Quaker's Crop, and yearly Increase of his St^ck and Labor,
for nothing. But to return to the other Priest, Author of the Right of Tithes.

20. He in his 42. Sect. page 215. frames a Quotation out of page 347. of my
Book, and gives it thus. The Landlord's dealing is far more merciful than the
Priest's; for the Landlord allows two parts to the Tenant for his Charge and
Subsistence; but the Pri^st takes the full tenth part of the Increase of the
whole Farm, and leaves the poor Farmer no consideration for his Toyland Charge.
To this he gives several sorts of Answers, whereof the first is this, That
there are few Landlords who take so little Rent as one part of three, and few
Priests get so much as a full tenth part of all manner of Profits: so that
(says he) this Argument is faulty on both sides, and halts on both Legs.

To the first part of this [v^z. That there are few Landlords who take so
little Rent as one part of three] his Brother Priest shall Reply for me, who in
his Vindication, page 321. says, A Farm of 90. l. a year consisting in Tillage
may be worth ^7. l. a year to the Parson. That it cannot be, unless it be worth
270 l. ^ year to the Tenant, which being thrice as much as the Rent, plainly
shows the Landlord takes no more then one part of three. To the latter part
[viz. That few Priests get so much as a full tenth part of all manner of
Profits] this Priest himself shall Answer himself, who in his Right of Tithes,
page 200. says, There are very few Parishes, where nineteen parts of twenty do
not pay their Tithes freely as any other Dues. If this be true, then there are
very few Parishes, wherein the Priests do not get of nineteen parts of twenty
the full tenth part of all manner of Pr^fits: for what should hinder their
getting it of all them that pay Tithes so freely! Thus, if this Priest dares
believe his Brother Priest for the first part, and himself for the second, he
will find my Argument is not faulty on either side, no^ halts on either Leg;
but that his Brother and himself, by their often interfering, and hitting one
Leg against the other, are themselves become lame, and halt of both Legs.

Another Answer that he gives is this, The very same thing is done in
Annuities, Free Rents, Rentcharges, Donations to the Poor, etc. the Money is
paid entire, and no satisfaction is made to the Oc^upant for his pains in
raising it; yet none ever called these Oppression, till T. E. appeared, page
216.

Here he thwarts himself again. He said but in page 201. There are some indeed
who cry out against all public Payments; and these do call not only Tithes,
but the Landlord's Rents, and Assesments to the King, and R^lief to the Poor,
great Oppressions. What could he have said more plainly opposite to his other
Sentence! Though for my part, I do not believe he spoke Truth in this
Assertion, nor that he is able to prove it by any Instance: Nor should I have
thought it worth mentioning, but to let him see, that when men take the liberty
to write any thing, true or false, they seldom come off without contradiction
and shame. But to pass by his Contradictions (which are too common with him to
be much taken notice of) let us examine his Answer. He says, in Annuities,
Free-Rents, Rent charges and Donations to the Poor, the Money is paid entire,
and no satisfaction made to the Occu^ant for his pains in raising it.

This is false. For if the Occupant be the Owner, he receives the Land under
the Condition of such Payments, and the Inheritance is satisfaction to him: but
if he be but T^nant, he either is not at all concern'^ in those payments, (but
the Landlord discharges them out of his Rents or otherwise) or if by contract
he pays them at all, it is but as part of his Rent, for which he has
proportionably the same satisfaction from his Crop, as he has for the other
parts of his Rent.

Another Answer he gives thus, ibid. We labor Spiritually for them, who take
bodily pains for us: and indeed the Parishioners give us nothing at all; but
only this Pains they take in making God's part ready.

Does he think that nineteen parts of twenty in most Parishes, or nine parts
either, believe Tithes to be God's part, or make it ready as such? Let him not
so deceive himself. The World has been too long gulled already with such
pretenses; which might pass for current in former Ages, when Darkness covered
the Earth, and gross Darkness the People: but now that light is broken forth,
which discovers they are but counterfeit, and as really false as seemingly
fair. His Triple Plea of Divine, Donative and Humane Right (which here again he
mentions) taken out of the Triple Crown (I mean derived from a Popish Power) is
already so fully Answered in several parts of the foregoing discourse, that it
would be improper here to discuss them again. But seeing he says, We (the
Priests) labor Spiritually for them, who take bodily pains for us.

If^ he speak it with respect to the Quakers, I must take the liberty to tell
him, he speaks that which is not true: for the Priests do not labor
Spiritually for the Quakers, but in an evil Spirit do often labor against
them, through Coveto^sness and Envy, casting them into Prison, and spoiling
them of their Goods for Nothing: by which means many industrious Families,
being stripped of those necessaries, which by the blessing of God on their
honest Labors and diligent Endeavors were provided for their subsistence,
have been reduced to great wants, and became Objects of good Men's Charity, as
well as Examples of the CLERGY's CRUELTY. And hence have the groans of many a
distressed Widow, and the Cries of many a Fatherless and helpless Child (made
so by the Priests means) entered the Ear of the God of vergeance, who certainly
will repay. With respect then to the Quakers the Priest's Position is false;
and ^ruly with respect to his own Hearers the reason of it will not hold. For
supposing him to labor Spiritually for them, as they take bodily Pains, for
him, yet inasmuch as he is not tied to any certain proportion of Labor for
them (for though the Priest^ preach and pray by the Hourglass, yet I never
heard they were strictly bound to make their Prayer or Sermon just an Hour
long, neither more nor less) there is no reason they should be tied to a
certain proportion and quantity of Labor for him (which they are, when the
exact tenth is required of them) but that they should be free, and at liberty
in their labor for him, as far at least as he is in his labor for them. But
he says, ibid. If our Ancestors enjoined their S^ccessors to give the Priest
the tenth part without his taking Pains, it was no more injustice in them, than
in King David, who made his part who tarried by the stuff, equal to his who
went down into the Batt^l, 1 Samuel 30. 25.

The Comparison is not equal, nor the Cases alike. David in distributing the
Spoils, ^ispo^ed but of that which was his own: for the Spoils b^longed unto
him, both as he was anointed King, and as he was Captain General of the whole
Army; Therefore we read in the Text, verse 20. And David took all the Flocks,
and the Herds, which they drove before thos^ other Cattle, and said, THIS IS
DAVID's SPOIL. But will any man (pretending to understand himself) say of the
Husband-man's Crop at this day, These are ^thelwolf's Profits, who has been
dead above 800. Years before these Profits were in being? Besides, those 200.
men whom David left at the Brook Bes^r, were not like any of the lazy Clergy,
that through Pride or Idleness refuse to work, expecting to be maintained by
other men's Labors: but they were Fellow Soldiers with the other 400. that
went, a part of the same Army, engaged in the same Service, and set forward
with the rest in the same expedition, and went on together as far as they were
able; but having spent their strength in the three days march from Aphek to
Ziklag before, and now again in a hot Pursuit of the Amalekites, they fainted
on the way, and could not go over the Brook Besor, and therefore were fain to
abide there. How unlike is this to the Case of these Lordly Priests! and how
irrelative to the present purpose!

But, says the Priest, finally, Will T. E. say, It is Oppression in the Priest
to take his full Tenth, and make the Countryman no satisfaction for his Pains?
If this be Oppression then God was the Author (according to T. E.) and the
Levites the In^^ruments of Oppression, since they were ordered to take the full
Tenth without any Compensation, page 217.

That does not follow, nor can be fairly inferred, unless the Priests now were
under the same Circumstances that the Levites were under, unless England were
as fruitful as was the Land of Canaan, unless our Laws and Polity were the same
with theirs, and unless we had as plain and positive a Command to pay Tithes as
the Jews had. Tithes were suited to the state and condition of that Country and
People, and expressly commanded by God: but neither are they at all suitable to
the state and condition of this Country and People, nor any where commanded by
God to be ^ow paid. There was an equality in the Jews paying Tithes to the
Levites, because the Jews enjoyed the Levites share of the land, and every
Fami^ of the other Tribes had their Lot enlarged by the (...) of the Levites
Part amongst them; so that Tithe with them was but a kind of Commutation or
Exchange for Land. But it is not so in England: the Priests here are not
debarred from having Lands as well as other men, but are equally capable of
enjoying temporal Estates, by Descent, Purchase, or otherwise, as the rest of
the people are. Besides, the Land of Canaan was so fruitful, that with less
then half the Charge which the English Husbandman is now at, they frequently
received six or eight, and sometimes ten times as much increase as Lands in
England usually produce; by means whereof they might with more ease pay the
full tenth to the Levites, then the English Farmers now can the twentieth part
to the Priests. These Considerations, duly weighed, will make it evidently
appear, that although Tithes were not an Oppression to the Jews, yet they may
be (and are) so to us, who have neither the same (nor any) Command from God to
pay them, nor the same (nor any) Compensation for them, nor equal ability to
undergo them, as had the Jews. And though the Priest says, The Levites were
ordered to take the full tenth without any Compensation, yet therein he speaks
not the Truth: for they that paid the Tithes had the Levites (...) (viz. those
Lands which would otherwise have f^llen to the Levites share) divided amongst
them: so that they had a Compensation, Lands for Tithes. The Priest's Argument
therefore is fallacious, and his Conclusion utterly false. He infers not
rightly when he says, If it be Oppression in the Priest to take the full tenth,
etc. then God was the Author of Oppression. The Consequence is not true: for in
Canaan, where God was the Author of taking the full tenth, there it was no
Oppression; and in England, where it is a^ Oppression, here God was not the
Author of taking the full tenth. Thus we see, that for the Priest to take the
full Tenth without making the Countryman any satisfaction for his pains, may
be truly called an Oppression, and yet God not be thereby taxed with being the
Author of it. But these gross Absurditie^ the Priest runs himself into by
over-hastily and inconsiderately catching up a wrong Conclusion, that what was
lawful, just and equal between the Jews and L^vites, in the time of the Law,
and in the Land of Canaan only, must need be so in all times and places between
other People and their Priests; not duly weighing the different circumstances
under which the Jews then stood, and others now stand.

Let us hear now how the Priest says the Countryman is compensated for his
pains. S. Augustine says (if the Priest says true) God gives us all the nine
parts, in compensation for our pains, in providing the tenth for him, ibid.

What a pretty Notion is this, neither confirmed by Scripture-Evidence, nor
backed with any Reason. He thought (it seems) S. Augustine's ipse dixi^ would
have passed, but it will not, at least with me. God gives us all the nine
parts, it is true, but not to reward us for providing him the tenth: for he
gives us the Tenth as well as the Nine. And as he gives us all, so he expects
we should use it all in his Fear, and employ it all to his Honor, the nine
parts as well as the tenth, and the tenth part as well as the nine. But he that
thinks God gives him the nine parts upon condition that he shall provide the
tenth for him, may be in danger to be begged, and so lose the nine parts too.

Another Conceit the Priest has to this purpose, which he pretends to fetch
from Sr. Hen-Spelman; and that is of the sacredness of the number Seven, and
that by right God should have had a full se^enth part of our Profits, but that
in compensation for our pai^s he remits three parts, and so is content with a
tenth.

If this be true S. Austine was out: for he (according to the Priest) says, God
gives us all the nine parts, in compensation for our pains, in providing the
tenth for him: But this (taking no notice at all of the nine parts) says, God
gives us back three parts of our Profits in compensation for our pains, and
instead of a seventh, is contented with a tenth part of our Estate. Methinks
the Priest might have considered, before he had brought these two sentences
together, that there is some odds between giving nine parts in compensation for
the pains in providing the tenth, and giving back three parts in compensation
for the pains in providing the seventh; wherein not only the Clai^s, but the
Allowances also for pains, are very disproportionable. However, if (as he
fancies) God did give back to ^he Jews three parts of their profits, in
compensation for their pains; then seeing the Husbandmen here, in many places,
are at well-nigh three times the pains and charge the Jews were at, it might
justly be expected that if God did now require any such Tribute he, who is
perfect Justice, would make his Abat^ments proportionable to the ^ains, which
must necessarily be taken in providing his part, whence the same Reason that is
supposed to have bro^ght it from a sevent^ to a tenth, on account of reward for
pains, would long since have drawn it from a Tenth to a Fifteenth, as a more
a^ple Reward for gr^ater Pains. But leaving these petty Conceits to the
Judgment of those sober men to whom he propounds them, I will go on to that
which the Priest offers as a further Answer yet to my Objection.

I will only add, (says he, page 218.) That the Priest's Payment is more
Merciful then the Landlord's; for the Landlord expects his full Rent, be the
year never so bad, or the Profits never so few or small; but the ^ ri^sts part
cannot exceed the increase; if it be little, he has but little; if God gives
much, the Country^man is a^le to pay more.

The Landlord, I grant, does expect his full Ren^ in bad years, as well as in
good; but he never expects more then his Rent, be the year never so good.
Though he often consider the Tenant's Losses in bad years, yet if the best
years happen within the term of his Contract, he expects no Advance of Rent
thereby. Now, if there were Truth in what the Priest says of his own part, it
were something to the purpose; but alas! it is utterly false.

He says, The Priest's Part cannot exceed the Increase.

It may be he means, it should not; but then the Priests are the more too blam^
in exceeding what they account their part: For certain it is, that where there
is no increase, nay, where there is a plain and manifest Decrease, where the
Crop is not so much as ^le Seed that was sown, even there ^o the Priests aim
and take a tenth part. Now why do they thus, if their part cannot exceed the
increase? Does not this convict them of taking a part where themselves confess
they should have no part? If a man sow twenty Bushels of Wheat, and receive at
Harvest but ten Bushels again, would any man but a Tythe-Taker call this an
increase? Yet these Priest^ have learned new Figures of speech, and will call
it an increase from Twenty to Ten; and though the poor Farmer lose half his
Seed, and all his plowing and other C^arge, (which seldom comes to less than
thirty Shillings an Acre) yet shall he not escape so; the P^iest w^ll have a
Bout with him too, and make him poorer yet, by taking from him the tenth part
of the Remainder of his Decrease. Yea, though the Seed that was sown was tythed
the year before, and has not now produced its own value, yet is it now tythed
over again, and thus the Priest takes Tithes of one thing twice. Judge now,
Reader, if t^is be not Injustice, if this be not Unmercifulness, if this be not
great Oppression. Yet does the Priest sooth up the poor Husbandman, and sawns
upon him with flattering words; I^deed (says he) the Priest is h^reby ob^^ged
to (...) with his Neighbors, since he ^spans^ in their ^ains and Losses, p.
218.

In their Gains to be sure he will be a Sharer, and i^ one respect in their
Losses too, that is, Let them los^ what they will, if they do not lose all, to
be sure he will have a share of what is left, how little soever it ^e. Thus he
has a share in making them lose, to that he sets both his hands; but to bear a
part of the Hu, bandmau's Loss, he will not stretch out the least of hi^
Fingers. Does he bear a share of the Hu^ban^m^n's Loss, who when the Husbandman
reaps but half the Seed he sowed, and loses three times, the value of his Crop
beside, takes from him the tithe of that little that remain^, although it was
tyt^ed the year before, and no increase, but so much los^ upon it since? Such
Sharers in Losses the Husbandman had better be without, than have. Yea, it were
far better for him that the Priest would only share in his Gains, and never
pretend to share in his Losses: for whenever he comes under that pretense, to
be sure he makes him the greater Loser: And yet he cry, The Priest and the
Husbandman ought to have the same care for one another.

If the Husbandman ^ad no more care of the Priest, than the Priest has of the
Husbandman, there would not be so many fat Priests, and lean Farmers, as there
are. The Husbandman in^eed takes care and pains all the year round; but what
case does the Priest take, unle^^ it be, when Harvest comes to get as much from
the Husba^dman as he can? Thus indeed they both take care, though not both the
same Care. The Husbandman's Care inriches the Priest, but the Priest's Care
impoverishes the Husbandman.

21. H^ is loath to confess that the Charge is much gheavier (...) upon the
people, than it was under the Levi^^^al Priesthood; and endeavors to persuade
the contrary by a suppositive Computation of the Charge then, which he borrows
from Godw^n, as he from others; the sum of which is, That the Jewish Husbandman
paid One Thousand Two Hundred and Twenty One Bushels out of Six Thousand, that
is, above a sixth part of his Crop, page 219, 220.

To which I reply, 1 st, That the Computation is doubtful: for it supposes the
Tithe of the whole Crop was to be paid to the Levites, after the First Fruits
were taken out, which the Text seems not to allow. The express words are, Deuteronomy.
^4. 22. Thou shall truly Tithe all the Increase of thy Se^d, that the Field
brings forth year by year. There was the Seed, and the Increase of the Seed.
The ^eed was part of the form^r years increase, and so was tythed before: but
if it should now have been tyt^ed a^ain, together with its own Increase, it
would th^n have been tythed twice. In order then to a right Computation, it
seems the Seed should first be deducted, and the Increase only computed; which
will make a considerable Alteration in the Account: for it must be no very
small quanticy of Seed, that produces 6000. Bushels of Grain.

But 2. This more then a sixth part, as he accounts it, was not all paid to the
Priest^ and (...) appropriated to their Maintenance; but the Fath^rl^ss, the
Widow, and the Stranger were provide^ for out of this. The Husbandman did not
ra^se a (...) to maintain the Poor (as now he (...) to do) b^t this de^rayed
all those Charges, and he and hi^ (...) had their share of it too. But if the
Hu^band^e* now should compute their C^arge, and take an (...) ^^ccount of what
they pay both to the Priest and his Sub-Officers, and also to the Poor upon all
Occasions, I am persuaded many of them would find a sixth part of their Crop
does (...) excus^ them.

Again, 3. The Husb^ndman now pays T^the of many more things t^an the Jews
did, as Hay, Wool, Mi^k, Wood, etc. to omit things of less value, as Honey,
Wax, Eggs, etc. yea the Priests now have the Tithe even of the Husbandman's
Straw and Chaff as well as of his Hay, to the great Damage of the Husbandman,
who often wants these to maintain his Cattle, always to make Dung to keep his
Land in heart.

But 4. If nothing of all this were to be alleged: if the Jews had paid a full
sixth part to the Levit^s, and that for the Levites proper use, and had
undertaken the Relief of Father^ess, Widow and Strangers beside^; and if the
Husbandmen now paid Tythe^ of no more things than what the Jews paid Tithes of,
yet comparing the great Charge and small Increase the Hu^bandman now has, with
the small Charge and great ^ncrease the Jews then ^ad, it will still appear
that the people are under a greater Burden, and the Charge lies heavier on the
people now, who pay the t^nth part to the Priest, than it did, or would have
done on the Jews, had they paid, as they did not, a (...) part to the Levites.

To what I urged before, to prove the Charge heavier on the people now, t^an it
was on the Jews, viz. That the Levit^s having no Inheritance with their
Brethren, the Lots of the other Tribes were the bigger, which was some
Consideration for their Tithes, etc. The Priest answers, That though the
Levites had not any entire Country set out together, yet they had fair
Possessions in every Tribe, having forty eight Cities, with two thousand Cubits
round without the Wall, appointed them by God; which (says he, page 220.) was a
better proportion then our Gl^be-land, and in value might be esteemed the
twelfth part of the Land of Canaan.

He computes strangely to make the Levites Cities with their Suburbs a twelfth
part in value o^ the Land of Canaan. Was that the way for the Levites to have
No Inheritance (Numb. 18. 23, 24.) No Part with their Brethren (Deuteronomy. 10. 9.)
to give them a greater part tha^ any of their Brethren had? For if (according
to the Priest) they had had in Cities and Suburbs a twelfth part in value of
the Land of Canaan; and they were in number (as Seldom computes) scarce a
fiftieth part of the people, they had had a notable Advantage by being (as I
may say) disinherited of the Land, although they had received neither Tithes
nor Oblation^, but those Cities and Suburbs only. But what value soever those
Cities were of, the Levites had them, and that by God^^ a^po^ntment: But by
whose appointment have the Priests now their Parsorage-houses and
Vicarage-houses with their Glebe-lands? or what value may we suppose them to
amount unto? If there be in England and Wales about ten thousand Parish, to
^ach of which a Parsonage or Vicarage-house belongs, these, could they be
reduced into Town, would make as many, and probably as fair, a^ those the
Levites had. For ten thousand Houses divided into forty eight parts, afford
above two hundred unto each: and doubtless two hundred such Houses as most of
these are, with their great Tythe-Barns and other appurtenant Buildings, would
make as la^ge a Town as most, if not as any of them. Then for the Glebe-lands
belonging to these Houses, there is no question but their extent does far
exceed the two thousand Cubits of Land allotted to the Levites round each ^^ty.
For suppose there be but twenty Acres of Glebe-land to every Parsonage or
Vicarage-house one with another, yet that (not to make an exact calc^lation)
casts about four thousand Acres to every two hundred Houses, which probably
would surpass the Limits of the L^vites Suburbs, at least a fourth part. This
in short, only to show, that if the Levites had Houses, and Lands about them,
so have the Priests now also, and that (so far as may be gathered) in much
greater quantity. So that the Levites having Cities and Suburbs does not at all
abate the force of my Argument, but still it appears that the Charge is much
heavier upon the people now, than it was under the Levitical Priesthood: for if
the Levites received Tithes of the people, so do the Priests, and that of more
things than the Levites did; if the Levites had Houses of the people to dwell
in, and some Lands about them for their Cattle, so have the Priests of the
people now, and that (probably) in greater proportion then the Le^ites had.
Thus far then the people now have the worst of it, but much more in that which
follows: for if the Levites had Cities and Suburbs, they had not Inheritances
with their Brethren; they had not those Cities and Suburbs and the Share of the
Land besides. But the Priests now have not only Cities and Suburbs (as I may
call them) but Inheritances also with their Brethren. They have not only Houses
and Lands equivalent at l^ast, if not superior, to what the Levites had, but
their share also of the rest of the Land, being equally capable of holding
Estates by Civil Title, as any other of the people are. And how much soever the
Priests thus possess, so much the less the people have, and so much the heavier
lie^ the Burden on them, than it did upon the Jews. Besides, Let it be
considered what vast Revenues, what great and rich Possessi^ns (sufficient to
de^ray the public Charge of the Nation) are grasped into the hands of
Archbishops, Bishops, Pr^bends, Deans and Chapters, etc. From whence I pray
were these squeezed? was it not from the people? Are not the people hereby
impoverished to make the Clergy rich? Were ever the Jews so served by their
Priesthood? Had their Priests or Levites Lands or Poss^ssions in the Land of
Canaan, besides their Cities and Suburbs? Judge then Reader, whether the Charge
lies not heavier on the people now, than it did under the Levitical Priesthood,
seeing the people now pay more and enjoy less than the Ie^s did.

Then for their Offerings, If the Levites had a part of the Sacrifices, a share
of the Feast, a part of the voluntary Oblations, the first Born of Cattle,
R^tes for the redemption of the first Born of men, and of persons dedicated by
Vow; The Priests now have many more ways of drayning M^ney from the People,
and such as are more burdensome to the People too. In the Sacrifices, Feasts and
voluntary Ob^ations, as the Priests and Levites had a part* so the people also
had their share. But in the Off^rings and Payments which the Priests now claim
and receive, the People have no share at all: so much money is demanded and
paid, with which the Prie^t feasts himself, but the People neither ^at nor
drink for it. But if there happen to be a Feast in the Parish, at a Christening
(as they call it) or any other Gossipi^g Bout, who but the Pars^n there? The
price for Redemption of Persons dedicated by Vow was very uncertain. The Priest
sets down fi^ty Sh^kels, which was the highe^^ ^rice that it could at any time
amount unto. But in other Cases (more likely to happen) the price was sometimes
thi^ty, sometimes twenty, sometimes ^en, sometimes five, and sometimes b^t
three Shekels; and if the Party vowing was poor, then was he to pay (...)
according to his ability, Levit. 27. But these in g^neral happened so rarely,
that little comparatively could come to the Priests thereby. And indeed, if the
many Arts and Engines which the Priest^ have and use, to (...) Mon^y out of the
People by, were reckoned up together (some of which in my former Book, page
349. are presented to the Reader's view) the Jewish Offerings to their Priests
would seem s^all in comparison of what the Clergy now has.

Two pass^ges more out of my Book he quarrels with in this Section, one is,
that Those Tithes and Offerings under the Law maintained all the Officers
belonging to that Taberna^le, so that the People were at no further Charge. To
this he says, page 222. Pray what [All] was there to be maintained? None besid^
the Levites, except the poor Nethinims, who were Gibeonites, and did the
Drudgery of the Temple.

It matters not what [All] there was; It is sufficient that all the Officers
(Priests, Levites and Nethinims) were maintained by those Tithes and Offerings,
and the People not put upon any n^w charge. Whereas now notwithstanding the
heavy Charge the People a^e at in maintaining their Priests, they are fain to
begin again, and make new provisi^n, for the maintenance of the Nethinims of
these times (the Clarks and Sextons, etc.) to do the Priests drudgery, which
the Priests are either too fine or too idle to do themselves, and too Covetous
to pay for doing. This Charge therefore, be it more or less, is so much more
than the Jew: were liable to.

The other passage is, That out of the Tithes under the Law Provision was made,
for the Fatherless, the Widow, and the Stranger, Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29. This, he
says, is another mistake, if I mean these were provided for out of the Levites
Tithe.

He may see what Tithe I meant by the Text I quoted, which speaks of the third
Year's Tithe, thus Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29. At the end of three Years thou shall bring
forth All the Tithe of thin^ Increase the same Year, and shall lay it up within
thy Gates. And the Levite (because he has no part nor Inheritance with thee)
and the Stranger, and the Fatherless, and the Widow, which are within thy
Gates, shall come, and shall eat and be satisfied, etc. Now whether he will
call this the Levites Tithe or no, which was thus to be laid up for the Levite,
Stranger, Fatherless and Widow in common (and was it seems to be ALL the Tithe
of the Increase of that Year) yet to be sure it was included in that, which he
says was more than a sixth part of the Husband-man's Profits. So that those
Tithes which the Husbandman paid, were not for the Maintenance of the Priests
and Levites only, but of the Stranger, the Fatherless and the Widow also; and
the Husbandman was at no further charge. And as Tithes were at first
introduced in this and other Nations, under the specious pretenses of C^arity
and Alms to the Poor, so in the settlement of them in this Nation, especial
regard was had to the Poor, and particular Provision made for their Maintenance
out of the Tithes, as appears by the Statutes of 15 R. 2. 6. and 4. H. 4. 12.
Of the neglect of which, William Thorp (who lived under both these Kings, and
is by Fox recorded for an Holy Confessor of Jesus, though by this Prie^t
branded with the ignominious Name of a Re^egado) thus complains to the
Archbishop of Canterbury; It is now no wonder though the People grudge to give
the Priests the Livelode that they ask. Mekil People now know, how that Priests
should live, and how that they live contrary to Christ and to his A^ostles. And
therefore the People is full heavy to pay (as they do) their tempo^al Goods to
Parsons and to other Vicars and Priests, which should be faithful Dispensators
of the Parish's Goods: taking to themselves no more but a scarce living of
Tithes, nor of Offerings, by the Ordinance of the common Law. For what soever
Priests take of the People (be it Tithe or Offering, or any other duty or
service) the Priests ought not to have thereof no more, but a bare living; and
to depart the residue to the poor Men and Women specially of the Parish of whom
they take this temporal Living. But the most deal of Priests now wastes the
Parishes Goods, and spends them at their own Will after the World, in their
vain Lusts: so that in few places poor men have duly (as they should have)
their own Suste^ance, another of Tithes nor of Offerings, nor of other large
Wages and Foundations that Priests take of the People in diverse manners above,
that they need for needful sustenance of Meat and Clothing: But the poor needy
People are forsaken and left of Priests to be sustained of the Parishioners, as
if the Priests took nothing of the Parishioners to h^lp the People with. And
thus Sir, into overgreat Charges of the Parishioners, they pay their temporal
Goods twice, where once might suffice, if Priests were true Dispensators. Thus
he, Martyr^l. Vol. 1. page 494. By which it does appear that in former times
Tithes were reputed the Parish's Goods (not the Priest's Fre^hold and Property,
as these confident Priests now adays have learnt to talk) of which the Prie^^s
we^e but Dispensators or Stewards, to receive a bare Living for themselves, and
distribute the rest to the poor of the Parish, by which the Parishioners were
exempted from further charge in that respect, till the Covetous Priests took
all to themselves, and shut the Poor quite out; which was gradually done, as by
degrees the payment of Tithes was at first brought in on the Poor* behalf, and
under pretense of relieving the Poor. Nor do I remember I have read of any
other provision made for the Poor, or so much as the Name of Overseer of the
Poor in any of our Statutes mentio^ed, until the Forty Third Year of Q.
Elizabeth, not full Eighty Years ago. For in the beginning of her Reign, Tithes
(under the Name of the Goods of the Church) were reputed the Goods of the Poor,
and a Maintenance for the Poor expected from the Clergy, as appears by the
Injunctions given by the Queen in the Year 1550. of which the Eleventh runs
thus, Furthermore, because the Goods of the Church are called the Goods of the
Poor, and at these days nothing is less seen then the Poor to be sustained
with the same, all Parson^, Vi^ars* P^nsionaries, Prebendaries, and other
beneficed Me^, within this Deanrie, not being resident upon their Benefices,
which may dispend yearly twenty Pounds or above, either within this Deanrie, or
elsewhere, shall distribute hereafter among their poor Parishioners, or other
Inhabitants there, in the presence of the Churchwardens, or some other honest
men of the Parish, the fortieth part of the Fruits and Revenues of their said
Benefice, le^t they be ^o^thily noted of Ingratitude, which reserving so many
parts to themselves, cannot vouchsafe to impart the fortieth portion thereof
among the poor people of that parish, that is so fruitful and profitable unto
them. It appears then, the Poor were maintained out of the Tithes, not only
among the Jews in the time of the Law, but in this Nation also till of late,
that the Priests have j^stled out the poor (whose Names they made use of to get
Tithes by at first) and now ingross all the Tithes to themselves, leaving the
poor upon the Parish's charge. So that the Parish, though they pay their Tithes
never so exactly, and to the full, are fain when that is done to begin again,
and make n^w L^vies upon every man's ^state, to supply the wants of the Poor.
And whether in this respect also, the charge is not heavier on the people now,
let the indifferent Reader judge.

. 22. He spends his next Section in quarrelling with me, for asking Wheth^r it
was not a Pope that set up Parish Priests? The occasion of the Question was
this. The Author of the Conference (as this Priest in his Right of Tithes, page
223. reports him) had given two Reasons why the Apostles took no Tithes: (...)
No^ of the Jews, because their own Priests were in possession of them: 2. Not
of the Gentiles, because of their unfixt Station. To each of these I returned
an Answer in my former Book, page 351. then asked this Question, Seeing the
Apostles state of Life was unfixt, who, I pray, fixed your state of Life? who
divided Provinces into Parishes, and set up Parish Priests? was it not a Pope?
For this Question the Priest derides me with a great deal of scorn, and says
(Right of Tithes, page 224.) Never did any man pretend to (...) of things he
understood so little, as T. E. does of Ecclesiastical matters. This All-knowing
Quaker (says he) does not understand, that the Apostles themselves fixed
Bishops and Pastors in the several Citi^s they had converted, Timothy at
Ephesus, Titus in Crete; giving them Commission to ordain and fix others in
lesser Cities.

He were a knowing man himself, if he were able to prove this. Was Timothy
fixed at Ephesus? Titus in Crete? By whom? The Apostles themselves, he says:
but how does he prove it? He says it, and that is all. Methinks since he judged
I do not understand this, he might have been so courteous to have offered some
proof of it. By which of the Apostles may it be supposed that Timothy and Titus
were fixed (as he expresses) at Eph^sus and in Crete? Paul was as likely to have
been the man, as any other: for by his Ministry they both were converted to the
Faith of the Gospel, with him they seem to have most conversed, and from him
they received those Epistles which are inscribed to them. Yet so far was Paul
from fixing Timothy, or Timothy from being fixed at Ephesus, that we find he
was sent by the Apostle into Macedonia, Acts 19. 22. To Corinth, 1 Cor. 4. 17.
That he was with him at Athens, when he writ to the Thessalonians, 1 Th^s. 1.
1. and 2 These. 1. 1. That he was sent to Thessalonica, 1 These. 3. 2. 6. to
Philippi, Phil. 2. 19. That he was with the Apostle at Rome, when he writ to
the Collossians, Col. 1. 1. In Prison with him there, and released, Heb. 13.
23. and sent for by the Apostle to Rome again, not long before his Death, 2 Timothy 4. 9, 21. So also for Titus, h^ was sent by the Apostle to visit the
Corinthians, afte^ the first Epistle was written to them, 2 Cor. 2. 12 and 7.
6. and 12. 18. went afterward again to visit the C^rinthians, and carried the
second Epistle to them was sent for by the Apostle to come to him to Nic^polis,
where he intended to Winter, Tit. 3. 12. An^ after all this we find him gone
into Dalmatia, 2 Ti^. 4. 10. If these be Arguments of their being fixed at
Ephosus and in Crete, I confess I do not understand what he means by the word
fixed. Will ^e ground the fixation of Timothy at Ephesus, on the words of the
Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 3. (As I besought thee t^ abide still in Ephesus, etc.)
or of Titus in Cr^te, on the words of the same Apostle, Tit. 1. 5. (For th^^
cause left I thee in Crete) he will find them both quickly u^fixt again, and
traveling from Co^^try to Country to visit the Churches, to preach the Gospel,
or to minster to the Apostles; and that after these Epistles were written to
them.

But let us suppose, for the present, his Position to be true [viz. That the
Apostles themselves fixed Bishops and Pastors in the several Cities they had
Converted, Timothy at Ephesus, Titus in Crete, giving th^^ commission to ordain
and fix others in lesser Cities] and see how miserably he wounds himself, and
his Brother too, with his own Weapon. The Apostles, he says, took no Tithes of
the Gentiles, because of their un^^xt Station. Tithes, or any other fixed
Maintenance, was utterly incon^istent with their unfixed state of Life, Confer.
page 157. Yet the Apostles themselves fix^d Bishops and Pastors in the several
Cities they had Converted, Timothy at Ephesus, Titus in Crete, etc. Did ever
man that pretended to understanding so contradict and confound himself! He
gives their unfixt station for the reason why they did not take Tithes, yet in
the same Breath says, Ti^^thy (...) fixed at Ephesus; Titus was fixed in Crete;
the (...) themselves fix^d Bishops and Past^rs in the sever^^ Cities they had
converted. A fixed state then (according to him) it seems there was amongst
them in the several converted Cities, and yet notwithstanding this, their
unfixt state was the reason why they did not take Tithes. (...) the man that in
derision calls me the All knowi^g Quaker. This is he that say^ of me, Never did
any man pretend to write of things he understood so little, as T. E. does of
Ecclesiastical matters, Let him see now, and be ashamed of his own weakness,
and learn for the future to speak wit^ more modesty of others.

He goes on thu^ concerning me, page 224. He knows not how Eusebius and other
Historians, reckon up the very Persons in all eminent Churche^, ^^dained and
fixed there by the Apostles.

Is he sure he speaks Truth in this? How know^ he but that I do know what
Euse^ius, and other Historians, say in this case, as well as himself? wit^out
offense to him be it spoken, I know no reason why I may not. But how much or
little soever I know, I Will assure him I know more both in Eusebius and other
Historians also, than I could ever yet find Faith to believe: and if I mistook
him not, he seemed to be somewhat of the same mind in page 131.

Again, he says, ibid, It will be News to him to tell him, That in the very
beginnings of Christianity, wheresoever the Gospel was once planted, there were
strict Canons made agaisnt the Clergy of one Diocese going into another to
officiate.

This is News to me indeed, and which is worse, false News too. How chance he
quoted no Author of his News? Is not that a sign it is News of his (...) making?
I confess I never heard before, that in the very beginnings of Christianity,
there were any such Canons made, or any such Diocesses, as he dreams of. It
behooves him therefore to set forth his Author, left himself be repu^ed, and
that deservedly, a Raiser and Spreader o^ fals^ News. But in the mean time let
us ^ift his News a little, and see how well it hangs together. He told us but
now, that Tmothy and Titus were fixed at Ephesus and in Crete, and that by the
Apostles themselves (though he does not know by whom) yet we find not only the
Apostle Paul send^ng Tychicus (a dear Brother, and faithful Minister in the
Lord, Ephesians. 6. 21.) to the Ephesians, 2 Timothy 4. 12. But Timothy also at
Corinth, at Athens, at Thess^lonica, at Philippi, at Rome, etc. So likewise for
Titus, whom he fixes in Crete: Does not the Apostle speak of sending Artemas
and Tychicus thither, and of sending for Titus to Nico^^lis, Tit. 3. 12? Does
he not intimate that Zenas and Apollo (one of whom was an Expounder of the Law,
the other an eloquent Preacher of the Gospel) were at Crete, ver. 13? and did
not Titus himself travel up and down into diverse Cities and Countries in the
labor of the Gospel? Was he not at Corinth once and again? an^ went he not
also unto Dalmatia, 2 Timothy 4* 10? Now if Timothy and Titus had been fixed (as he
fancies) at Ephesus, and in Crete; if Bishops and Pastors had been fixed by the
Apostles in all eminent Churches, and in the several Cities they had converted;
and if in those times, in which fell the very beginnings of Christianity, there
had been any such Diocesses as he dreams of, or any such strict Canons, as he
conjectures, made against the Clergy of one Diocese going into another to
officiate; Pray how did Tychicus, Apollo and other^ observe those Canons, when
they went (as they did) to Ephesus and Crete? On how well did Timothy and Titus
obey them, when they went to officiate at Corinth, Thessolonica, Philippi,
Rom^, and other places, which (according to this Priest) were distinct
Diocesses belonging to other men, into which by the Canon they were strictly
forbidden to go to officiate? Does not this discover the emptiness of his
story, and manifest the falness of his News?

But we may guess at his date of Christianity, by the after-Instance he gives
of a Canon of the General Council of Chalcedon, the date of which he willingly
leaves out: but that Council was held (according to Genebrard) under Pope Leo
the first in the Yea^ 454. Was this in the very beginnings of Christianity? No;
nor of the Apostasy from Christianity neither: for much Corruption, both of
Doctrine and Practice, was in the Church before that time. Thus Reader thou
may see what his confident talk, of strict Canons and Diocesses in the very
beginnings of Christianity, is come to. Would any man of honesty, ingenuity or
modesty impose such falsehoods, upon ignorant Readers, or expose such folly to
judicious Eye^!

He talks also page 225. of a Synod among the Britains, held by S. Patrick,
anno 456. but without any mention of Paris^es; and very confidently takes for
granted, that long before the Popes of Rome so much as directed any thing h^re,
the Britains had fixed Archbishops, Bishops and Priests; by which if he means
those Priests were fix^d to Parishes (as now they are) which I observe he does
not expressly say, but only that they were fixed; they may believe it, that dare
take his word for it, but prove it he never can. Seldom in his History of
Tithes, Chap. 9. Sect. 1. shows the contrary. But the division of Parishes
a^ong the Saxons, the Priest ascribes to Honorius the fifth Archbishop of
Canterbury about the Year ^4^. or to Theodor^s (the next b^t one in that Sea)
(...) t^enty or thirty Years after.

Hence I perceiv^ he thinks he has sufficient ground to deride me, for asking
If it was not a Pope that divided Provinces into Parishes, and set up
Parish Priests. Whether Parishes were divided by Honorius, Theodorus, or some
other of later time, I think not worth Inquiery. I know the common Opinion
attributes this work to Honori^s; which yet is doubted by many, and some of
great judgment. It suffices my purpose, that whether Parishes were set out and
Parish Priests fixed thereto, by Honorius or Theodorus, it was done by the
Pope's power: for either of these received his Archiepiscopal Authority from
Rome. Honorius (says Bid, Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 18.) received the Pall of his
Archbishopric from Honorius at that time Pope of Rome, and withal a Letter,
in which the Pope grants to this Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury, and to
Paulinus then Archbishop of York (to whom also he sent a Pall) this power, at
their request, that which soever of them should die first, the surviver might,
by the authority of the Pope's Command, make such an Ordination of another in
his room as should be pleasing to God. This shows they received their authority
from the Pope; and what they acted by that authority, was done by the Pope's
power. If therefore Honorius, as Archbishop of Canterbury divided that
Province into Parishes, and set up Parish Priests therein, it cannot be denied
but those Parishes were divided, and Priests set up, by the Pope, whose
Instrument Honorius was therein, and by whose power it was done. And thus seems
Ca^den* to understand it, in his Brittania, page 100. where* he says, When the
Bishops of Rome had assigned several Churches to several Priests, and (...)
unto them, Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury, about the Year of our Redemption
^36, began (...) to divide England into Parishes, as we read in the History of
Canterbury. So that he refers this Act of Honorius to the Bishop of Rome, not
only in point of power, but of example also. In imitation then of what the
Popes had done, and by virtue of Authority received from the Pope, were these
Parishes set out, and were Parish Priests at first set up, whoever was the
P^pe's Agent therein.

The Priest con^ludes this Section thus; And now (says he) we see T. E. has
neither Learni^g nor Truth in him, who attributes our fixing to a ^ope, when
the Apostles themselves showed the way in this Practice, not intending that any
^agabond Speakers should be allowed, after once the Christian Church was
settled, page 22^.

I am better acquainted with my self, than to pretend to any great store of
Learning, and with his manner of writing, than to regard his R^flection* on the
Truth of what I have written* With great readiness I submit both to the Censure
of the judicious and impartial Reader. But as little Learning as he is pleased
to allow me, I have enough at least to let him see, that, for all his great
stock of Learning (wi^h the conceit of which he is so over-blown) he has in
this very Period expressed himself very unlearnedly and inconsiderately. The
Apostles (he says) showed the way in this practice, not intending that any
Vagabond Speakers should be allowed, after once the Christian Church was
settled. Va^abond Speakers! It seems then with him those Speakers that are not
fixed to a parish or place are Vagabonds; and though such were allowed in the
Christian Church before it was settled, yet after once it was settled no
Vagabond Speakers were to be allowed. Does he not already begin to perceive,
how for want of a little consideration, he has stigma^iz'd the Apostles and
Disciples of our Lord with the infamous Brand of Vagabonds? Could all his
Learning furnish him no better than with such a Roguish Epithet (for to Rog^es
the word Vagabond is usually now applied?) How little Reason has this boasting
man to vaunt of his own Le^rning, or undervalue another's!

. 23. In his next Section he makes a faint attempt to help the other Priest
off, who had so far over-shot himself in his Conference, page 157. that among
other Reasons why the Apostles had not Tithes, he gave this for one, That they
needed them not, for as they had their Gifts so their Maintenance by a
miraculous providence; which he grounded upon Luk^ 22. 35. The falseness of
this Argument I plainly showed in my former Book, called Truth Prevailing, page
352. Whereupon this Priest in ^is Right of Tithes, page 226. says, I hope when
T. E. considers how wonderfully God opened the hearts of the first Christians,
not only to give the Apostles Meat and Drink, but to sell all, and give the
price to them, he will upon second thoughts correct that passage, page 352. and
allow this to be an extraordinary and miraculous Providence of God's, to
encourage their first beginnings.

The other Priest grounded his Miracle upon the Apo^tles wanting nothing when
they were sent forth without Pu^se and Scrip, Luke 22. 35. This Priest finding
that too weak to bear him up, adds to it the believers ^elling their Estates,
Acts 4. 34, 35. and to serve his End corrupts the Text too, saying they sold
all, and gave the price to the Apostles, as if they had transferred their own
property to the Apostles, which they did not, but deposited it as in a common
Bank, which was committed to the care and trust of the Apostles to distribute,
but wherein the Apostles themselves had no more propriety than any other of the
Church. Therefore the Text says not that they brought the Prices of the things
sold and gave them to the Apostles (which would imply an investing the Apostles
with a peculiar propriety therein) but that they brought the prices of the
things that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles Feet, which imports
no more than a committing it to their care, in whom the Trust was reposed, as
Treasurers of the common Stock for the maintenance of the whole Society; Whence
it follows in the Text, And distribution was made unto every Man, ac^ording as
he had need. In all which I confess ^ do not see the Miracle he talks of, and
if he himself will have this to be a Miracle, he must then acknowledge Miracles
are not ceased, the same thing ^aving been practiced by others of late Years,
and I think by some yet in Germany. But if the selling of Possessions, and
living in a Community had been a Miracle, yet it could not reasonably be
assigned for a Reason why the Apostles did not take Tithes: for we read not
that it was used in any of the Gentile Cities that were converted to
Christianity, but only at Jerusalem, and there too for a short time. So that if
this had been a Reason why the Apostles took no Tithes at Jerusalem, yet it
could not ^e a Reason why they took none at Rome, at Corinth, at Ephesu^, at
Coloss, at Thessal^nica, at Philippi, and other places where they preached the
Gospel, and where this practice was never used; nor at Jerusalem neither, after
it was disused. Neither is (...) true which the other Priest says, viz. That
the Apostles needed them not: for the Apostle Paul testifies of himself that he
had learnt to suffer Need, Phil. 4. 12. and amon^st other Hardships reckons his
Necessities, 2 Cor. 6. 4. and 12. 10. And it appears he used to work for his
living, Acts 20. 34. which the lfine-fing^red Priest* now adays scorn to do.
Thus all these seeming Reasons appear to be indeed but empty Shows and vain
Pretenses, and the very, true and right Reason why the Apostles did not take
Tithes was, because they knew that Tithes were a part of the Ceremonial Law,
given to the Jews, and abrogated by Christ.

The other Priest in his Conference, page 158. said, If you conclude that we
must be in all things, (...) were the Apostles, then must you of the Laity, now
do as the Laity did then, who sold their Possessions, and laid them down at the
Apostles Feet, Acts 4. And I can argue the one with the same Reason you can the
other. This I plainly disproved in my former Book, called, Truth prevailing,
page 353. showing the different grounds on which the Apostles and other
Believers then acted; the one being positively bound, and under a necessity to
preach the Gospel; the other being altogether free, and under no necessity to
sell their Estates, but did it voluntarily. So that, whatever the Priest at
first thought, the same Reason will not serve to argue the one as the other;
and that may probably be the Reason, that he, having no other Reason, was fain
t^ let his Argument wholely fall, and take no further notice of it. Nor makes
the other Priest, in his Right of Tithes, any other Reply to it than this, T.
E. says indeed they sold their Estates voluntarily, p. 353. which is most
true; and we do not desire any to s^ll the^ involuntarily now. But (adds he,
page 227.) when our people sell all voluntarily as they did, we will quit our
Claim to Tithes.

Indeed! will ye so! what, after all this ^usle and Contest for a Divine Right
of Tithes, will ye quit yo^^ Claim thereto, upon condition the people will ^ell
all, as once Believers did! See, Reader, now the horrible Deceit and false
D^aling of this man in the Management of this Controversy, and how contrary he
has argued to his own Judgment. Has he not said over and over, That Tithes are
God's part, God's due? How often has he called Tithes a sacred Maintenance, a
divine Tribute, a sacred Revenue, etc! Did he not affirm they were grounded on
the law of Nature, and primitive Revelation; and that they rely on an internal
Rectitude and an eternal Reason, page 49? Did he not assert, That our* lord
Jesus and his ^postles have sufficiently established Tithes for the Maintenance
of the Gospel Ministers, page (...)? Was he not positive, That our Lord Jesus
and the Apostles said enough to show, that the ancient divine Right to the
tenth part should be continued, and the Gospel Ministers should be the
Receivers of it, page 71? Who that had read all this could have thought any
other, but that he verily believed Tithes were so ordained and settled by God,
that they were an immutable unalterable Maintenance? Nay, K. Hen. 8. is, by the
other Priest, charged with Sacrilege, for but alienating some part of the
Tithes, Vindicat. page 305.) And yet he now says, When our people sell all
vol^ntarily as they did, we will quit our Claim to Tithes? Does not this
manifest that what he has written before of the divine Right of Tithes was in
Hypocrisi^ and Dissi^ulation, to blind the Eyes of ignorant people? Had he
sincerely believed Tithes to be s^ due, as in the places fore-quoted he plainly
affirms; had he faithfully believed that our Lord Jesus and the Apostles
intended the ancient divine Right to the tenth part should be continued, and
that the Gospel Ministers should be the Receivers of it; how could he
(pretending, as he does, to be himself a Gospel-Minister) quit his Claim to
Tithes for any other Mai^tenance! Would he quit that which himself says Our
Lord Jesus intended should be continued, if he believed in earnest that Jesus
ever intended so! And if he did not so indeed believe, how false was he, and
how devoid of Truth, so to affirm! But what will not Interest and Advantage
work, in men of corrupt Minds! Tithes then however, are not, it seems, so
sacred a Maintenance, so divine a Tribute, but that the Priests will quit their
Claim thereto, whenever they find they can mend their Market. Till then (says
the Priest, viz. Till the people sell all voluntarily) We desire the Quakers
will let us quietly enjoy our ordinary Maintenance, and we are well content

No wonder. Fill them full, give them what they would have, and they are well
content; but no longer. How like are these to some of them of old, that (as the
Prophet words it, Mic. 3. 5.) bite with their Teeth, and cry, Peace: and he
that puts not into their Mouths, they even prepare War against him? Just
thus it is with the Priests now: feed them, fill them, keep them biting;
labor, toil and drudge for them; and make it thy Care that they be maintained
in Pride, I^leness and Fullness of Bread, although thy own Family want, and they
are well content, and will cry, Peace, Peace, and s^w a soft Pillow under each
Arm-hole. But if once thou beginnest to slack thy Hand, look to thy self. If
once thou forbearest to put into their Mouths, they will not only prepare War
against thee, but will quickly too make War upon thee; will take thee Prisoner,
and spoil thy Goods. In a word, if thou give them not what they would have to
bite, they will bite Thee.

. 24. As he would be very well content to be ma^ntained by the Quakers, so he
would fain persuade the Quakers to be as well content to maintain him; and the
chief medium he uses to persuade by is this, That to pay Tithes (especially
unwillingly) is a piece of passive Obedience, to which a man ought to submit
quietly for Conscience sake, and in point of Obedience to the Authority
imposing it, though it be never so much against his Judgment, page 127.

Does this man regard what he writes, who puts such a Gull as this upon his
Reader? Where any thing is imposed by Authority, which is contrary to a man's
Conscience, no doubt the man is as well obliged, on the one hand, to submit
quietly, for Conscience sake, by a passive Obedience, to what is so imposed;
as, on the other hand, not to act against Conscience. But who till now ever
heard, that actually to pay Tithes is a pi^ce of passive Obedience? Does not
the Law enjoin men to set out their Tithes, to separate the tenth part from the
nine? Is not that Action? If thus to do be a passive Obedience, I would fain
know what is active. Why says he, If the King should bid the Quaker turn
Minister, and take Tithes, his doing that were Active Obedience.

So it were indeed: but then his refusing to do it, and suffering quietly for
so refusing, were passive Obedience. In like manner, if Authority command a man
to set out his Tithes, to separate the tenth part of his Corn from the nine,
his doing that, were active Obedience: but his refusing to do it, and suffering
quietly for so refusing, is passive Obedience.

But he says, page 228. Our Savior submitted to pay Tribute, which ought not
to have been exacted of hi^. And S. Paul commands the Christians to pay Tribute
and Custom to the Heathen Emperors, though they used it to idolatrous and
wicked Purposes.

Those were Taxes purely civil; which Tithes are not: And they were levied for
a Civil Use, however afterward disposed of; which Tithes are not. He thin^k^
the Quakers may as well submit to (what they account) an Unjust Payment, as to
(what they call) an Unjust Imprisonment, p. 229.

So they do: and much after the same manner. In the Case of an Un^ust
Imprisonment (as that for Tyth^s is) they do not imprison themselves; but if
the Sheriff or his Servants come, and take them to Prison, they make no
Resistance, but qui^tly submit. So also in the Case of Unjust Payment (as that
of Tithes is) they do not pay it, nor dare they: but if the Sheriff, or any
other Authorized come, and take away their Tithes, or their Goods for refusing
to pay them, they make no resistance, but quietly submit. Thus they submit
alike to an unjust Payment and to an unjust Imprisonment, by a passive
Obedience in each.

He begins to cogg with the Quak^rs, and says, If I were in their case, I
could pay my Tithes in Obedience to the laws of the Nation, though I did
believe the law never so unjust; because this Payment (to one so opinionated)
is a Penalty, and his Obedience therein m^erly Passive.

He speaks very like a temporizing Priest; but if he were in the Quakers Case,
he would be of another Mind; for indeed he could not be in their case unless he
were better minded than he is. But are Tithes a Penalty? What Offense are they
a Penalty for? Were Tithes then imposed as a Fine or Mulct for some
Transgression? The Party then, of whom they are demanded, ought in Justice to
be first convicted of that Transgression, before the Penalty [Tythes] be
required of him. This is a new Crotchet concerning Tithes. I have heard indeed
of a Penalty for not paying Tithes; but I never heard that Tithes themselves
were a Penalty before. The Quakers perhaps might be somewhat beholding to him,
if he would inform them what the Transgression was, for which Tithes were made
a Penalty, that by keeping out of the Offense, they might avoid the Penalty.
But is the Payment of Tithes a Penalty only to one that believes the Payment
unjust (for so I understand him by the word [Opinionated] It must then be the
Belief of the Injustice of the Payment that makes it a Penalty; and if so, then
he that, so believing, pays it, inflicts a Penalty on himself, which, beside
the Injustice is contrary to Nature.

Again says he, I cannot remember ever to have read of any sort of People in
the World before, who counted it a Sin to pay an Imposition supposed unjust;
which is no more a Sin, than to be Stockt or Whipped, to be Fined or Imprisoned;
all which we may submit to without Sin.

To submit to Stocking, Whipping, Fining or Imprisoning is one thing; but for a
man to Stock, Whip, Fine or Imprison himself is another: so to suffer for not
paying Tithes is one thing, and to pay Tithes is another. This he says, and
therefore cunningly changes his Voice from Active in paying Tithes, to Passive
in being Stockt, Whipped, etc. When he speaks of the payment he says, If I were
in their Case I would pay my Tithes, etc. And, I never read of any who counted
it a Sin to pay an Imposition, etc. Here he uses the Active [to pay.] But when
he says it is no more a Sin, than to be Stockt or Whipped, to be Fined or
Imprisoned, he turns from Active to Passive: for to pay is Active; to be fined
or Imprisoned is Passive. This Fallacy of his he thought perhaps the unlearned
Quaker would not find out. He says, We may submit to Stocking, Whipping, Fining
and Imprisonment without Sin. It Is very true; and so we may to Death also: but
does it thence follow that a man may without Sin put himself to death, be his
own Executioner, and kill himself? If it be evil for a man to do this, how can
he without evil do the other? If he may not put himself to death, by the same
reason he may not stock, whip, imprison or fine himself. And if Tithes be a
penalty (as the Priest says they are, to one that believes the payment of them
unjust) he may no more execute that penalty on himself, by paying Tithes, than
he may execute the other pen^lties of Stocking, Whipping, Imprisonment or
Death, by putting himself in the Stock^, by Whipping himself, by clapping
himself into Prison, or by putting himself to Death. But seeing the Priest
says, If he were in our Case he would pay his Tithes, etc. Let me put him the
Question, Whether if he were in our Case, and were sentenced to be Hanged (as
some of the Quakers, purely for their Religion, and conscientious Obedience to
God, have been) he would forthwith take an Halter, and Hang himself?

He connludes, That it is no Sin to pay Tithes, though it were a Sin in the Law
to command them, and in the Priests to t^ke them, page 230.

The other Priest also in his Conference, page 15^. says, After all this
Outcry against Tithes, do the Quakers think the paying and receiving of them
to be a Sin? And in his Vindicat^on, page 300. he complains that this Question
was not Answered, and says, It was the most considerable passag^ that he had.

That Tithes were a part of the Ceremonial Law given to ^he Ie^s, and taken
away by Christ's death, is largely proved before. They were a part of those
Offerings which by the One Offering were ended, and so ended as never to be
offered again, because the Offering of them again would have been a denial of
that one Offering by which they were taken away. Now as it would be a Sin to
offer the other Offerings of the Law, the Burnt-Offerings, Meat Offerings,
Drink Offerings, etc. although commanded, so is it also a Sin to offer the
Offering of Tithes, although commanded thereunto. If all the Offerings,
Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Law should now be set up again, as it would be
Sin in them that should set them up, or command the performance of them, so
would it be sin in them also that should act therein, or consent thereto. If a
man should bring forth his Oxen, Bullocks or Sheep to be made a Sac^ifice or
Burnt-Offering^ as of Old, this would be sin in him that should so do, although
commanded, as well as in him or them that should so command. But if a man being
so commanded should refuse, and his Oxen or Sheep be taken from him by force,
or against his will, and made a Sacrifice or Burnt-Offering, the sin would lie
upon them that thus command or Act, and the man so refusing would be guiltless
before the Lord. If a man should be commanded to Circumcise himself, or to
offer himself to be Circumcised, that man if he should actually Circumcise
himself, or consent to be Circumcised by another, would be guilty of sin before
the Lord, notwithstanding his being commanded: But if he, who is thus
commanded, shall refuse to Circumcise himself or to consent that another shall
Circumcise him, and he be taken by force and Circumcised against his will, the
Sin will lie at their door who thus command or Act, and the man himself, thus
refusing to act, or to consent unto the Act, will be guiltness before the Lord.
Now Tithes being ended by Christ, as well as the other Offerings of the Law,
and as Circumcision; it is a sin to pay Tithes now (and a denial of the one
Offering Christ Jesus) as it would be a sin to offer the other Offerings of the
Law now, or to be Circumcised. And as in those Cases, the being commanded would
not excuse them from Sin that should perform those things; so neither in this
case of Tithes, will the being commanded excuse^ them from Sin that pay them.
But if a man conscientiously refuses to pay them, and dares not act therein,
nor consent thereto, though his Tithes should be forcibly taken from him, or
any Penalty be inflicted on him, he in his thus conscientiously refusing to act
therein or consent thereto (yet not resisting, but quie^ly suffering) will be
found guiltless in the sight of the Lord. Hence it appears that to pay Tithes
is a Sin, as well as to receive them. And thus the one Priest's false Position,
and the other Priest's most considerable Passage, are plainly and fully
answered.

. 25. His next Section treats of the First Fruits and Tenths paid by the Clergy
to the Crown, against which, he says, the Quaker has nothing to say, hut only
that this Power once stuck in the Tripple Crown.

Where he found this he might have found more: for in the same placo (page
355.) in Answer to the other Priest, who called First Fruits and Tenths one of
the Faire^^ Flowers belonging to the Crown, I said, No Flower can be fair in an
English Crown, which was taken out of a Pope's Mitre. And if nothing else could
be said against it, but that it once stuck in the Triple Crown, that alone were
enough to make it unworthy to be worn in an English Diadem. Hence it appears I
not ^nly had more to say, but said more also against this Flower (as they
account it) of First Fruits and Tenths, than only that it once stuck in the
Tripple Crown: for I showed, that being taken out of a Pope's Mitre, it could
not be a fair Flower in an English Crown, and that having once stuck in the
Triple Crown, it was unworthy to be worn in an English Diadem. Besides, those
words [if nothing else could le said against it] imply there was more to be
said against it, if need require, and opportunity serve. But this which was
said was more than he was willing to take notice of, and that little he did
take notice of, was more it seems, t^an he either knew how, o^, at least,
thought fit to Answer. He says upon it, page 230. His Majesty will not so
easily be wheadled out of so great a part of his Revenue, and so clear an
acknowledgment of his Clergies subjection to him. What if he will not? Has this
any appearance of an Answer? or carries it in it the least show of an Argument?

The other Priest, Author of the Conference, seems to have something to say
here, Vindication, page 325. First he says, I do not ^ind that T. E. answers
the Argument, but catches at a phrase, etc.

For my part, I see no Argument there to Answer, unless he will call it an
Argument for Tithes, that the ^ing has a Revenue out of Tithes. And if that
were his meaning, I take it to be Answer sufficient to such an Argument, to
show that the Tithes themselves, out of which that Revenue arises, are contrary
to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ? But can either of these Priests (or any
man else, using his understanding) think it an argument of any force for the
lawfulness or Equity of Tithes, that a Revenue arises out of them to the Crown?
What Evil might not, in other Nations, be patronized by such an Argument? May
not the Papists argue their Indulgences are right and good, because they bring
in a considerable Revenue to the Catholic Chair, as they call it? Unhappy
Luther! who saw not the force of this Argument, but zealously notwithstanding
exclaimed against Indulgences. May they not from the same Argument infer the
lawfulness of Stews at Rome, since from them arises a considerable Revenue to
support the Triple Crown? But though he is offended that himself is compared to
the Crow, for calling first Fruits and Tenths so fair a Flower, yet he cannot
deny but this Flower stuck once in the Triple Crown; ^ut then, he says, it was
stole from the English Diad^m, ibid.

Was it so? Did it ever stick in the English D^adem before Hen. 8. Stuck it
there? That Is more indeed then ever I read; and more I think than he is able to
prove. But both these Priest^ urge the payment of First Fruits and Tenths to be
an acknowledgment of the Clergies subjection.

It may be it is so; but there is no necessity it must be so. Is there no other
way for the Clergy to acknowledge their Subjection but by paying first Fruits
and Tenths? The payment of Tribute is I confess an acknowledgement of
Subjection; yet not so, but that subjection may be acknowledged other waye^
without it; what acknowledgement else would all such be capable of making of
their subjection, who are not in a condition to pay Tribute, in which rank a
great part of the Nation will be found?

Now to return to the Author of the Right of Tithes; he spends the rest of his
47th Section in computing the Revenue the King receives from the Clergy, which
yet he does so confusedly, that it is ^ard to collect from thence any certain
Sum for the Total of that Revenue. The best account I can gather from his is,
that it is near 30000 l. per annum. Be it more or less, it is not much
material. No doubt it is a large sum (if fully paid.) But what a vast sum is
that then, which the Priests receive of the People, of which perhaps this may
be scarce the twenti^th part, being usually paid by Composition and at low
Rates! But the stress of the Objection I take to be this, That if Tithes be
taken away, the Revenue of the Crown is so much diminished as this amounts to.
The Answer is, Conscience and Honor ought to be preferred before Worldly
Advantages. If the Rev^nues of the Crown are not found sufficient without t^is,
there are other and far better Ways of enlarging them than by this. Were this
Iron-Yoke but once taken off from the galled Necks of the people, they would be
certainly far more able, as well as probably more willing, to bear the public
Charges of the Nation. An^ it were not difficult to demonstrate that the Crown
would be rather a Gainer thereby, than a Loser.

. 26. He says in his next Section, page 231. I shall not need now to confute
that frequent and unjust Re^roach of the Quakers calling Ministers Hirelings,
page 356, etc. since I have showed, the only Reve^u^s they have are no other
than what they have a threefold Title to; first, by the Laws of God and
Nature: secondly, by the Donation of the right Owners: thirdly, by the La^s of
this Land.

He has as much need now as ever to clear himself and his Brethren (if he can)
from the Charge of being Hirelings, since his Triple Title is disproved, and he
cannot make out a Right to Tithes. He talks much of the Law of God, but No Law
of God can he show for the payment of Tithes now. He talks also of Tithes being
due by the Law of Nature: but that is a Position so extremely ridiculous, that
it is enough to render him suspected for a Na^u^al. These two make the first
part of his threefold Title. The second part is the Donation of the Right
Owners. This is so far from being true, that it is utterly impossible it should
be true: for Tithes being due (as himself says, page 196.) out of the Profits
only, they to whom he ascribes the Donation of Tithe neither were nor could be
the right Owners of those Profits, out of which the Priests now claim and take
Tithes. They were the right Owners of those Profits that arose while they were
possessed of the Lands, and might dispose of those Profits, as they pleased (so
(...) were not to an evil use.) But the present Prop^^etors or Occupiers of
Land now, are as really the Right Owners of all such Profits as are ^aised upon
the Lands now, as they of old then were of the Profits that were rai^ed in
their times. Seeing then those ancient D^^ors of Ty^^hes could not make these
Priest^ any Title to the pr^sent Profits, because they themselves were not the
right Owners of these Profits. And the present Proprietors or Occupants, who
are the right Owners of the present Profits, have not made any Donation of
Tithes to the Priests; It is evident that they have no T^tl^ at all by
Donation. Thus his second string also has given him the slip. His third is the
Laws of (...) Land. But he must take notice, that the Laws do not give a man a
Right either to Lands, Tithes or any thing else; but do only conserve unto him
that Right which he has already, whether by descent, purchase or gift, and
secure him, in the enjoyment thereof, from Viol^nce or Injury from others. If
therefore he could have proved a Right, he might well have urged the Laws of
the Land to conserve that Right: but if he has not otherwise a Right, he in
vain expects the Laws should make him one. Nor do those Laws which in join the
payment of Tithes, pretend to give a Righto Tithes; but suppose the Priests to
have a Right, and therefore take care to secure that supposed Right unto them.
But now it appears that that Supposition was grounded upon a Mistake, and that
the Priests have no Right at all to Tithes, but that all their Claims are
false. That they have no Right by the Law of God, no right by the Law of
Nature, no Right by any Donation or Gift from the Right Owners of the Profits,
out of which (and which only) they claim Tithes. Now the Reason and Ground of
the Law being, not to make a Right but, to conserve and secure to men that
Right they have, if the Priests have no Right to Tithes (as I have proved they
have not) then is there nothing for the Law to conserve or secure to them, and
so that Law, with relation to them, is at an end: for the Rule in Law being,
Cessante Ratione Legis, cessat Lex (i. e. Where the Reason of the Law (...),
there the Law it self cease also) the Reason of the Law ceasing in this Case,
where it has nothing to conserve, the Law it self must needs also cease (de
jure) according to that Rule. Thus the Priests th^e^fold lord is broken, and
down falls he and his pretended Right of Tithes together.

But in order to clear (if it were possible) the Priests from the just
imputation of Hirelings, he says, pap. 232. The people do not hire them; they
set them not on work, nor do they, out of their own, give them any Wages.

This does but further discover the Unrighteousness of the Priests: for if the
People do neither hire them, nor set them on work, how unreasonable and unjust
are they to demand, yea and force Wages from them, that neither hired them nor
set them on work! Is this to do as they would be done unto? Would the Priests
think it equal that any of their Parishioners, who are hired and set on work by
others, should come and demand Wages of them, when as they neither hired them,
nor set them on work? The latter part of his Sentence is a positive untruth.
The words are these, Nor do they (the people) out of their own, give them (the
Priests) any Wages. This is utterly false. The Wages which people give them is
truly and properly out of the peoples own: for it is out of the yearly Profits,
and the yearly Profits are truly and properly the peoples own, and belong not
to any man else.

Next he says, They (the Priest^) are employed by Go^, and he has provided for
them.

I deny that they are employed by God: let him prove it if he can. If they were
employed by God, they would be content with such (...) as he has made for them
whom he imployes, and not thus scrape and scratch, rend and tear, and never
think they have enough.

In the rest of this Section he charges me with l^ading the Loyal and Suffering
Clergy with a foul Calumny, in saying, They ^led, and left their Flo^k^ to the
Mercy of those whom they accounted no better than Wolves, etc.

This is matter of Fact, of which the whole Nation was then a Witness; and
there is scarce a Parish wherein some are not yet living who are able to judge
whether this be a foul Calumny or a just Charge, to whose Censure I submit it.

He says, They were sequestered, imprisoned, silenced, and by armed Soldiers
violently torn from their Cures*

This may be true of some of them, whose Unhappiness it seems it was to lose
what was non^ of their own. But if they had indeed been employed by God, and
had taken the Apostles for their Example (Acts 4. 18, 19, 20. and 5. 28, 29,
40, 41, 42.) though they had been sequestered, imprisoned, and by armed Soldiers
violently torn from their Cures, yet they would not have so been silenced. If
such things as t^ese could have silenced the Apostles and those othe^s that
were employed by God, in the first appearance of Christianity in the World, the
sound of the Gospel had not rung so loud nor so far as it then did.

In conclusion, as he raises to them Trophies of Praise, and celebrates their
Names with the highest Eulogi^s his fancy could furnish him with: so on me he
casts up the overflowing of his Gall, and with it the most reproachful and
scurrilous Expressions his imbittered M^nd did suggest unto him, Then he calls
the Loyal and Suffering Clergy -- These Noble Sufferers -- Such Illustrous
Names -- whom All the World Admires and Venerates. Of me he says, This
black-mouthed Slanderer may publish his own venomous Impiet^es. But as this
putrid matter does only discover the foulness of the Stomach from whence it
came, but does not at all defile me: so I envy not them all the Odours and
Perfumes he has provided to sweeten their Names withal, which perhaps there may
be need enough of.

The Author of the Conference took another Course to acquit the Priests from
the charge of being Hirelings, by comparing the Priests with the Judges of the
Land, and Tithes with the King's Allowances to the Judges. In my Answer to him,
I showed his fallacy in this so plain, that this other Priest (who came in for
his second) was not willing to meddle at all with the matter, but left him to
get off as well as he could. He said in his Conference, page 159. You know the
King has twelve Judges, etc. And these have an honorable Allowance from the
Exchequor, will you therefore say that they are Hirelings, and sell Justice?
and is not ours the same Case? I answered (in truth prevailing, page 356.) No:
for you pret^n^ to be Ministers o^ Christ; wherea^ they pretend no higher than
to be Ministers of State. You call your selves Spiritual persons: but you
reckon them but Laymen. You challenge to your selves a ^piritual Function:
they claim but a civil or temporal Office. They therefore standing in a civil
Capacity, may reasonably and fairly, without any imputation of Injustice,
receive what their Master is pleased to bestow upon them. But you, who pretend
to be Ministers of Christ Jesus, are therefore justly condemnable as Hire^ings,
because ye will not be content with that Maintenance, which he (whom ye call,
though untruly, your Master) has appointed, but seek for Hire from others. Out
of this he takes the first Sentence only, which was this [You pretend to be
Ministers of Christ, whereas they pretend no higher, than to be Ministers of
State] and passing by all the rest, makes this Reply to that. I thought (says
he, Vindication, page 326.) that every Magistrate had been a Minister of God:
St. Paul had ill ^^ck, that he had not our inspired Ellwood to correct him,
when he said, He is the Minister of God to thee for good, etc. and bears not
the Sword in vain, Romans 13. 1, 4.

That he may not have as ill luck in wanting correction, as he fancies St. ^aul
had, it will not be amiss to correct him before we go any further. He says he
thought every Magistrate had been a Minister of God. In what sense did he
understand the word Minister, when he thought so? Did he think every Magistrate
was a Minister of God in the same sense and Notion whereon he himself pretends
to be a Minister of Christ? If he thought so, he must think again. If he did
not think so, he does but conclude and urges this Text with a design to deceive
his Reader. However his Comparison between the Priests and Judges will not
hold, their Cases are not the same. It Is true that Magistrates are Ministers of
God, but that is as they are Ministers of State, as they bear the Sword. They
are Ministers of God in a political and civil Administration, and so are called
Civil Magistrates. But the Priests pretend to be Ministers of the Gospel of
Christ Jesus, which is a spiritual Administration^ So that neither are the
Priests Ministers of God in the same sense that the Magistrates are; nor are
the Magistrates Ministers of God in the same sense that the Priests pretend to
be. Yet this Priest says, Is not our Case the same with theirs? Not at all, say
I: for first, The Judges are what they pretend to be: so are not you. They
pretend to be civil Magistrates, Ministers of State; and so they are indeed:
but you pretend to be Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and are not. 2.
They are contented with that Maintenance which their Master, the supreme Civil
Magistrate, has allot^ed them, and seek no further: but you are not contented
with that Maintenance which the supreme Spiritual Magistrate, Christ Jesus,
whom you (though untruly) call your Master, has allotted for the Ministers of
his Gospel, but hunt about for more. And indeed, such very Hirelings are the
Priests grown, that that Parish which is able to give most Wages, may have
their choice of Priests, take them upon Trial and hire which they will. I do
not herein discover a Secret, but write that which almost every body knows. In
short, whether the Priests are Hirelings or no, let them judge who are fain to
hire them, to bargain with them, and in small Pa^^shes, and little Vicarages,
to engage and enter into Covenants to them to make their wages worth so much a
Year, or else they would not stay with them, nor Preach to them. Nay, are not
the Priests Hirelings to one another, as well as to the People? Do not many of
the rich Priests get three or four Benefices into their Hands together, and
Hire other poor Priests (whom they call Curats, but the People call them
Iourney-men) to preach for them? And many of these Underling Priests are not
Beneficed-men (as they term it) b^t only drive a small Trade, by Preaching for
others that either are not willing to take the pains, or cannot possibly
themselves supply so many places, as they have engrossed into their Hands. Thus
these poor Curats have some of them, two or three Maste^^ ^piece, by whom they
are plainly and positively hired, from whom they receive certain standing
Wages, and are engaged to Preach or read Prayers so many times in the Month.
Now what will the Priest^ say of these? May not these be justly called
Hirelings? Yes sure, and very Canonical Hirelings I think; f^^ ^hey are Priests
hired by Priests to do Priests work: and if such Priests be not Hirelings, I
confess I know not what an Hireling is. But leaving this to others judgment, I
return to the Author of the Right of Tyth^s.

. 27. He begins in his 49. Section thus. T. E. once more attempts to justify
the Quak^rs in detaining Tithes, although their separation be voluntarily; but
this is sufficiently confuted before, Sect. 9. And I desire the Reader only to
remember the Instance of the Truant-Boyes wilful absence from an endowed
Free School, page 233.

This which is a chief part of the Controversy (at least between the Priests
and the Quakers) the Priests have little mind to meddle with, so far as I
perceive. Whether Tithes are due at all from any, even from those that hear the
Priests, and receive their Ministry, is the general Question. But if Tithes
were due from those that receive the Priest^ Ministry and hear them, yet
whether they are due from the Quakers (and others) who neither hear them, nor
receive their Ministry, is the particular Question. The co^cluding the general
Question in the Negative, concludes the particular Question in it: But the
concluding the general Question in the Affirmative, does not include the
particular Question. If Tithes ^re not due at all from any (even from those
that hear the Priest^, and receive their Ministry) then to be sure they are not
due from the Quakers, who utterly disown them and their Ministry. But if Tithes
co^ld be proved to be due from such as hear the Priests and receive their
Ministry: yet it follows not that they are due from the Quakers, who neither
hear them nor receive them. So that the Priests have a double Task to perform:
first to prove Tithes due to them from such as do hear them; secondly (when
that is done, which c^n never be done) to prove Tithes due to them from such, as
are so far from hearing them, that they altogether disown them. Now the latter
of these (which is the direct and immediate Case between the Priests and the
Quak^rs) the Priests have been very backward to come to, and have as feebly
performed (if what they have said in this Case may deserve to be called a
Performance) as faintly undertaken. The first Priest cast it off to the Fag-End
of his Conference, page 161. and then too said as little to it, as well he
could: yet to that little that he said (scarce fifteen Lines) I returned him
more than three Pages in Answer; to which he was more wary than to Reply a
word. And the other Priest, in his Right of Tithes, when he came to this part,
where it behoved him to have showed his utmost skill and strength, chose rather
it seems to let it slip with a Reference to another Section, saying, This is
suffciently confuted before, Sect. 9. In which place too he only touches it by
the by, and gives an Instance of certain Truant-Boys wilful absence from an
endowed Free School, which is the only thing he here desires his Reader to
remember. But what the Priest has said in that Section, and particularly his
Bo^ish-Instance, the Reader may find fully answered, and I make no doubt to his
satis^action in the third Section of the third Chapter of this Book, to which,
for avoiding needless Repetitions, I refer him.

But although the Author of the Right of Tithes had no edge (as it appears) to
meddle with this part of the Controversy: yet that he might not be sentenced
by the Reader for a Mute, if he should have wholely passed it by; he thought it
expedient to make a show of saying something, and therefore picked out a Passage
or two, on which he nibbles a little. First he says, page 234. T. E. says,
page 358. Some Ministers are Vicious, and such as the Apostle has exhorted us
to withdraw our selves from.

He is willing I perceive to make my Question a Position, and I do not much
matter if he do. The Occasion of my words was this, The Priest, in his
Conference, page 161. said, The Minister is not to blame for their separation,
etc. Hereupon I asked, If the Minister be one that for Corrupt Interest has
intruded himself (as it seems by what he says in the Conference, page 11. some
such there be) If the Minister be a man of Vicious and Intemperate Life, of a
Disorderly Conversation, such as the Apostle has exhorted to withdraw from, is
not the Ministir then to blame for the Separation? Now I observe this Priest is
so cunning, that he neither attempts to clear the Priests, nor at all
undertakes to resolve the Question. Clear the Priests he could not, their
Corruption being confessed by his Brother Priest in the 11th page of his
Conference, and that Confession confirmed also even by National Experience. To
have answered the Question had been no less difficult; for to deny that a
corrupt Interest, a vicious and intemperate Life, and such a disorderly
Conversation as the Apostle has exhorted to withdraw from, are a suf^^cient
and justifiable Cause of Separation, were to exceed all bounds of Modesty* and
yet to grant, that, where this Cause is, the Minister is to blame for the
separation, had been not only a Contradiction to his Brother Priest, affirming
the contrary (which yet between them two had been no n^w thing) but even a
cutting with his own hand the Throat of his own Cause. To avoid all these
Dangers at once, he tu^ns my Question into an Assertion, and then instead of an
Answer to it, gives me a Question to answer; which is this. But do not the
Quakers separate from good Ministers as much and as well as from bad?

This I confess is a pretty Device to beg a Conce^^ion that some of them are
good; but I will not grant him that. Yet I would not here be misunderstood; I
speak not of them now as Men, but as Ministers. I reflect not (in this place)
on their Conversations, but on their Ministry. Some of them perhaps may be
sober, t^mperate and of orderly Co^versation; but none of them are Good
Ministers, because they are not the true Ministers of the Gospel of Christ
Jesus, though they all pretend so to be. This premised, my Answer is plain and
short, in the Negative, I deny that the Quakers do separate from good Ministers.

He adds, A Vicious Minister may be a pretense to them who resolved to separate
however; but his Vice is not the true Cause of their separation.

The Causes of Separation may be to dive^* different. The Vice of the Minister
to some, the Vice of the Ministry to others; a debauched Priest to some, a
false and antichristian Ministry to others; and either of these is Cause
sufficient to separate upon. A Priest's Debauchery is Cause enough to justify
a separation from that Priest: a Ministry's being false and antichristian is
Cause sufficient to justify a Separation from that Ministry. And as that
Minister is to blame, whose Debauchery is the Cause of Separation from him: so
that Ministry is to blame also, whose false and antichristian state is the
Cause of Separation from it.

But he says, I belie S. Paul, in saying, he exhorts the people to withdraw
from a bad Minister; he bids them not (says the Priest, page 234.) withdraw
from a Father, but a Brother walking Disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.

Was ever poor man so hard put to it! how great a strait must he be in, that
would make use of such a pitiful shift as this! Are the Priests got so high,
they disdain to acknowledge the People for their Brethren? They learnt not that
from Christ Jesus, nor any of his Apostles. For Christ was not ashamed to call
them Brethren unto whom he declared the Name of hi^ Father, Heb. 2. 11, 12. And
the Apostles in their Epistles salute the Saints by the Title of Brethren. Thus
Paul, Romans 12. 1. and in almost all his Epistles. Thus James, chap. 1. verse. 2.
Thus Peter, 2 Epist. 1. 10. Thus John, 1 Epist. 2. 7. Nor is any Compellation
more frequent in their Writings, than this of Brethren. Yea, in that very place
wherein Paul gives this monitory Counsel to the Thessalonians, he calls them
Brethren. And says the Divine John to the Churches of Asia, I am your Brother,
etc. Rev. 1. 9. The Apostles then and the rest of the Saints were Brethren it
seems, and yet says Paul to the Thessalonians, Now we command you, Brethren,
in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every
Brother that walks disorderly, etc. From every Brother! Either then the
Minister must not be a Brother, or, if he walk disorderly, must be withdrawn
from, although he be a Minister. Besides, what were those false Teachers that
troubled the Churches of Galatia and Corinth? were they not bad Ministers? Did
not Paul wish they were even cut off, Gal. 5. 12? And can any one think he
would not have had the Galatians withdraw from them? But I do not at all
wonder this Priest is so unwilling the people should withdraw from a bad
Minister.

Next he says, I run again into my old Mist^ke, applying Christ's Directions to
his Disciples on a private Mission to Unbelievers, as if it were a standing
Rule for Ministers amongst Believers.

This he draws from a close Expostulation with the other Priest himself, thus,
He pretends to be a Minister of Christ. Where did Christ e're empower hi^
Ministers to make people hear them, whether they will or no? or to exact Wages
of them although they did not hear them? His Instruction to his Disciples was,
Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your Words, shake off the Dust of
your Feet, Mat. 10. 14, The first part of this the Priest steps over. The
latter part he says is my old Mistake. Whether it be a Mistake or no will
appear. I urged it to show that the Apostles were not directed to press and pin
their preaching upon any, but to shake off the Dust of their Fe^ against those
that should not receive nor hear their Words. This he says was Christ's
Direction to his Disciples upon a private Miss^on to Unbelievers, and he calls
it my Mistake to apply this as if it were a standing Rule for Ministers among
believe^s. Had this Direction belonged only to that private Mission, as he
calls it, Paul and Barnabas who were not employed in that Missi^n, nor
converted to God till afterward, had had no share in this Direction, nor any
Commission to use it. Yet they, we see, long after Christ's Ascension, did
punctually observe this Direction, shaking off the Dust of their Feet at
Antioch against those that rejected their Testimony, Acts 13. 51. So that this
Direction had relation to the general Commission, as well as to that particular
Mission, which he calls private; and the Mistake, whether old or new, is his
own, in restraining it to that particular Mission.

In the next place he says, I compare the Quakers, in rejecting their Ministry,
to the Jews who rejected the Apostles, and judged themselves unworthy of
eternal Life, Acts 13. 46.

This is a very silly Catch, and has neither Truth nor Wit in it. I made no
Comparison at all; but showed from that Text, that the practice of the Apostles
was consonant to the Instruction of their Master. They preach the Gospel to the
Jews. The Jews reject it. They do not say, You shall hear it whether you will
or no; or however you shall pay us for Preaching it: but they turn from them,
and offer their Message unto others. Hereupon I said (in Truth prevailing, page
359.) He greatly mistake, if h^ thinks it to be the mind of Christ to impose
his Gospel upon any, or, as the Spaniards are said to have dealt with the
Indians, to make men Christians whether they will or no: Nay, nay; he lovingly
invites all; he inwardly strives by his Spirit with all; he graciously tenders
Mercy to all; but he obtrudes it upon none. And if he gave no Authority to his
Apostles to compel any to hear them; to be sure he gave them no power to
demand, much less Enforce a Maintenance from such, as did neither receive nor
own them. Out of this last Sentence (passing over the rest) he frames this
Quotation for me; Christ gave his Apostles no Authority to compel any to hear
them. He replies, Yes surely, he bid the^ go into the Highways and Hedges,
and compel those whom they found there to co^^ in, Luke 14. 23.

H^s Catch here is upon the word [compel] and a mere Catch it is. Compulsion or
constraining is twofold; by fair means, and by foul. By fair means, as by
Entreaty, Persuasion, Reason, Love, etc. By foul means, as by the severity and
sharpness of Penalties, whether corporal or pecuniary. He that observes not
this distinction may easily err. Of the first sort of Compulsion Instances in
Scripture are frequent. When Christ, immediately after his Resurrection,
appeared to those two Disciples of his that were going to Em^us, and they drew
nig^ to the Village, it is said, Luke 24. 28, 29. He made as though he would
have gone further; but they CONSTRAINED him, -- and he went in to tarry with
them. Now what manner of Compulsion was this? how did they constrain him; by
fair means or by foul? The Text expresses how. First, by a kind Invitation,
saying, Abide with us. Secondly, by urging reasons why he should abide with
them, For it is toward Evening, and the day is far spent. In like manner, when
Lydia's Heart was opened, she constrained the Apostle Paul and his company to
come into her House, and abide there. Here again we see is compulsion; but of
what kind, what nature? by what means? fair? or foul? By entreaty. Read the
Text, Acts 16. 15. And when she was Baptized, and her Household, she besought
us, saying, If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my House
and abide there. And she CONSTRAINED us. Many more like Examples might be added
from 2 Cor. 5. 14. and 12. 11. Gal. 2. 14. Matthew. 14. 22. Mark ^. 45. But these
are suffi^ient to show that the word^ Compel and Constrain (which are
Synonomous, and indifferently used) do not always import outward force and
violence, or penal Severity and Rigor; but frequently (and in holy Writ most
frequently) kind Invitations, loving Entreaties, gentle Persuasions, and
demonstrative Reasons. Now let us examine the Text he urges, Luke 14. 23. and
see what is there intended by the word Compel. The Parable is of a certain Man,
that made a great Supper, and bad (or invited) many Guests. They urge Excuses,
but come not. The Master therefore of the House bids his Servant go into the
Streets and Lanes of the City, and bring in the Poor, the Maimed, the Halt and
the Bli^d. That done, and yet there being room for more, the Master sends his
Servant again, saying, Go out into the Highways and Hedges, and compel them to
come in, that my House may be filled. For I say unto you, that none of those
men which were bidden shall taste of my Supper. Consider now I pray, what
manner of Compulsion was either needful or proper to be used to such Persons as
are here described. Is it proper to force Guests to a Feast, or send them to
Go^l if they do not come? Is it needful to Whip poor hungry Be^gars to a
Supper, or hale them in by the Head and Shoulders? Such persons as these, that
had no better provision than they could get from the Highways and Hedges,
would not need, one would think, to be dragged by force, or driven by Blows to
a good Supper. If outward force and violence had been to be used, it seems more
reasonable that it should have been exercised on them that were invited and did
not come: but they we see were so far from suffering any such violent and penal
compulsion, that after refusal, they were utterly excluded from the Feast; the
Master of the House saying expressly, None of those men which were bidden, shall
taste of my Supper, verse. 24. So that they that refused to come to the Feast,
were not fetched in by force: their punishment was to be shut out. And if the
others who were brought out of the Streets, Lanes, Highways and Hedges, had
made Excuses and refused to come, as those did, there had been the same reason
to ^ave shut them out also, as there was to shut out the former: but no more
reason to have exercised violence toward these, than toward the former, upon
whom for refusing to come, we do not find that any was used. But if these, that
were brought from the Highways and Hedges, did not refuse, but readily came at
the Call, there was then no need of (nor room for) any such forcible, violent
and penal Compulsion, as the Priest here speaks of.

But to make it more evident that our Savior in this Parable did not intend
any such violent or penal Compulsion as the Priest would fain be at, let us
con^ult the 22th Chapter of Matthew, where the same Parable in substance
(though somew^at different in Circumstances) is delivered. There we read, that
after they who were first invited had refused to come to the Wedding Dinner,
the King said to his Servants, ver. 9. Go ye therefore into the Highways, and
as many as ye shall find, bid to the Marr^age. These were the same sort of
Guests, mentioned by Luke, who were in the Highways and Hedges; and yet we see
this great King did not command, or empower his Servants to use any other
Compulsion to them, than an Invitation: As many as ye shall find, ^id [(...)]
to the Marriage. Thu^ that place in Luke being aptly explained by this in
Matthew, it appears that those words [Compel them to come in] import no more
than, Bid, or Invite, them to the Marriage.

Besides, if we look further into the Parable, we shall find that when the
King, taking a view of his Guests, saw one there which had not on a wedding
Garment, and asked him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having on a
Wedding Garment. The man was speechless, and the King commanded his Servants to
bind that man Hand and Foot, and cast him into utter Darkness. Which plainly
proves he was not brought in against his Will, he was not driven in by force,
nor dragged in by Head and Shoulders, for if he had, he had then had a fair
Plea to make, a ready Answer to return to the Question, How came thou in
hither, etc? I was driven in by stripes, I was drawn in by force, I was brought
in against my will, might he have said. Had it been so, he needed not have been
speechless, as it seems he was. And how, again, could it have stood with the
divine justice of that great King to sentence a man to be bound and cast into
utter Darkness, for coming in thither without a Wedding Garment, if the man had
been brought in by force, against his own mind, and that too by his Command.
But it is manifest that no such forcible, violent, penal Compulsion as the
Priest aims at, was commanded or intended by our Savior in this Parable; and
consequently that the word [compel] in this place (Luke 14. 23.) is
misunderstood, at least misapplied by the Priest, and his Yes surely is surely
false.

But he urges the Judgment of Augustine, That to compel Men to that which is
good, is very lawful, and an Act of necessary Charity to their Souls, yea, a
duty of Christian-Princes, etc. page 235.

Is it so? How chanced it then that they, who, being invited to the Supper,
came not, were not ^ompelled to come? Does the Priest think the Ma^te^ of the
House, who made the Invitation, did not know what Charity was necessary to
their Souls, or was ignorant of the duty of a Christian Prince? Would he have
omitted an Act of such necessary Charity (had it indeed been Charity) or
neglected a duty, had it been a duty? But let us examine this Position, and see
if there be any thing of truth or reason i^ it. The Position is, That to compel
men to that which is good, is very lawful, and an Act of n^cessary Charity to
their Souls, yea a duty of Christian Princes. First, who shall judge whether
the thing to be compelled to, is good or no; They that are to be compelled, or
he that is to compel? If they that are to be compelled may judge, it is not
likely that they should judge that good which they must be compelled to; for if
they judged it good, they would not need to be compelled to it. If he that is
to compel must judge, then whatsoever he shall judge to be good (be it never so
bad) that must bear the name of Good, and all must be compelled to receive it.
Secondly, concerning Christian Princes the like dissatisfaction may arise.
Possibly they who are compelled to that as Good, which they believe is not
good, may question whether they are Christian Princes that so compel. On the
other hand, what Prince is there throughout that part of the World which is
called Christendom, that is not ready on all Occasions to assert himself a
Christian Prince? Now therefore if every one that holds himself a Christian
Prince not only lawfully may, but also, both in point of duty and as an Act of
necessary Charity to the Souls of others, ought to compel men to that which he
judges good, what hinders then but he, whose Ancestors received from Rome the
Title of Most Christian King, and who professes himself a Son of the Church of
Rome, lawfully may, yea must (according to this Position) both as his own duty,
and as an Act of necessary Charity to their Souls, compel all Protestants in
his Dominions to the Romish Religion, which he judges good? Thus, Reader, thou
see the horrid Consequence of this false and Antichristian Position. But this
is the old Argument of the Papists, long since exploded and detested by men of
Reason and Ingenuity, though sometimes, as now, made use of at a pinch of need,
to countenance a corrupt and selfish Interest.

But he shows him^^lf a right Romanist. He has not only the Popish Argument
for Persecution, but the Popish Cloak also to cover himself withal. It is not,
says he, page 236. the Priests compel them, but the Laws of the Land. The
Priests indeed see them in desperate Heresies and most wicked S^hism, and in
pity to their Souls, admonish them, warn them, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. and labor to
convince them by Arguments; yea, at length they use the Censures of the Church,
and finally, as the last remedy complain to the secular Magistrate, etc.

What did Bonner more, or the worst of Popish Bishops? They did not use to Burn
me^ themselves: but they got a Law made that such as they declared Heretics
should be Burnt, and then they sentenced those for Heretics, that would not
bow to them and their Inventions, and prayed the Magistrates to burn them. What
odds in all this between the Popish Priests and these, save only that these are
not yet come to Popish Fire and Faggot, as himself well observes, page 237*

But besides this, is it all true that the Priest says here? Do they descend by
these steps to their Church Censures and secular Complaint? Do they admonish?
Do they warn? Do they ever attempt to convince by Arguments? Whom of a thousand
is lie able to name for an Instance of such procedure? yet he says, This is no
more than S. Paul threatened, 2 Cor. ^0. 6. and acted also, in delivering the
incestuous Corinthian to Satan, punishing his outward man for the health of his
Soul, 1 Cor. 5. 5.

S. Paul indeed, did admonish often, did warn frequently, did labor to
convince by Arguments, and that earnestly; but I never read before that he
complained to the secular Mag^^^rate, or so much as threatened so to do. I am
sure the Scriptures he has quoted will not justify this Assertion. But if S.
Paul did not complain to the secular Magistrate, then this, which the Priests
confesses they do, is more than S. Paul did, and the Priest, in saying it is no
more, is found in a downright Falsehood. But to proceed.

I said in Answer to the former Priest, If Christ gave no Authority to his
Apostles to compel any to hear them; to be sure he gave them no power to
demand, much less Enforce a Maintenance from such as did neither receive nor
own them. This the latter Priest transfers from the Apostles to himself and his
Brethren, and makes a quotation out of it, with which he begins his 50th
Section thus, He adds, page 359. Christ gave us no power to demand a
Maintenance from those who do not receive us.

I perceive he is willing to creep in any how: but unless he had come in
fairer, he is like to turn out again. I do not admit that Christ has given him
power to demand Maintenance of any body, no not of them that do receive him:
for Christ gives Power to none in this Case, but those whom ^e^ends, of which
number he is none. However, I observe he does not deny what I said [viz. That
Christ ga^e his Apostles no Power to demand a Maintenance from such, as did
neither receive nor own them] but rather seems to grant it: for he replies, Nor
do we demand of the Q^akers to give us one single Penny more than what was
given to us, and s^ttled on us many hundred years ago: we only ask our own; we
only ask that which the Quaker did not take of his Landlord, that which was or
ought to have been abated in his Rent, p. 338.

Don't you demand of the Quakers the tenth part of their yearly Profits? Could
these be settled on you many hundred years ago! The Folly of this pretense is
obvious of it self. But how many hundred years is it, I pray, since Tithes were
settled on you? It Is but about 140 years ago since the first Statute Law for
Tithes was made, and that too was made both by Papists and for Papists.

But he says, They only ask that which the Quaker did not take of his Landlord.

They not only ask that which the Quaker did not take of his Landlord, but they
also ask it out of that which the Quaker did not take of his Landlord, viz. out
of the Profits: for out of the Profits only are Tithes due, says this Priest,
page 196. Now the Quaker took the Land only of his Landlord, not the Profits.
He knew well enough what Land he took, but he knew not, when he took the Land,
what Profits he should have. The Profits he receives afterward by the Blessing
of God on his Labor and honest Endeavors, with the use and employment of his
Stock, which his Landlord has nothing to do with. So that if the Priest will
needs claim the tenth part of the Quaker's Profits, because the Quaker did not
take it of his Landlord, he may by the same Reason claim the other nine parts
of the profits too, because the Quaker did not take them of his Landlord
neither.

Again, he says, They only ask that which was or ought to have been abated in
his Rent.

I deny that. That which they demand, (viz. the tenth part of the Profits)
neither was nor ought to have been abated in the Rent. If it should be supposed
that any thing is abated, yet the most that could be expected would be but the
tenth part of the Rent. And if the tenth part of the Profits be no more than
the tenth part of the Rent, then must the whole Profit be no more than the
whole Rent; and what then shall the Farmer have to defray his Charge, and
maintain his Family? But if the tenth part of the Profit^, which the Priest
claims, be more than the tenth part of the Rent, then (according to the
Priest's own way of reasoning) he demands more of the Q^^ker than either is or
ought to be abated. And indeed, what Reason has a Landlord to abate of his Rent
in consideration of ^ythes, which are not demanded out of the Land, which be
lets, but out of the Profits only, which the Tenant by ^is own Labor, Stock
and Industry (through the Blessing of God) acquires? However, how could the
tenth part of the Profits ^e abated in the Rent, whenas the Rent is certain and
fixed for twenty years or more together, and the Profits always uncertain,
never it may be of equal value two years together throughout the whole term,
and sometimes perhaps in two years time may rise or sink half in half.

Again, he says, page 239. Our Right to Tithes dep^nds not at all upon v^^ns
being willing or unwilling to come and hear us.

You are so much the more unlike the Apostles, whom ye pretend to be Successors
to.

And the Q^aker (says he) is sadly mistaken, to think we come to s^u them our
Sermons, or that Tithes a (...) Price which is the Quaker's own to give.

The Quakers are not at all mistaken in thinking you come to sell your Sermons.
They have known you of old, and before they were Quakers they traded with you,
and bought your Ware, and paid full dearly for your Sermons; but they will never
trade with you more: for they see your Ware is naught, and they find you the
worst sort of Chapmen of any they have to do with. For (as I formerly observed)
take the most greedy and overreaching Tradesman that one can find, though he
should tell me his Ware is very good, and that he has such as will fit my turn,
yet he will not th^ust it upon me, whether I like it or no, but leaves me to
(...) own liberty, either to take it or to leave it; and if I do not take it,
to be sure he will never demand any thing of me for it. But this Priest will
either make us take his Ware, though we neither like it, nor have any need of
it; or to be sure will make us pay for it, though we never take it. What can be
more Unreasonable, what more Dishonest than this!

. 28. As for going to Law for Tithes, you have (says he to his Brother Priest,.
51.) fully proved it lawful in the Conference, and the Quaker answers not one
of your Arguments; so that till he reply to that, I will only note, That it is
much against our W^ll, etc.

I answered all his Arguments for going to Law for Tithes, in proving at large
that Tithes are not due; for no Argument can justify going to law for that
which is not due; and if Tithes were due from the Quaker to the Priest, he
should not need to go to Law for them; the Quaker would be as ready to pay
them, as the Priest should be to receive them. I also showed (in my former
Answer, page 361, 362.) That for a Minister of Christ to sue men at Law for his
Belley, is without all Precept, President, or Ground in Scripture, Religion or
Reason; and that it is contrary to the nature of a Gospel-Maintenance, which is
altogether free and voluntary, not at all compu^sory. But this the Pri^sts,
both one and the other, chose rather to let pass untouched, than give occasion
for further inquiry into it.

But the other Priest (in his Vindication of the Conference, page 327.) though
he silently slips over what I said against Priest* going to Law for
Maintenance, yet to blemish (if he could) the Quakers, he says, Whereas the
Quakers (to make Magistrates as useless as Ministers) used to declaim against
going to Law upon any occasion whatsoever, T. E. in contradiction to his
Brethren; says, In Civil Cases it is no Injustice for a man to recover his due
by Law. Hereupon the Priest asks, Have the Quakers received some n^w
Dispensation from Heaven? If not, how comes it to be lawful to go to Law now in
Civil Cases, when 20 years ago the same thing was denied by them as unlawful?

Had he intended to have convicted me of contradicting my Brethren, it had
behoved him to have proved (not only said) that the Quakers did use to declame
against going to Law upon any occasion whatsoever. Not only Honesty would have
obliged him so to do, but common Prudence would have led him to it. But seeing
he has so confidently said it, without offering any Proof, I put him upon the
Proof of it, and leave him under the Imputation of Slander, until he shall give
a Proof of his Assertion.

Upon this false Insin^ation he thus proceeds, The Spirit then by which the
Quakers pretend to be inspired, either differs from it self, or is not the same
Spirit which the Quakers so lately pretended to.

The Spirit by which the Quakers are inspired, neither differs from it self,
nor is any other Spirit than that, which the Quakers have always not only
pretended to, but enjoyed. The Quakers are led by the same Spirit that ever
they were, and their Testimony is the same that ever it was. And truly I do not
see but the Priests also are led by the same Spirit, by which they were led
twenty years ago: for they B^lyed the Quakers twenty years ago, and so they do
still. Of this black Art this Priest is Master, and as one resolved by false
Reports to defame (if he could) them, whom by Fair Reasoning and Plain
Arguments he is not able to withstand, he tells his Stories of the Quakers with
as great Confidence as if he himself believed them.

One of them (says he, Vindication, page 328.) told me very lately, That I
accused the Quakers falsely in saying that they neglect to crave a Blessing upon
their Meat, which is now frequently practiced among them: Whereupon he says, If
this be their Minds now, formerly they talked at another rate: What (said they)
we crave a Blessing when we go to Meat? that is stinting the Spirit to a Meal,
to a Breakfast, a Dinner, or a Supper.

The Quakers Practice in this case now is no other than it always was. They
never neglected to crave a Blessing upon their Meat, but have always used to
wait upon the Lord, in an holy Fear and Reverence, both to crave and receive
his Blessing. So that the Priest is indeed a False Accuser of the Quakers in
saying, They formerly talked at another Rate. Let him name those Quakers (if he
can) that have said, (as he reports the words) What we crave a Blessing when we
go to Meat? And to provoke him to it, let him take notice, that the Charge of
Slander is left at his Door.

Again, He blames the Quakers for making their Appeals to Sessions and Assizes,
bringing A^tions, etc. though they know there can be no pr^c^eding in any Court
but that both Witnesses and Iuries must give their Evidences and Verdicts upon
Oath. If then it be truly so (says he) why will they be any Occasion to bring a
Disgrace and Reproach upon Christianity? Vind. p. 32^.

That Christianity is disgraced and reproached by Oaths is too true, but that
the Occasion thereof is brought by the Quakers is as false. The Quakers do not
desire that either Witnesses or Juries should give their Evidences or Verdicts
upon Oath; but that both the one and the other should speak the plain and naked
Truth without an Oath, and that under the same Penalty as by Oath, to which the
Quakers with all readiness of Mind subject themselves, if they be found guilty
of giving False Evidence. It is not then the Quakers fault that Christianity is
dishonored by Oaths, but it is the Priest's Envy that casts this false
Aspersion on them.

But he charges the Quakers not only with occasioning others to Swear, but with
taking Oaths themselves too, and he says he is able to make it out.

He should have done it then; and I make no doubt but he would, if he had any
ground for what he says: for it cannot be supposed, that he who has so grossly
abused the Quakers without all ground, would have spared them an inch in any
thing for which he had had a real ground.

He adds a couple of Stories which he pretends to have heard from others. The
one is of two Quakers that took their Oaths in answer to an Exchequer Bill, and
very formally too, put off their Hats, and kissed the Book: and this he says,
was lately told him by an Attorney of great Account and Practice. His other
Tale is of a Quaker who at a Commission, came very formally to Swear against
the late Bishop of Lincoln, in a Chancery Suit. And that being asked by one of
the Commissioners (from whom, he says, he had the Account) How it came to pass
that he being a Quaker would Swear? he told him, Thou know that among
Hunts-men it was never thought amiss to kill a Fox or Badger by any means; such
being allowed no fair play, etc. leaving it to himself to make the application.

These are matters of fact, depending upon personal Evidences, which the Priest
ought to have produced, if he had intended to have dealt honestly. Had he named
the Quakers whom he here accuses, or those Persons from whom he pretends to
have received his Information, I would have taken the pains to have sifted his
Reports, and tried the Truth of his Stories: and that I suppose he foresaw,
and feared. But seeing he has chosen so dark a ^ath to walk in, to secure
himself from being traced, I think it sufficient at present to tell him, first,
That if any who bear the Name of Quakers have done as he reports of them, they
have therein done very wickedly and evilly, and deserve as great condemnation
and shame, as he himself does for thus belying them, if they have not so done.
But secondly, for my own part, I do not believe his Stories to be true, but
that they are either forged by himself, or taken upon (...) from others of his
own temper, and thus cast abroad with an evil design to defame the Quakers, and
blast the Reputation God has given them. As therefore I fairly provoke my
Adversary to give over Creeping, and stand up like a man, and to bring forth
his Proofs and make good his Charges against the Quakers, if he be able: So I
also make this just Request to my Reader, that he will not pre-judge us for
such groundless Reports, raised or spread abroad by our professed and avowed
Enemies, but will suspend his Judgment till he sees a Proof. If I had a mind to
retaliate my Adversary, I could do it very effectually, and give him a large
Catalogue of scandalous and infamou^ Priests; but at present I forbear,
intending to let the World see I defend a Cause that has no need of such shifts.

. 29. I am now come to the Conclusion of each of my Adversaries Books, in which
I find neither any thing relating to the Subject of the Controversy, Tithes,
nor ought else that deserves to be taken notice of. They both take pains to
justify the ill Lang^age, which the first Priest gave in his Conference, and
indeed have so far outdone it since, that that may comparatively be thought
modest. Some few Instances of which I gave before (page 3.) out of the Right of
Tithes; a few more I will add here out of the same Book, that the Priest may
see his own Complexion, as well at going off as coming on, viz. These Rebels
in Religion, page 15. Such wretched pretenders as T. E. and his Crew, page 153.
T. E's head swimming with repeated Revelations, page 154. His Seditious
Follo^e^s, page 181. This unlucky way of immediate Teaching, page 182.
Ignorance and Confidence can inspire a raw Quaker, p. 187. Doting Falsehoods --
As senseless as thy self* page 191. What Insole^ce is it for this Novice, page
2^6. Would have discovered his knavery in this false Assertion, page 20^.
Vagabond Speakers, page 226.

It is not to be wondered that he should defend his Brother's unseemly
Expressions, who knew himself so deeply guilty in the like kind. But whether it
becomes either one of them or the other, let the Reader judge.

The Author of the Right of Tithes spends the greatest part of his 52 Section
(which is the Conclusion of his Book) in Flouting and Jeering, Deriding and
Scoffing, Disdaining and Scorning me; but in all that I see no Argument (unless
it be of a bad ^ause and Mind) therefore I let it pass. But he observes that
the former Priest had said, The Primitive Christians were quite different from
the Quakers, and that I had called it an old overworn Objection: Whereupon he
says, The Quakers may be ashamed to let the Objection grow old and over-worn,
before they have either confessed the Truth, or made some satisfactory Reply
thereto, page 240.

But let him know, The Objection is over-worn with being often replied to
already; It is worn with being answered over and over. So that the Priests may
rather be ashamed to urge an Objection that is so over-worn with answering.
Besides, he may remember that his Brother Priest urged this Objection with
reference to a future debate, as Pr^vidence should give Occasion and Assistance
(Conference, page last) which I took notice of in my former Answer, page 363.
and gave as the Reason why I would not anticipate his work: But Providence, it
seems, has not yet assisted him in that attempt; and indeed, if he never begin
it till Providence assists him, I never expect to see it. Not only the
Objection, but himself also will ere then be old and over-worn. But I perceive
by this Priest, it was expected that I should forth-^^th have entered upon the
work, and have proved that the ancient Christians had not this, that and the
other Rite: for he says, page 241. If he (meaning me) can prove that these
ancient Christians had no distinct Order of men, -- no Sacrament, no
Catechizing, etc. and so goes on to reckon up a matter of ten No's, with an Et
Caetera, for me to prove. But where all this while was his Learning asleep,
when he put his Opponent to prove not only Negatives but Et Caet^ra's also? Was
this like a Disputant? His mind, it seems, was up in the jollity, laughing at
the ignorant Quaker (as may be gathered from his own words at the entrance of
this Section) till he could not (...) the Absurdity he ^an into, but exposed
himself to the laughter of others that are not more serious than himself. Nor
did he perhaps perceive the gross Contradiction he brought forth in his Mirth,
when telling his Brother the occasion he took to smile, he says it was, To
observe what rare Effects the happy Conjunction of Ignorance and F^lly have
produced in your Adversary (meaning me) And yet a little after, adds, I am apt
to hope, when they (the Quakers) shall see how plainly the Ignorance and
Malice, the Hypocrisy and Mistakes of this their bold Champion (meaning me)
are detected, they will begin to perceive, that their P^inciples are not to be
defended, no not by the most politic Equivocation and Sophistry.

But are not the most politic Equivocation and Sop^^stry rare Effects indeed
of a Conjunction of Ignorance and Folly? so rare I think that they were never
yet known to proc^ed from such a Conjunction. What unhappy Conjunction was it
then of Mirth and somewhat else that produced this rare Effect in him, to make
the most politic Equivocation and Sophistry the Effects of Ignorance and
Folly. But leaving him to recover himself* I will wipe off an Aspersion which
the other Priest has cast upon the Quakers; which, having no relation to the
Case of Tithes, I thought fi^ to refer to this place, that I might not by
interweaving it (as he has done) with the subject of Tithes, interrupt the
Course of the preceding Discourse: and the rather, because, though he brings in
his Cavil toward the beginning of his Chapter of Tithes, page 300, he repeats
it in the Conclusion of his Book, page 333. The matter is this.

The Author of the Conference, amongst his many Abuses, charged the Quakers
with mis-applying that Text, Ier. 5. 31. The Priests bear Rule by their Means.
And because I took no notice of it in my former Answer, he (in his Vindication,
page 300. 301.) begins to insult and boast, as if I had therefore passed it by,
because I knew neither how to answer his Argument, nor vindicate the Reputation
of my own Party; and that, not knowing how to excuse this, I had put it into
the Catalogue of minute passages. Minute enough it certainly is to be put into
such a Catalogue. But to let him see he glories in a false Reason, I will give
him the true Reasons why I did not think it deserved an Answer. First, because
he brought it in with an idle Story (as himself calls it, page* 153.) o^ the
Invention of Guns and Powder, no way pertinent to the subject he was upon, but
a very silly digression from the matter, which I have observed frequent in him,
and take for an Indication of a discomposed Brain. Secondly, because though he
charged the Quakers with mis-applying that Text, Ier. 5. 31. yet he neither
named any Quaker by whom, nor any Book in which that Text was any way app^ied,
or so much as at all mentioned: So that his Charge had neither Top nor Bottom,
Head nor Tail. Who then could have thought the man so idle to expect an Answer
to such an idle Charge! But now (in his Vindication, page 301.) he quotes,
after an odd manner, a Tract (so he styles it) called, Some of the Quakers
Principles, put forth (he says) by Isaac Penington, and the second Quaker there
(he tells us) has this passage.

But I can tell him there is no such Tract put forth by Isaac Penington;
although a Book there is bearing this Title, Some Principles of the Elect
People of God in scorn called Quakers (which is a Collection of some particular
passages, relating to our Principles, taken out of several Books of diverse Men,
and published together) But neither was this put forth by Isaac Penington,
although his Name be to some parts of it. This I take to be the Book which the
Priest refers to: And though he cites no page thereof, yet finding in the fifth
page that Passage (I suppose) which he cavils at, I will set it down at large
as it there stands. The Title of that Page is this, Grounds and Reasons why we
deny the World's Teachers; And the third Reason is thus given, viz. They are
such Priests as bea^ rule by their means, which was a horrible and filthy t^ing
committed in the Land, which the Lord sent Jeremiah to cry out against; while
we ^ad Eye* and did not see, we held up such Priests, but the Lord has opened
our Eyes, and we see them now in the same Estate that they were in, which
Jeremiah cried out against, who did not bear rule by his means; and therefore
we deny them, Ier. 5. 31. This is that Paragraph to a Syllable; in which there
is no Foundation for the Priest's Cavil: for the Quaker does not say (as the
Priest suggests) that those Priests, mentioned by Jeremiah, did bear Rule by
their Estates; but that these Priests, whom we deny, are such as bear Rule by
their Means or Estates. Those Priests, in the time of the Prophet Jeremiah, did
bear Rule by means of the false Prophets: These Priests now adays do bear Rule
by means or help of those Estates which they get from the People. That was an
horrible and filthy thing then: This is an horrible and filthy thing now. For
the horribleness and filthiness of the thing must not be restrained to their
bearing Rule by those particular means only, and no other: for if they had born
Rule by any other false and indirect means, it would have been an horrible and
filthy thing, as well as it was in their bearing rule by means of the false
Prophets. For the only means by which the Priests of God ought to bear Rule is
the Spirit and Power of God, the virtue and influence of the divine Truth; and
those Priests that take upon them to bear Rule by any other means than this,
commit an horrible and filthy thing. Thus did those Priests in Ieremiah's time;
They bore Rule, not by means of the divine Spirit and Power, not by means of
the Heavenly virtue and influence of Truth, but by ^ther means, viz. by means
of the false P^ophets, and therefore the true Prophet cried out against them.
And thus do Priests now adays; They bear Rule, not by means of the Spirit and
Power of God; not by means of the divine virtue and influence of Truth, but by
other means, viz. by means of those Estates which they get from the People, and
therefore do we, in the Name of the Lord, deny them. Now it is manifest, that
the Author of that Book, out of which this passage is taken, did not say that
those Priests of old and these of late did both bear Rule by one and the same
means; but the scope and dri^t of his words there is to show, that they did
both bear Rule by false and unlawful means: for he says (in the place
fore-quoted) While we had Eyes and did not see, we held up such Priests, but
the Lord has opened our Eyes, and we see them now in the same Estate that they
were in, which Jeremiah cried out against, who did not bear Rule by his means.
So that herein it is that he shows they agree; in this it is that he draws the
Comparison between them, viz. in that they did not bear Rule by God's means. In
this they were both in the same Estate, namely, in that they did both bear Rule
by wrong means, although they did not both bear Rule by one and the same wrong
means. The Identity or Sa^eness is not referred to the particular means by which
they did and do bear Rule, but to the Estate which they were and are in* who
did and do bear Rule by indirect mean^. Therefore, observe, He does not say, We
see them now bear Rule by the same means that they bore Rule by which Jeremiah
cried out against: but he says, We see them now in the same Estate that they
were in which Jeremiah cried against, who did not bear Rule by his (viz. God's)
means; which was an estate of Apostasy and Degeneration, an estate of
Alienation from God, and of Rebellion against him, usurping to themselves an
Authority, and bearing Rule over the People, but not by God's means, not by
those means which God had appointed, viz. by the divine Virtue and heavenly
Power of his holy Spirit, but having recourse to other means to get up, and to
keep up a Domination and Rule. Now although the means, by which those Priests
then did, and these now do bear Rule, are not Specifically the very same; yet
are they one and the same in Nature, that is, they are both wrong means, both
unlawful means, both such means as God neither appointed nor allowed, which is
the ground of their being disclaimed, and declamed against both by the Prophet
of Old, and by us now. So that they are the same, in that respect, in and for
which they were and are disowned: and in that part it is that the Comparison
lies; with respect to that part the Parallel is drawn. Nor does the Allusion to
the Prophet's words strictly tie the Alluder to an exact Comparison in every
point and circumstance; but it is sufficient, that the Comparison holds in that
part, upon which the Argument is grounded. Now the Quaker's Argument here
against the Priests is grounded on their bearing Rule by false and indirect
means, by such means as are not God's means: and these Priests being compared
(in this respect) with those Priests in Ieremiah's time, the Comparison is
found to be true and good; for those Priests, then did bear Rule by means alike
unlawful. And the Prophet's crying out against those Priests then for
committing thi^ horrible and filthy thing, does justify the Quakers in crying
out against these Priest^ now, for committing a thing of the like Nature. By
this time I doubt not but I have satisfied the Reader, that the Quakers do
neither mis-interpret* nor mis-apply that Text of the Prophet, Ier. 5. 31. but
that the Priest has grossly abused the Quakers, and manifested an envious and
foul mind; in charging them hereupon with sottish Ignorance, and calling them
Chea^s and Impostors. And seeing the Priest says in his Vindication, page 333.
Had T. E* c^eared his Brethren from the Imposture, he had effectually convicted
me of virulency; I hope the Reader will here find my Brethren so effectually
cleared from the Priest's false Charge of ^mp^sture, that he will see the
Priest effectually convicted of virulency, even according to his own conf^ssion.

But leaving that to the Read^^'s judgment, let me now take the liberty to
Expostulate a little with the Priest, and ask him why he did not Answer those
Grounds and Reasons, which (in the Book before-quoted, out of which he pi^k't
this passage to cavil at) the Quaker gave why we deny the World's Teachers? He
charges me with leaving my Argument to catch at, or play upon a word or phrase,
Vindicat. page 311. But has not he charged his own guilt upon me? Has he not
here catched at and played upon a word or phrase, and let the Arguments pass
untouched? Again, his Brother Priest says, in another Case (though without
Cause, as I have already showed) The Quakers may be ashamed to let the
Objection grow old and ^ver-worn, before they have either confessed the Truth,
or ^ade some satisfactory Reply thereunto, Right of Tithes, page 240. But how
long have these Objectio^s lain against the Priests! (it is little less than
twenty years since they were first printed) Might not they well be ashamed (if
they were not past shame) who, in all this time, have neither confessed the
Truth, nor made any Satisfactory Reply to the Objections? This Priest could
find in his heart to look among the Grounds and Reasons there given, to see if
he could find any thing to carp at; but let whosoever will answer them, for him. He
had not it seems Ingenuity enough to confess the Truth; nor Courage enough to
undertake a Reply to the Reasons. Nay, he did not so much as attempt to answer
that one Reason, out of which he took his Cavil, vi^. That they are such
Priests as bear Rule by their Means. That they are indeed such, is too
notorious to be denied: and according as their Means are gre^ter or less, so do
they bear more or less Rule over the people. What Parish is it that knows not
this b^ sad E^perience? Yet has he neither confessed the Truth of this, nor
made any (much less a satisfactory) Reply thereunto. Besides, in that very
page, out of which he catched that word he has so played upon, the Priests are
charged to be such Shepherds that seek for their Gain from their Quarters, and
can never have enough, which the Lord sent Isaiah to cry out against, etc. Isa.
56. 11. They are charged to be such Shepherds that seek after the Fleece, and
clothe with the Wool, and feed on the Fat, which the Lord sent Ez^kiel to cry
out against, etc. Ezekiel. 34. They are charged to be such Prophets and Priests
that Divine for Money and Preach for Hire, which the Lord sent Micah to cry
against, and whilst we put into their Mouths, they preached Peace to us; but
now we do not put into their Mouths, they prepare War against us, Mic. 3. 11.
May not these Priests be ashamed to let these Objections (and many more in the
same Book) lie near Twenty Years against them, and neither confess the Truth,
nor make any satisfactory R^ply thereunto? Had it not bee^ more for this
Priest's Credit, to have endeavored, at least, to remove these Objections, by
a sober Answer to the Grounds and Reasons in the forementioned Book given,
than to catch at a word, as he has done, and only play upon a Phrase, to
exercise upon it his abusive Wit and Sophistry, as he most falsely charges me to
have done? But let this suffice to manifest the Injustice of these Priests, in
charging the Quakers and me with those very things, which they themselves are
so deeply guilty of.

. 30. Now, for a Conclusion of this Treatise, I recommend to the Reader's
diligent O^servation, the following Particulars, as a brief R^capitulation of
the whole.

1. That Tithes (or an exact tenth part) were never due by the Law of Nature;
by the eternal, moral Law; That^ there is no Eternal Reason for that part, nor
Internal Rectitude in it.

2. That Abraham's giving the Tithes of the Spoils to Melchizedec, and Jacob's
Vowing to give the tenth part of his Increase to God, being both of them
spo^taneou^ and fr^e Acts, are no obliging Precedents to any to give Tithes now.

3. That Tithes are not now due by virtue of that Mosaic Law, by which they
once were due, that Law being peculiar to the Jewish Polity, and taken away by
Christ at the dissolution of that Polity.

4. That Tithes were never commanded by Christ Jesus to be paid under the
Gospel, nor ever demanded by any of the Apostles, or other Ministers, in their
time; That there is no Direction, no Exhortation, in any of the Apostolic
Epistles, to the Churches then gathered, for the payment of Tithes either then,
or in after times; That there is no mention at all of Tithes (they are not so
much as named) in any of the New Testament Writings, with respect to
Gospel-Maintenance, although the Maintenance of Gospel Ministers be therein
treated of. In a word, That Tithes were not either dem^nded or paid in the
first and purest Ages of the Christian- Church.

5. That those Donations of Tithes which are urged by the Priests from
Ethelwolf and others, were made by Papists (not in their Civil, but Religious
Capacity) and were the Effects of the Corruption of Religion.

6. That Tithes being claimed as due out of the Profits only, those Donors
could extend their Donations no further than to the Tithes of those Profits
that did belong to themselves, and of which they were the right Owners. But the
pr^se^t Profits not belonging to them, but to the present Occupants (who are as
really the right Owners of these Profits that arise now, as they then were of
those Profits that arose then) and the present Occupants, who are the right
Owners of the present Profit^, not having made any Donation of Tithes, it
follows, that Tithes are not now due by virtue of any Donation from the right
Owners.

7. That the Laws, which have been made for ^he payment of Tithes, not making
nor intending to make the Priests a Right to Tithes, but supposing they had a
Right to Tithes before, if that Supposition prove to be false (as it plainly
and evidently does) and it now appears that in very deed the Priests had ^o
right to Tithes before, then have the Priests no Right to Tithes now by v^rtue
of these Laws. For those Laws not intending to make the Priests a (...) Right,
but (by mistak^) supposing they had an old one; that old one being tr^ed and
^^oved (...), they have now neither old nor new. T^us it appears that the
Priests have no Right to Tithes by the Law of God, no Right to Tithes by the
gift of the right Owners, no Right to Tithes by the Laws of the Land.

8. That Tithes, as taken in this Nation, are a very great Oppress^on, an
unreasonable and unequal Imposition. Unreasonable, in that, under pretense of
taking the tenth part of the Profits, the Priests take the tenth part where
there is no Profit, but loss; in that, under co^our of taking the tenth part of
the Increase, they take the tenth part where there is no Increase, but
D^crease; and the same Seed is Tyth^d twice. Unequal, in respect both of the
Payers, and of the (...)* In respect of the Payers, in that the burden lies
chi^^ly on the poor Farmers and Husbandm^n, and men of (...) Estates pa^ least:
So that he that has many Thousands a Year scarce pays so much Tithes, as he
that Rents a Farm of fi^ty Pounds a year. In respect of the Receivers, in that
one Priest has as much as ten others. For some of the Priests engross to
themselves the Tithes of three or four Parishes, amounting to four or five
Hundred Pounds a year (and some to more) whenas others are g^ad of a small
Vicarage of thirty or forty Pounds a year; and some are fain to play the Curats
for twenty Pounds a year, if they can get it. And yet these last are as much
Priests, as much Ministers, take as much Pains, (to as little purpose) are as
good Men, and perhaps as well Learned, as many of the others; only they are not
able to make so good Friends to the Bishop or the Patron.

9. That Tithes being claimed by the Priests as wages for work, it is the
highest Injustice in the Priests to take Tithes from the Quakers, who neither
set the Priests on work, nor like their work, nor receive their work.

10. And ^astly, That Tithes are utterly inconsistent with the Gospel-state,
and with the Christian- Religion. For Tithes being a part of the Ceremonial
Law, and peculiarly belonging to the Jewish Polity, which Christ came to end
and take away; the continuing, or restoring of Tithes, is equally a denial that
Christ is come in the Flesh, as the continuing or restoring of any other part
of the Ceremonial Law (as of Circumcision, b^^ody Sacrifices, etc.) would be.

These things I request every sober Reader to weigh well, and consider
seriously of; that he may no longer consent to or act in a thing so greatly
dishonorable to our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the true Christian-Religion; but
in patient suffering, contentedly sit down amongst them, who conscientiously
refusing to pay. Tithes, do peaceably and quietly, by a passive Obedience,
submit to what Authority requires, waiting in stillness and patient Hope, till
God shall be pleased to open further the Eyes of Princes, and incline their
Hearts to break this painful Yoke, and ease the People of this heavy burden,
under which the Nation groans.

ERRATA.
OF the Faults of the Press, the most considerable are here corrected. Others
of less moment (as Mis-pointings, Mis-placing of Letters, putting [e] for [a]
and other Literal Mistakes) the ingenuous Reader is desired to excuse.

Page 1. line 22. for men read man. P. 7. l. 32. r having P. 14. l 4. r.
became. Page 15. l. 27. f have r. h^w. Page 16. l. 1. r. Psalm. 50. 10. P. 20.
l. 11. after before, make a full point. P. 22. l. 27. after hold, make a full
point. P. 23. l. 8. f. thing r. hinge. P 25. l. 23. f. gleaned r glanced. l.
24. ^. presentel r. prosecuted. P. 29. l. 33. f. 19, 20, 21. r 29, 30, 31. P.
33. l. 13. r. Genesis 14 P. 36. l. 18. f. That, r. This. l. 32. r. Genesis 14. P. 45.
l. 17. r. Ie^^ram. P. 49. l. 25. f. ^rus^ily, r. craftily. P. 51. l. 29. r.
Rites. p. 52. l 27. r ^ther. P 57. l 26. r precarious. p 62 and p 63. are ^et
twice. p 62. l 8, and 9. r profi^s. l 11. after whether, r this p 63 l 9. after
of, r Abraham and. p 6^ again, l 1. f concerning, r of comparing. l 10. dele
and dispensation. l 11. f there, r these l 32. r Father. p 64. l 16. r is the
Lord's. l 28. f state r (...). p 65. l 27. r learn. p 66 l 19, and 20 r B^za
turns. p 67 l 5. r implying. p 68. l 27 r Mat. 10. p 72. line la^, after
und^^e, r being the weightier things of the ^aw (...) should ye have done these
things, and also not have left the other und^^e p 73. l 10. after all, r the
Ce^em^nie^ of. l 29. f 146 r 446. p 74. l 10. r page ^ 4 p 83. l 9. r meat. p
85. l 4. f Title, r Tithe. p 90. l ^. f pay r (...) l 23. after Cerem^nies, r
by the Death of (...). p 93 l 9. after that, r was. p 94. l 1. after to, r God
and. p 95. l 13. r (...). p 96. l' 11. f therein, r then. p 98. l 18. after
that, make a full point. p 104. l 17. r call me p 106. l 31. dele not. l 32.
after hindered, r not. p 112. l 31. fare, r were. p 119. l 12. f 14. r 4. p 134
l 28. r rased. from p 150 to p 158. the paginar figures are mi^^aken. p 153. l
26. r many. p 160. l 12. r manda^u ^. p 161. l 7. r venund^bant. p 162 l 1. r
Cypriani. p 164. l 30. r Tess^resdecatite. from p 164 to p 167. the paginary
figures are mi^^aken. p 165. l 1. and l 6. r curse. p 167. l 32. r funiculus. p
175 l 2 after sin, r in praying to Saints. p 177 l 22 after other, r fixed. p
178 l 16 f 57. r 157. p 187 l 15 after end, r of. l 16 dele of. p 189 l ^4 r
unive^sal^. P 199 l 10 after or, r l. l 29 r Religious. p 203 l 5 r Lot^^r. p
204 l 30 r (...). l 32 r adjurante. l 33 r custodire d^ooverunt. p 207. l ^31 r
P^tria. P. 218 l 13 r vicaries. p 226 l 3 r Idololatria l 5 r ^ings. p 229 l 30
f least, r servant. P 231 l 1 f as examples, r ab exemplo. p 235 l 16 r page
120. l 19 f these, r their. l 30 r me^. p 244 l 12 read Durandus. p 246 l 6
after Bid, read Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 22. l 10 r ^mma. l 20 r Tunna. p
250 l 32 after maintenance, read these. p 252 l 19 f own, r only. p 256 l 27 r
hal^owed. p 262 l ^ r covin. p 263 l 12 r subsequent Titles. p 268 line last,
read Christian Church. p 2^0 l 7 f ver. r Rev. l 1^ r primus. p 271 l 1 r
ablegarent. p 274 l 3 r indesinenti. p 276 l 2 r temporalibus. l 28 d ele and.
p 277 l 12 r authoritativus. p 278 l 3 r page 93 p 2^2 l 4 ^ annuit. l 18 r
Monasterium. p 285 l 6 r Imperijs. p 28^ l 4 f ethically to be increased, r
ethnically to be incensed. l 25 f have showed, r shall show. p 297 l 6 after
seeking, r thereby. p 298 l 8 r nuzled. l 9 after holy, r Church. p 300 l 13 f
are r were. p 310 l 28 after Christ, r by the Anointing. p 312 l 8. after
Grace, r and. l 11 read 2 Pet. 3. 18. p 313 l 16 after and, r did p 317 l 2 f
such, r other. p 325 l 24 f fully, r folly. p 340 l 27 after equal, r temporal.
p 341 l 2 f ^lamning, r claims. l 19 f next, r rest. p 342 l 31 read Mat. 10,
10. p 353 l 9 f clearer, r clever. l 34 read ^ight of Tithes. p 365 l 15 r
Sect. 14. p 367 l 26 r Sect. 14 P 383 l 23 dele a. p 403 l 4 f at, r of. p 414
l (...) f for, r from. p 427 l 8 after of, read Tithe to. p 468 l 14 for says,
read saw p 470 l 16 read place. p 477 l 18 for Then, read Them. p 479 for
whereon, read wherein. line 8 f conclude, read collude.

THE END*

