ADMONITION To Doctor BURGES; And to those who either COMPOSED Or caused to be
REPRINTED, That Seditious PAMPHLET, Entitled, The Common Prayer Book
Unmasked; And to all others, who endeavor to Maintain that Factious Opinion,
That the use of the Liturgy of the Church of England, is sinful.

By EDMUND ELIS, Rector of East-Allington in Devon.

London, Printed by Matthew Inman, for James Magnes, living in Russel Street
near Covent Garden, 1661.

To Doctor BURGES, etc.
SIRS;
IF you believe There is a GOD that shall judge the World, be not overhasty to
condemn this Paper directed unto you, from one whose Principal Encouragement to
such attempts is, That it being the Love of God, which inclines him thereunto,
to Comply with those inclinations by the help of the same SPIRIT, from which
they proceed, is it self a Reward, becoming the Giver of every good and perfect
Gift: for (of late) my heart has been much versed in the apprehensions of this
Truth, That the Happiness of man wholly consists in Doing His Will, who is the
Fountain of LIFE and LIGHT, and LOVE. If it shall please GOD to give any
success to this Attempt by piercing your Hearts, through my words, by the
Sword of his SPIRIT, my desire is that it may never come to my knowledge,
unless the knowledge of it may prompt me to some fresh attempts of the like
nature, etc. lest perhaps it should prove a temtation unto me to Expect the
Praise of men, and by that means deprive me of (that which I now enjoy) the
praise of God.

Says this Erroneous Opinion, That the use of the Lyturgie of the Church of
England is Sinful, Superstitious, and Idolatrous, was one of the greatest
causes of those horrid Combustions in this Church and State, which HE by whom
KINGS Reign has so wonderfully Suppressed, and we hope in time will quite
Extinguish. I cannot but esteem those men as notorious Incendiaries, who
endeavor still to keep the people they have already Seduced, in this Factious
Opinion, and continually to draw others into it. I boldly appeal to the
Judgment of all Impartial men upon the face of the Earth, whether these two
opinions which usually go together, Viz. that the people may fight against
their lawful Prince, so it be for Reformation, etc. and that our Religion, as
to public Worship, is sinful and Antichristian, so bad that it is necessary it
should be Reformed, do not tend directly to the stirring up of a new Rebellion?
Yea, was not this Opinion the Entrance into that Labyrinth of Error, wherein
those Wretches had Lost themselves, who were lately Drawn, Hanged, and Quarterd
for being in Actual Rebellion against him, who has hitherto appeard to be not
only the most Gracious of Princes, but also the Meekest of Men? But it may be
you will say, That you do not teach the People that it may be lawful for them
in some cases to take up Arms against their King: but you plainly do that which
is almost as bad: You endeavor to persuade the People, that That way of
Worshipping God in public, which is practiced by the King and the Bishops, is
sinful, and by consequence, that there is a very great need of Reformation in
our Church; Which Imagination was one of the Roots and Principles of our late
Rebellion; and in the mean time it is most evident that you Connive (at lest)
at this Cursed Opinion, That in case there be need of a Reformation, the People
may justly take up Arms against their Lawful SOVEREIGN, if it may not be
affected by other means.

Thus I have briefly discovered the Considerations, which moved me to make this
Address unto you, To Charge you before God; and the Lord Jesus Christ, that you
be not so Rash and Precipitant in endeavoring to engage the minds of the
ignorant Vulgar in such averseness to that excellent Set-form of prayer, which
was composed, and is still used by so many men of Eminence for Parts, and
Learning, and Piety, whereas most of the Arguments which you produce against
it, are so notoriously weak and frivolous, that I cannot but fear that the most
learned of you do not believe your selves those things to be Truths, which you
would impose as such upon the Minds of others. What an Argument is this (which
some of you have Printed) that the Common Prayer cannot please God, because it
pleases the Papists: (which I have answered, or rather exposed to contempt, in
a small Treatise I lately published?) What an Argument is this against that
excellent Hymn, entitled Te Deum, which (who that loves the Lord Jesus Christ
in Sincerity can possibly read or hear, but must needs be affected with some
Spiritual Delight in attending unto it?) That Reasons showing the necessiry of
Reformation, etc. P. 27.
it is a piece taken out of the Mass Book. If you meant that it was composed by a
Papist, it is unquestionably false: If you mean that the Papists make use of it
in their public Worship, may you not Argue in the same manner against the use
of many portions of Scripture? But suppose it had been composed by a Papist:
shall we not make use of that which in it self is entirely good, because he had
some bad opinions who was the Author of it? Oh, blush, and be ashamed, that
ever you published such Folly as this. Some of you have said that this part of
the Letany, By Common Prayer Book unmasked. P. 27.
the Mystery of thy holy Incarnation, by thy holy Nativity and Circumcision, by
thy Baptism Fasting, and Temptation, by thine Agony and bloody Sweat, by thy
cross and Passion, by thy precious Death and Burial, and by the coming of the
Holy Ghost, Good Lord deliver us, is not better then that Conjuring or Juggling
of of the Magicians, whereby they seemed to imitate Moses his working of
Miracles.

Hear O Heavens, and hearken O earth! What impudence is this? Could there ever
be better words then these found out to be used in Prayer? What words can we
ever compose that are more apt to bring the souls of those that hear or reed
them, to an Inward Spiritual Sense of the mercy of God in CHRIST, in which
consists the very Essence and Formality of true Prayer, or of the Worshipping of
God in Spirit and in Truth? Surely I fear that those men who wrote this
Pamphlet, had not Felt the power of Godliness working in their souls through a
Faithful, or Practical Apprehension, or understanding of the Person of the
Glorious (...), Our blessed Mediator, the Son of God, and the Sone of MAN: for
most improbable it is that any one who effectually apprehends the Mystery our
great Salvation, can so Quarrel with those words, whose Nature and Property
is to Signify it unto him, to Actuate our souls in the Notion of those several
ways By, or Through which CHRIST JESUS is made unto us of GOD, Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption.

Rather then I would believe that this part of the Letany is no better then
Conjuring, etc. I should think that those men are no better then Bewitched that
esteem it so to be: so little is there in all the Arguments they can get to
maintain their opinion, even of the appearance of Reason. You, the diverse
Ministers of sundry Counties Reasons, etc. Page 30.
have said, that this expression in one of the Prayers after the Communion,
Those things which for our unworthiness we dare mot, and for our blindness we
cannot ask, vouchsafe to give us, etc. is a Contradiction: For (say you) while
we say we dare not ask. (We) do ask, and pray him to give us; Can we pray thus
in Faith?

Yes (say you, in the Person of a Respondent) When we pray for this for the
worthiness of Christ, as after follows: Well Answered, surely this Answer is
sufficient for that Objection that it is a Contradiction: for sure I am any one
of you who has not quite forgot his Logic, will not say but that without a
Contradiction, a man may speak of the same persons that they dare, and not
dare, viz. in diverse respects the thoughts of our own unworthiness, and GODS
glory when we draw nigh unto him, fill us with Reverence and Hebr. 12. 8.
Godly Fear: But the thoughts of that Great Heb. 4. 14, 16.
High Priest that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, makes us
come boldly to the throne of Grace. But you fly to another Argument. If our own
unworthiness (say you) causes us not to dare to ask, Why do we pray elsewhere
for ought else at all? We who worship God in Spirit, and in Truth, in the use
of the Common Prayer, do not believe that we may ask any thing at all of God,
but with confidence in his mercy, through the Worthiness of Jesus Christ: but I
presume your selves will join with us in this Assertion, That it is not
necessary in all our Vocal Petitions to name CHRIST, though that Petition shall
never be granted, which is not put up unto GOD with some Confidence (Holy and
acceptable to GOD) that it shall be granted, produced in our hearts by the
Virtue of some Direct Apprehensions of his Person, which you know may remain in
the heart, when those Apprehensions themselves are not Actually there. The rest
of your Arguments against that Excellent, and most useful Set form of Prayer,
seem to me as weak and frivolous, as those I have here mentioned: so that I
think that the shortest, and most Compendious way of convincing you of your
Error, is this, To Exhort you in the Name of the GOD of Truth to look into your
own hearts, and to consider seriously whether your selves do truly and
sincerely believe those things to be True, which you pretend to Demonstrate
unto others: I conceive that your belief of them is only a Fancy, or such an
Imagination, as is really the product of the First thoughts which we place upon
those Truths, which are any way capable of opposition: but, I should be too
favorable to your Cause, if I should grant that the Truths you would oppose,
are capable of Oppostion, viz. of being rendered seemingly false (to any
Considering person.) Can any of you (who are men of any Parts, or Learning)
upon Second Thoughts or mature Deliberation, conceive that, that expression,
Those things which for our unworthiness, etc. is a Contradiction, or that the
Common Prayer cannot please God, because it pleases the Papists, etc. Ah,
Sirs, for your Countries sake, for your souls sake, for your God's sake,
Consider; what you do* be not so forward to publish such Writings, as are so
undoubtedly false, and can only prevail upon the thoughts of those men, who
are either blind (through Ignorance) or Purblind through Prejudice.) Ah, Sirs,
you have done wickedly? What! Cause such a multitude to fancy themselves to
deserve the name of the godly, because (for sooth) they are not for the use of
the Surplice, and the Book of Common Prayer? Those of you, who have ever had
any Scholastic Education, I conceive to be rather perverse, then simply
Erroneous (as in effect I have said before) and therefore I do not think you so
fit to be Disputed with, as to be Prayed for. If you swell with wrath, and
inordinate Passion, upon the reading of what I have here written (as some of
you have done upon the like occasion) Consider I beseech you, that the time
draws on apace when you, and I shall appear before His judgment seat, who
searches our hearts: who sees his heart who wrote these lines, and the hearts
of those that read them: And therefore I Conclude with that saying of the
Apostle, with which you Conclude your Epistle to the Parliament, Let your
Moderation be known unto all men; The Lord is at hand.

FINIS.

