A VINDICATION OF THE CLERGY, From the Contempt imposed upon them by the Author
of The Grounds and Occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy and Religion.

WITH Some short Reflections UPON HIS Further Observations.

Facit Indignatio
LONDON: Printed by Andr. Clark for Hen. Brom, at the Gun at the West End of
S. Paul's. 1672.

To the Reader.
THere came out not long since, a Discourse, under this following Title;

The GROUNDS and OCCASIONS of the CONTEMPT of the CLERGY and RELIGION Enquired
into; in a Letter Written to R. L.

So that here is first, a Contempt, Presupposed; with a search into The Grounds
and Occasions of it: and Then, a Resolution upon the Question, Page 3. That
Ignorance and Poverty are the Grounds and Occasions of that Contempt. After
which, the Author of this Letter takes wonderful pains to Prove the Clergy
contemptible, by Endeavoring to make them so. First, he dresses you up a Vicar
in a Fools-Coat, with a Capons Feather in his Cap, and then laughs at him. But
all this while; he tells us in his Preface, That he has a most solemn Reverence
for the Clergy in General; and Especially for that of England. Now how to
reconcile The Clergy in the Preface, with the Clergy in the Text, and
Title Page, I cannot imagine; for he has a solemn Reverence it seems, for the
One, and A Contempt for the Other: Unless he will say, that he speaks of an
Utopian Clergy, Before, and After; and of the English Clergy in the Middle; or
that by the Clergy in General, he Intends the Clergy with Restriction. But
without more ado; It is the Generality of the English Clergy, that he is
Pleased to divide into Fools and Beggars; And when he has framed to himself,
out of Plays, Clubs, Old Stories, Fancy and Invention, a Pitiful, Comical,
senceless Sir John, without either Brains, Mode, or Money; This is it, which he
delivers over to the World for the Character of That Clergy. And it is as
Pleasantly Drawn, as if Sir Roger himself had set for his Picture. We shall
refer the Merit of the Cause to its Proper place, and only offer a word or two
at Present, by way of Enquiry into the Grounds and Occasions of his Enquiry.

Does he make this Enquiry, for the Information of Himself, or of Others? If
the former; why does he Publish it? If the latter; I would fain know, to what
End, and with what design the Thing is done, unless it be to Vnhinge the
Government. The first Point in Consideration, is This; Whether the Clergy be
contemptible, or Not? Whereupon, most Naturally Follows, in the very next
Place, This Question, Whether or no shall the People Believe their Teachers;
and follow their Guides? For most undoubtedly, they will do, or not do, the
one, and the other, according to the opinion they have of them, or Reverence
for them. Again: If he tells the People but What they knew before, he might
have saved himself that Labor: But if he Pretends to a further discovery, It
looks as if his Business were not so much to show that the Clergy are
contemptible, as to Procure that they may be thought so; and in a word, to set
up the Church for a Jack-a-Lent, for every Man to throw a Cudgel at: Especially
considering that the whole Project is Carried on with the Spirit, and Liberty
of a Farce; and Calculated, so Pat, to the Meridian of the Rabble; that if
Merry Andrew had but hit upon it time Enough; It Is forty to one we should have
seen the whole Story, ere this, in a Puppet-Play. And why all this to the
People? Alas! They cannot help it, unless they should fall to their old Trade
of Reformation again, and one would Think we have had Enough of that Already.
Nay, put the Case, that the Monkey-Tricks, Apes-faces, and Fooleries, which he
fastens upon our Clergy, were all True; (The contrary whereof is as clear as
the Sun) He Is but an ungracious Child yet, that lays open the nakedness of his
Mother.

Nor indeed does the stress of this Imputation lie so heavy upon the
Illiterate, Imprudent or Necessitous part of the Clergy, as upon the Government
it self. For, without dispute, those miserable Creatures which he makes himself
so merry withal, would be Wiser, and Wealthier if they could: But the Charge
lies upon their Superiors, for Choosing and Providing no better: And this is no
other than the old Trick over again, of wounding our Governors through the
sides of their Ministers; and tearing the Government all to Pieces, under
Color of mending it.

Neither will it much help the matter, to say that this Enquiry was not
intended so much for a Remonstrance to the People, of the despicable Faculties,
and Estate, of their Spiritual Guides: as for a Hint to Authority, in order to
their better Provision, and supply. For first; there is no proportion at all
betwixt the Dignity of the Subject, and the manner of handling it: betwixt the
solemnity of the Pretense; and the licentious Freedom of the Style: which runs
altogether in a vein of Popular Humor, and Drollery: and it is not usual for
Men to address, to Kings, or Parliaments in Raillery or Burlesque. Now as there
is a Certainty of Mischief on the one hand, there is not so much as any
Probability (I might have said Possibility) of Benefit on the other. For,

Secondly, Beside the Indecency, and Incongruity of the Application, The
Inquisitor seems to be no less Mistaken in his Expedient, than in his Method.
For it may be Observed, that notwithstanding his distribution into Fools, and
Beggars; All his Beggars, are Fools too over and above; and subjected
indifferently upon both Accounts, to Derision, and scorn. So that unless he can
find a way to Cure Their Ignorance, as well as Their Poverty, when our
Governors shall have done their best upon the Point of Maintenance and
Revenue, we shall be still as much at a loss as ever, upon the more material
Points of Learning and Sufficiency, Except he would have the Clergy
new-modell'd, and the Poor Fools he talks of, turned to Grass again by
Hundreds, with Whites Centuries of Scandalous and Insufficient Ministers, and
then the Work were done.

And yet after all this appearance of Mischief, Intended, and Contrived, I have
still the Charity to Persuade my self that it is all but Chance-medley, and
that the Gentleman has no malice in his Heart. Not only because he Gives us to
Understand in his Preface, (by way of Anticipation) that he is no Malcontent,
either Ecclesiastical, or Civil, whatever he may seem to be; but a man may
gather as much, methinks, from the very Air of his Writing, which savours more
of a Droll, than of a Mutineer. But this does not acquit him yet of Great
Inadvertency, in a freedom of this nature. These Squibs and Crackers may do
well Enough, in a fitting place, or season; but such a Pamphlet to the
Multitude, and in This Juncture too, is like a Fire-work into the Powder-Room,
it blows up all into Confusion: And though it may provoke Laughter, and make
sport for a while; yet in the End, it runs naturally into Sedition and Schism.

I know very well, that in a second Letter of Observations upon an Answer to
the former; our Author would be thought to take another Biass, in turning the
Point of the Satyr upon the Nonconformists: but that shift will not square at
all with the scope of his Pretensions. For in stead of small, and Beggarly
Allowances, they have just none at all; neither is their Ignorance, a scandal
to our Ministry, but on the contrary, an Honor, and Advantage, upon the
comparison.

To Close up all in a Syllable; There Is a pretty Fardle of Tales bundled
together, and they have had the hap to fall into such hands as had rather lose
a Friend (not to say their Country) than a Jest. We shall proceed now to a
Consideration of the Letter it self.

A VINDICATION OF THE CLERGY.
THe Gentleman our Author is pleased to spend so much Ink and Complement upon
in his doubty Letter, you must suppose to be (...), some Man of Parts; because
he tells us he has always been a devout Admirer, as well as strict Observer of
his Actions, and has constantly taken a great delight to concur with Him in
his very Thoughts: And who do you guess this may be? Truly I am of the opinion
he so far Apes Antoninus, as that he writes (...), and means his own dear Self
in plain English: T. B. and R. L. are intended only for Blinds: Qui nescit
dissimulare, nescit vivere: So far let him go for a Politician. What a
Churchman he is, he would next insinuate by professing that he has a greater
kindness for our Mother of England, than for the painted Lady at Rome, or any
Lecturing-Gossip of Geneva, Amsterdam, etc. But all this while he desires not
to be called her Son, contenting himself to be only much her Servant, in
divulging her pretended faults, and propounding Reformation-work, as if he had
been Secretary to some Committee of plundered Ministers in those blessed Times.

That the value of our Clergy is or has been lessened, he refers to two very
plain things, the Ignorance of some of them, and the Poverty of others. These
are the Iachin and Boaz, the two Pillars or Poles on which his Aerie Castle
hangs; which if we shall chance to subvert or unhinge, let the Giant that built
and swaggers in it, look to himself. -- Quid enim tent are nocebit?
(I cannot forbear a scrap of the Poet now and then, though I know it troubles
him vilely.)

Now that I may not be altogether without method, I shall lay down three plain
Propositions, against his two plain Things, which (I doubt not) will make it as
clear as any Demonstration in Euclid, that my Gentleman had better have
employed his time, which lay so much upon his hands, in pilling of Straws, or
catching Butterflies, than in picking of holes in a Canonical Coat.

The first is this, That neither Ignorance nor Poverty do always necessarily
infer contempt.

The second, That Ignorance and Poverty are most injuriously fastened upon the
present English Clergy.

The third, That if the English Clergy be not duly valued, but lie under some
contempt, it is to be attributed to other, and those far different reasons.

And first of the first, That neither Ignorance nor Poverty do always
necessarily infer contempt. Not that I am much in love with either of them, or
intend to write a Panegyrique in their Commendation; but only vindicate their
innocence so far, as to show, that admitting my Adversaries bold Hypothesis
were true, viz. That the English Clergy is both poor and ignorant, (which we
are to examine in due time) yet it would not follow that their contempt must
needs be derived from those two sources: for it is well known to all that are
versed in Things and Books bearing date a little before yesterday, that a great
part of Mankind have and do still account Poverty a thing sacred, and make
Ignorance the Mother of their Devotion, as well as Admiration. First, as for
Ignorance, however it may render private men inconsiderable, yet it has no
such necessary influence and effect on public Persons, (bating me that mortal
sin of a School-distinction) whose reputation and esteem is not ever built
upon, or preserved by their Learning and Knowledge, but sometimes to be
attributed purely to the dignity of their Rank and Place. Though the Mayor of
the Town be but a Thatcher, and guilty of so little Scholarship, that he goes
about to read his Commission with the wrong end upwards; yet by virtue of his
Gown, Mace, and other Ensigns of Power and Government, he shall command an awe
and respect from all the Neighborhood under his Jurisdiction: And it is neither
necessary nor true de facto, that all Princes prove as Learned as Moses, or as
Wise as Solomon: some have had such ordinary natural or acquired personal
abilities, that they have been fain to leave the management of their Affairs
wholly to the Wisdom of their Councils: yet all this while their Subjects have
not withheld due Honor and Obedience from them, since their sacred Function
and Sovereign Authority are of themselves sufficient Guards to the Imperial
Crown. Where the word of a King is, there is Power, (says Solomon) whether,
like some Alexander, he is wont to sleep with Homer, or Plato under his Pillow,
or spend his most serious hours, with Domitian, in that malancholique
employment of catching and stabbing of Flies. Now although Moses (by reason of
the advantage of his Education, as he was the reputed Son of Pharaoh's
Daughter) was learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians; yet we no where read
that Aaron was any great Scholar, but only capacitated to be a Mouth to Moses,
whilst Moses was to him in stead of God: And that he and his Posterity (upon
whom that Priesthood was entailed) were had in great honor by the People, is
to be attributed to their stupendiously solemn Consecration, their rich Attire,
and distinguishing Vestments, their Mitres and holy Crowns, and their sacred
Unction, designed on purpose to beget and maintain a venerable esteem of them
in Men's Minds, together with Gods express command they should not be evil
spoken of, Exodus 22.28. and his severe Judgments upon such as did not respect
their persons, Lam. 4.16. And I appeal to the whole Series of the Jewish
Dispensation, whether those Priests must needs be all profound Doctors and
Rabbis, whose business was to rive Oxen, (not Texts) blow Trumpets, offer
Incense, and the like: here was no need of quick Parts, ample Faculties, or
much-acquired Knowledge; and yet their Ministry and Persons (for their Orders
sake) were never suspected of contempt. Again, if it were worth the while to
rake in the Dunghill of Pagan Idolatry, it would easily appear what ignorant and
stupid Wretches their Priests generally were, and yet had the People in great
awe. Not to insist upon the salvage, obscene, and villainous Rites of the more
barbarous Nations; their sacrificing Men and Children to the Devil, and
worshipping all manner of things for Deities, excepting only the true God that
made the World; I shall only note in transitu how things stood with the Romans
who pretended to be the civilized People: for whatever Pliny boasts to the
contrary, their hands also were frequently dipped in Humane Blood, as
Tertullian and Lactantius have observed; and their Superstitions were as
nonsensically ridiculous, as numerous. And however their Priests by the Devils
delusions seemed to presage future evens from the Entrails of Beasts, flight of
Birds, and the like; yet they were not required to be any great Conjurers at
Learning: all the Accomplishments their Curiones, Augures, Flamines,
Pontifices, Salii, Aruspices, and the rest of their Orders pretended to, were
only such as these, That they were of Body unmaimed, legal Years, could butcher
and dress a Bullock, and it may be dance handsomely, and sing indifferently, and
eat well; a steady Hand, an acute Knife, agile Body, and wide Throat, were then
mighty Breeding: And a little Education qualified their Vestal Virgins to trim
up a Lamp, and worship the Palladium, and those Penates said to be brought from
Troy for a lucky Pawn of the lastingness of their Empire. So far was Ignorance
from breeding contempt, that the Politicians in those days seem to me to use it
as the great mean to preserve the respect of all their Religious Rites and
Persons also. They knew the Vulgar do more earnestly admire little things and
devices hid from them, thinking some great virtue or mystery couched under
whatsoever they understand not. And he that has but half an eye may see, that
Rome Christian (who will needs be Sovereign Lady of the Religious, as her old
Grandame was of the Heathen World) proceeds upon the very same principle,
having established Ignorance by a Law, and requiring Mass to be said constantly
in an unknown Tongue; unknown, I say, as well to the Priest who reads it
oftentimes, as to the People that hear it. What mean all their fictitious
Relics, those many Loads of Timber, (as they would make) said to be pieces of
our Savior's Cross; the infinite number of forged Nails, vended for those that
pierced his Hands and Feet; John Baptist's Head preserved miraculously in two
or three several places; Ioseph's Humm, the Virgin Mary's Milk? etc. These and
a thousand such little Inventions, and Legendary Tales, as they are undeniable
Arguments of a Catholic stupidity amongst them, so they were never intended to
expose their Clergy, who are believed to work new Miracles every day by a
careful application and management of the old.

Lastly, To look a little more homewards: We are none of us such Fools, but our
Mistress Experience may inform us, that the most rude and illiterate Men have
sometimes been admired and followed by the multitude, as the only powerful and
heavenly Preachers, whilst in the interim a wise and very learned Clergy has
been despised, ejected, and put to silence under pretense of Insufficiency.
What Parts or Learning were those Mountebank Divines guilty of in the late
times of Rebellion, who yet made a shift to Preach almost all England out of
their Wits? Were not Confidence, and Ignorance, antique Gestures, piteous
Faces, canting Phrases, and earnest Tautologies, all the Rhetoric most of them
pretended to? Did they not dawb miserably with untempered Mortar? and in stead
of St. Paul's (...), (rightly dividing) did they not mangle and tear the good
Word of God, and jumble and dash the sacred Texts, those Orient Pearls, so
rudely one against another, till all were broke in pieces? Did they not give
Glasses at random, and make false Consequences without fear or wit, often
laying the whole weight of the Story upon some slender Circumstance, as that
Dives went to Hell because he was Rich, and the like? Yet these were the only
Boanerges in those days, who like a Land-stood carried all before them. Populus
aliquando vult decipi, especially when Authority (though but usurped) favors
the design: For had they enquired into the Cheat, they might easily have
discovered that many of these painful Bawlers were no more Scholars than those
Geese which saved the Capitol.

Then how egregiously is our wise Clergy-mender mistaken here in one moiety of
his Hypothesis? Alas! Ignorance is so far from exposing a public Person, that
(allowing him Power and Authority with it) it is the only way to rear and
advance his esteem amongst the generality of Mankind, who are themselves
unlearned; and if the Preachers great business be to influence and engage the
Peoples affections for that end, he must be sure to meddle with none but
Thimble and Bodkin Divinity, he must renounce his vain Philosophy, he must
beware of all Carnal, though never such Rational Discourses; take all his Books
and burn them, (there is a private Text for that, Act. 19.) and teach wholly by
the Spirit, and then his business is done, Never man spoke like this man.

Secondly, That Contempt was ever Poverties fatal Handmaid, is one Doctor's
judgment indeed; but if he be found singular, what if he should talk rather
like an Apothecary in that too? Surely the intelligent part of Mankind don't
use to judge of things by their gaudy outside, to esteem the Horse by his
Trappings, the Ass by his burden, or the Man's Worth by his Wealth. Quantum
quisque sua nummorum -- is only a mistake of the seduced Vulgar: And that end
of Latin borrowed of a certain Satyrist, Nil habet infelix paupertas durius in
se
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit --
amounts to no more than this, that Poverty (abstractly considered without all
intrinsic Worth and Parts) makes men ridiculous amongst flouting Heathen: (for
it is well known that the Principles of Christianity oblige us to make such Men
objects rather of our Pity and Charity:) for even the sober Heathen had brains
enough to distinguish between a Philosopher and an Idiot, a good Man and a bad;
and none but Fools amongst them were wont to put the Man into one Scale, and
the Money into the other, and thereby guess at his just price. You don't find
any of their Learned Deifying Money, but all unanimously declaiming against it,
as an old Enemy of Virtue, by Men's abuse, as Euripides complains, (...)
Pythagoras in his Golden Precepts recommends not Gold to his Disciples, but
pure beaten Virtue, and a moderation of all extravagant Passions. And I
remember a great Proficient in Epicurus his School, (if yet he was not more his
own Master) does not only, like an arch Wag, laugh at all the rest of the
vulgar Deities, but professedly lashes the blind God of Wealth (as if he were a
blind Bear) through many of his Dialogues, especially that ycleped Timon, where
he tells you, that Pride, Ostentation, Effeminacy, Violence and Fraud, do ever
crowd in at the door with Plutus, whereas Labor, Wisdom, Temperance,
Fortitude, and a world of other Virtues, are wont to march under the Conduct of
Poverty. Amongst the various Sects of Philosophers, only the Peripateticks seem
to have a kindness for Money, as one necessary ingredient for making up the
Golden Calf of their Summum Bonum: the rest generally declare against it, and
value a Philosopher in his threadbare Cloak, or Cynical Tub, above Croesus and
Midas, those gingling Pack-horses, or Alexander that prodigious Robber, with
all his spoils. The Stoics in particular profess themselves Volunteers for
Poverty, and speak more sense (whether dissembling or in earnest, is not a
halfpenny matter) to render Riches contemptible, than some body else can do
Poverty, with all the artifices he has. In a word, a man might be honest,
virtuous and wise in those days, though he was not Master of both the Indies:
nay, such an one, though brought to his shifts by Tyranny or Chance, and forced
to the servile office of drawing water merely to get bread, should be gladly
received, and easily believed by the best of Men.

But we need not stand to the verdict of these Ethnic Oracles only, since
Christ's own Jury of Life and Death, his Apostles, have given it against our
Adversaries false Indictment: St. Peter, their Foreman, speaks the sense of
all the rest, (excepting only Judas, who for his love of Mammon amongst other
reasons fell from his place) Silver and Gold have I none. The Kingdom Christ
claimed was purely spiritual, and that old Sophisters large offer not likely
therefore to succeed, when he said, All these will I give thee, etc. He
required the first Promulgers of his Gospel, to forsake all when they followed
him, to carry neither purse nor scrip in their journey, that the World might be
convinced he stood not in need of any common helps and artifices to plant his
holy Religion, and persuade Men to embrace it: for the more low and improbable
means and instruments are, the more admirable certainly is the effect: it made
the arrogant Greeks themselves pluck in their horns, when they met with (...),
a poor Mechanic beating them at their own Weapon; that a parcel of mean
illiterate Fishermen, and such like, should reform a debauched World, and
plant the Christian Faith in all Nations, is argument enough that the Hand of
God was in all this, who works his Will to the more advantage sometimes by
balking the assistance of the Rich and Learned: And though when the Church was
under persecution, those primitive Christians laid all their Estates at the
Apostles feet; yet they employed them wholly for the Churches public use, and
are not believed to have licked their fingers, and enriched themselves thereby.
I never heard that St. Peter himself left one penny stock in his pretended
Successors Coffer.

It Is true indeed, since the World is come into the Church, and Kings have
embraced and undertaken to defend the Faith, the face of things is most
reasonably altered, and a competent Patrimony settled upon the Church in
general: That of Rome in particular is pretty well to live, as we say, for
matter of maintenance, and many of her Grandees may possibly keep up their
Reputation by their vast Wealth, and outward Splendor: but yet every body
knows, that several of their Religious Orders are professed Mendieants, and
sworn Votaries to Poverty; and these are so far from being laughed at, that
they are had in mighty reverence and superlative admiration by all of that
Belief. Nor do I see that accidental must needs make a Clerick ridiculous, more
than wilful Poverty; nay, without all peradventure, the former deserves most to
be pitied, as being sometimes many an honest Man's inevitable doom, as well as
Job's and Lazarus's, whilst the latter is of mere affectation, and
superstitious choice.

And therefore I would entreat our wise Author to suppose a thing that may be
for once, for you see he is very prodigal of Hypotheses that may not be.
Suppose a Church under the persecution of Rebels, and sacrilegious Usurpers,
where the rich and fattest Parsons are found the greatest Delinquents,
plundered, sequestered, and brought to want of bread, having no Clothes almost
left to their backs, excepting only a Stone-Doublet; imagine, I say, they are
confined like St. Paul, and have no other work but to convert Iaylors, sing
Psalms with their feet in the Stocks, and preach to the Spirits in prison: if
these learned and sacred Persons be deemed the (...) of the World by an
uncircumcised Crew of Miscreants, whose fault is that? Neither their Poverty,
nor Exile, nor all their sufferings, impair their Reputation amongst sober,
religious, and loyal Persons, who rather admire and applaud their resolved
Fidelity to God and the King, let Men and Devils do their worst. Been facere
and male audire Regium est: the dirt and reproaches cast upon them by
foul-mouthed Men, rebounds all upon themselves; their unjust slanders are our
highest honor, their detractions add to our esteem; the blots and false
aspersions they cast upon our good names, do but, as so many spots, set off
their beauty: indeed, if Cato, if Laelius, if the Scipio's should contemn and
defame me, (says Seneca) I should be moved; but let the Rabble say what they
will: Mean while, 'twere strange to say these worthy Men were thus despised and
handled because they were poor, whereas the contrary is most manifest; their
fair Revenues, Lands and Dignities, the Gold and Silver Vessels of the Temple,
etc. were the undoubted baits that tempted the avarice of Men sacrilegiously
disposed, to fall foully and falsely upon their Reputation.

Now from the Premises, every Novice in Logic may infer, that the Ignorance of
a Clergyman does not necessarily render him contemptible with the vulgar, nor
his Poverty amongst the wise and learned; and consequently that my first
Proposition is true.

But what if it be? will he say; if the second be false, you are but where I
left you. Not so neither, under favor, I conceive a little ground is gained of
him (more perhaps than he can allow the Vicar for his Glebe) thereby: for if
public Persons are not always, nay very seldom, contemptible for their own
either Ignorance or Poverty, then there is some way made for my third
Proposition, which will be sure to meet with him at the long run, and inform
him, that if our present Clergy want an inch of that respect due to their
Function, it is to be attributed to far different reasons, and neither of those
two upon which he has founded his pretty little Church History.

But what his modesty supposes and grants to make himself merry, I shall
take the boldness to deny, and maintain the contrary; which is my second
Proposition, That Ignorance and Poverty are most injuriously fastened upon the
present English Clergy.

In order to the clearing hereof, it must be first stated how far we are
agreed, and wherein we differ; and then I shall leave it to impartial Readers
to believe and judge who has greatest reason and truth of his side.

We are agreed in the first place (I presume) whom we mean by the present
English Clergy, viz. such Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, as are now (or were at
least about last Michaelmas-Term) actually preferred in the Church of England.
So that we exclude first, all that having sometime been of our Clergy, are
since dead, and so cannot de jure render such as are now alive contemptible:
for what is that to me, if my Predecessor forty or fifty years ago could not
say his Commandments, or tell how many Apostles our Lord had, or that he baited
a white Bear now and then in his Sermons, or talked beside the Cushion? There Is
not the same reason for Preaching sure, as for Original Sin, that it should be
entailed upon all Posterity; and yet our Author is so ingenuous as to produce
instances before he was born (the truth whereof might perhaps be questioned
too) to serve his present purpose, as you shall see anon.

Secondly, we exclude also all the Nonconforming Brethren, of what Sect or
Party soever, who have indeed excluded themselves to our hands, by departing
schismatically from our Communion. We intend not to answer for their ridiculous
extravagancies in the Pulpit, more than their other faults: for what do their
gross abuses of Preaching concern the Orthodox Clergy, who abhor to tread in
their steps? Men may as well charge upon us the old Monk's Proof of a plurality
of Worlds, from that Text, St. Luke 17.17. Annon december facti sunt mundi? or the
ignorance of those two other Disputants, who having resolved that ten thousand
Spirits might dance upon a Needles point, could not determine where the Piper
must stand all this while. Yet this will be found too some bodies close way of
reasoning; some factious Separatists have used foolish Phrases and childish
Metaphors in their Preachments, ergo, the English Clergy is Ignorant.

Secondly, We are agreed further against the brainsick Catharists conceit, and
expect not to see a Clergy made up all of Saints and Worthies. It is supposed
on both sides* that every Vicar is not obliged to be as rich as the Vicar of
Rome; and that two or three in a County may be connived at, although they be
not altogether as learned as Saint Augustine. We know full well that there is
no Profession in Nature wherein all are improved to the same Perfection: There
was, and always will be an Ignoramus or two amongst the Lawyers, some Quacks
and Empiricks amongst Physicians, some Idiots in the Schools of Philosophers,
and Dunces in the number of pretended Scholars, some poor Gentry amidst the
rich, to make up the Harmony of things; and that it were a downright piece of
Sophistry to condemn any whole Profession and Order of Men, for the ignorance,
mistakes, and absurdities of some few Individuals thereunto belonging. Thus far
I must hold my Gentleman's Nose to the Grind-stone, and make him agreed whether
he will or no; for otherwise he fights with his own shadow, and fathers faults
upon the Clergy, which are either committed by those who are not of that rank,
or are not a sufficient number to make a denomination.

So that the great difference or Ball of contention between us, is, Whether the
generality, or at least a great part of our present English Clergy deserve the
brands of poor and ignorant, or not? He does not only take it for granted all
along, but expressly affirms it, and that with a Witness, page 81. (as if the
Lord's Lot were a mere Lottery, wherein there are an hundred Blanks for one
Prize) but my second Proposition does with as much Confidence and more Reason
deny it.

First, As for Ignorance, I blush for him, to think he could find no where to
fasten that, but upon one of the most learned Churches in the World; which as
it has always been able to deal with the formidable Roman Giants on the one
hand, and those undermining Separatists on the other, (for Papist and Puritan,
like Sampson's Foxes, though looking and running two several ways, yet are ever
joined together in the Tail) so I am bold to say, it is now more plentifully
furnished with Men of singular Worth, universal Knowledge, and great Clerks,
than ever it has been since the Reformation.

Now although he can expect but little favor from me, yet I will do him the
justice to believe he never intended to bring our Reverend Prelates into his
Indictment, nor yet the worthy Deans, and other Dignitaries in the Church, Men
generally of known Abilities, some of whose Works do not only praise them in
the Gates, but are also famous throughout the World. Nor do I think him so
ungrateful to our Universities, as to deny that they now flourish more than
heretofore with all sorts of good Literature, very learned Men, and accurate
Preachers. Nor do I believe he aims at the City, since they are fully satisfied
in the Labors of their Pastors, unless they quarrel them sometimes for their
too much Humane Learning, Reason, and Morality, as being hard words many of
them were not brought up to. No, the Ignorance he upbraids us with, must be
amongst us in the Country, or no where. Now it is not probable there should be
many Dunces amongst the Parsons, considering they hold their Benefices either
from the Broad Seal, (for obtaining which 'twere great rashness to think they
give not as ample Testimony of their Parts, as a Man must do for his Truth and
Honesty before he can procure an ordinary Brief) or from some Spiritual or
Temporal Lord, (and it were somewhat saucy to think either of them keeps a Fool
for his Chaplain) or some Collegiate Society, (and 'twere as strange they
should search all about for an Hocus, when they have so many good Scholars at
home unemployed, and fit to present) or some Civil Incorporation or Company,
(and they are not so easily bribed, but will have their choice of several
persons all of good note) or lastly, from some private Patron; and there lies
all the danger, lest he having an Oak Tree, or good Horse to sell, should close
with his best Chapman, and require no more Latin skill in his Clerk, than to
render [ Quantum dabis?] into current English Money. But I hope such sordid
practices are very rare; I Am sure it is below the Spirit of a true English
Gentleman, (who can sacrifice his whole Estate to serve his King and Church) to
stoop to such a pitiful Bribe or Bargain, forgetting Honor and Conscience both
at once: Besides, if any that wear that Name be so far degenerated, as to
expose a Benefice to Sale; yet where is that bold Son of Simon, who shall dare
to be the Buyer? He must be a prodigious Sot indeed, who will pawn his own
Soul, by living in a continued perjury, to be put into a capacity of saving
other men's: So improbable it is there should be many ignorant Parsons. And if I
may guess at other Diocesses by this, I must tell our pragmatical Author, that
I know very few Parsons who will turn their backs of him in any solid piece of
old Learning, many of them being aware of his new Philosophy too.

But the whole strain of his Book tells us, he aims at a cowardly triumph over
the little Vicars and Curates, though he is not likely to have his end of them
neither. One of them has answered him already, (but that he was so civil to his
old Acquaintance, as to be too too free and prodigal in his Concessions) and,
for ought he shall ever know the contrary, I may be another.

As for the Vicars and Curates in Cities and Corporations, (which make a
considerable part of the Nation) himself grants they are mostly very learned
and judicious persons: but then he tells us a piece of worshipful News, that
Christ came not to save Mayors and Aldermen, and Merchants only, but
Country People also, whereby he requires me to follow him into the Villages, to
find out that Ignorance we are Nosed withal, and hitherto are at a loss for.
And the truth is, I have made it more my business than ever he has done, to
enquire into these Men of a low Church-Dispensation, (as we must phrase it) and
will maintain it against him or any other, be he never so confidently
ingenious, that many of them are Men of very considerable Worth, and want
nothing but a little of his boldness to show their Parts, and a Friend at Court
to provide them of good Benefices. The generality of them (though perhaps they
aspire not to be made the Kings Professors, nor can split the hair exactly in
determining the five Points, or confuting Transubstantiation, yet) are very
sufficiently qualified for the discharge of their Cures. Nay, there is scarce
any amongst 'um all, but preaches once every Sunday, and that with good
gravity, honest sobriety, and to take satisfaction of his Parishioners; and if
there be here and there one less knowing than others, you shall be sure to find
him at it twice a day, Bishop Andrew's his old Rule being worn out in some
places, viz. He that preaches twice every Sunday, usually prates once. In a
word, if upon due examination our Author had found but ten men of worth amongst
all the Vicars of England, had he been a merciful Chastiser, he might have
found out a very good Precedent, to have spared the rest for their sakes: But
since he writes at random of Men he has never studied, and has taken so much
pains to impose upon the World, with a parcel of prodigious Whiskers dressed a
la mode, since we defy him to pick out Ten amongst us all who have not
Learning enough to discharge our places, let him hereafter keep his Ignorance
to himself, for it belongs to very few of our Profession.

Nor is he much more ingenuous in representing the Poverty of our inferior
Clergy, (for them alone he must mean) by making it far more extreme and
desperate than in truth it is. For if any man has such a miraculous Faith, as
to take his word, rather than believe his own eyes, he must needs fancy them a
company of sneaking Mendicant Friars, who live from hand to mouth, who are
pincht with want of the common necessaries of life, and spend all their days in
studying only to stave off those two troublesome Creditors, the Back and Belly.

Indeed it must be confessed that the Church of England is not now so rich,
fat, and well-liking, as she was in diebus illis his days, and consequently not
able to settle such plentiful Portions upon her younger Children as she would:
for she lost a considerable Collop by the Pope, (however our Author is so civil
to the old Gentleman, as not to mention him) who laid a fair foundation of
Sacrilege, by impropriating 3845. of the 9284. Parishes then in England, as
Doctor Basire notes out of Cambden. And when she had somewhat picked up her
crumbs again, by the accession of new Revenues, King Henry the Eighth knowing
as infallibly as the Pope himself, that the Church Lands were very good Lands,
could not forbear writing after his Holiness's Copy, but gave her such a
tearing Purge, that she has never recovered her Complexion since. Not to
mention how far Queen Eliz. did patrizare, thanks be to God our Vicarages are
not all so poor as they left them; for, however our Author's memory fails him
again, he speaks not a syllable of any late Augmentations: No, he never heard
that our Reverend Bishops, and Deans, and Chapters, have (by the gracious
Intimation, and to the eternal Honor of His present Majesty) competently
augmented most, if not all the small Vicarages belonging to them respectively.
And now I have told him, it would be a good jest indeed if he should write an
effectual piece to make the Sky fall; I mean, to persuade all other
Impropriation-mongers to follow so good an Example, and bring them to some
satisfaction however, for I despair he should ever win them to refund the
whole, and make us all Parsons again, although it be a grievance to our
Consciences, that Vicarages and Sacrilege came first into England together from
Rome, and in the same Cloak-bag; and besides, Experience tells us, that
Church Lands (like the Ark of God amongst the Philistims) have been but a
plague to the Families, and a canker in the Estates of their Purchasers, as
says the Heathen Prophet, -- Vix gaudet tertius Haeres.

Now though we dare not be so bold as to say with my Lord Bacon, that all
Parliaments since the 27 and 31 of King Henry the Eighth, stand obliged to God
in Conscience to reduce the Patrimony of the Church, (to which he adds, that
since they have debarred Christ's Spouse of a great part of her Dowry, it were
reason they made her a competent Ioynture) yet thus much we dare boldly say,
that our gracious Sovereign and this present Parliament have already given a
signal earnest of their pious intentions, by restoring that part of the
Churches Patrimony which was bought and sold by those unhallowed Rumpers; and
our little Historian was unworthy to mention that Noble Act, (reserved for some
great Hand to record it) for which their Names shall be had in everlasting
remembrance.

In the mean time, those Vicars whose Incomes are but small as yet, content
themselves to make a Virtue of Necessity, and cut their Coat according to their
Cloth. Enough sometimes is as good as a Feast, and a Dinner of Herbs is more
pleasant and acceptable to some, than a stalled Ox attended with all varieties
is to others. Not one of an hundred of the Clergy but is as well provided for
as those the Poet cries up for the happy Men, Queis Deus parca dedit quod satis
est manu. Indeed I have often admired to observe how contentedly, yea, how
plentifully several of them live upon a little; and though I have imputed it
somewhat to their own prudence, frugality, temperance, and cutting off many
artificial necessities others create to themselves; yet I could not but call to
mind the Widows Cruise of Oil; and Barrel of Meal that never consumed while
they were feeding a Prophet, and almost fancied God gave them Blessings other
Men know not of, and made some secret addition to their store: Nay, I have
known some of them grow insensibly into the number of the Rich, whilst many of
their Neighbors have (by their own imprudence, or some unlucky accident) lived
to bury fair Estates before them, and left nothing when they died but a Wife
perhaps, and five or six pretty Children; by way of Legacy to the Parish.
However, admitting they steer but Agur's middle course between the two extremes
all their lives, it is sufficient for my present purpose; and I have reason to
conclude, that Poverty as well as Ignorance is most injuriously attributed to
the generality of our present English Clergy, Quod erat demonstrandum.

Now though I am not obliged to take any notice of the Gentleman's whole
subsequent Discourse, because it is built upon a false foundation, viz. A pair
of Principles of his own forging; yet for diversions sake, we'll give him his
Hypothesis for once, provided he never ask it more, to see what work he makes
on it: we'll allow him to stand in the Air with Archimedes, only to see what
Knacks and Feats of Activity he is dexterous at.

When he has told us with much modesty, that the generality of our Clergy are
Fools and Beggars, parti per pale, he proceeds to give us a reasonable account
both of their Ignorance and Poverty.

A great part of their pretended Ignorance, he lays upon the old-fashioned
methods and discipline of Schooling, to assure us he is a well-wisher to some
new Model, he knows not what, but is content at present to be only so far a
Regulator, as to mention some very mischievous abuses of Youth in common
Schools, which I shall enquire into by and by: for it were not amiss to inform
him by the way, that all Men are not of the Fanatic Skip-Iack's mind, for new
Models and Methods, (more than for new Moons, and new Gods) provided the old
have been found by long experience neither uncertain nor ineffectual. (...)
says plodding Aristotle, and it is as true as if Carts himself had said it,
That changing foundations is oftentimes of dangerous consequence. Historians do
but laugh at the mighty devices of projecting Nero, to cut a Channel from the
Lake Avernus, to the mouth of Tiber, and pierce the massy Ithmus in Achaia, as
vain attempts to shorten Voyages, and (as it were) cross the Sea by Land. Thus
Nicanor Seleucus went about to cut the Straight between the Euxine and Caspian
Seas; and Cleopatra, Camer. Medit.
that which divides the Red Sea from Egypt: yet none of them brought their
design to effect, but only made themselves ridiculous, for Men were still fain
to go the old way. And truly the device of training up Boys after a new method,
may be ingenious and plausible in the Theory, but perhaps not so practicable
and successful as the old. Good Counsels have ofttimes bad events; and all
Reformers ought to reflect upon that famous Axiom of the Schools, Bonum ex
causa integra, Malum ex quolibet defectu, so far, as to remember, that all
circumstances must concur to make the Model complete, since one considerable
defect or mistake in Ichnography, mars the whole project: Old Methods may have
their imperfections and superfluities, but yet it argues no great wisdom to
abandom them for any new ones suspected to be guilty of as many more. I now
proceed to consider the abuses our Author observes in the old received way of
School-Education.

The first is, That Boys are kept in pure slavery to Latin and Greek words,
till 16 or 17 years of age: so that if you will believe him, Rider's Dictionary
and Scapula's Lexicon are the only Books they do, or at least need converse
with for that purpose. To remedy this abuse, (which yet is of his own making)
he starts the fancy of putting them upon English Authors: that doubtless would
be as pleasing as Tityrus's Apples and Nuts to them who are naturally inclined
to ease and idleness, but would not so well satisfy their Parents, who send
them to School chiefly to learn Amo's and (...)'s, for so we are taught to call
the Greek and Latin Tongues. But that they should fall upon Geometry and
Philosophical Discourses for that end, rather than Homer, Virgil, Tully, etc.
is such a monster, as the teeming Africa never brought forth the fellow of it:
'twere (...) indeed, to put Boys upon puzzling their tender Brains about
crabbed Theories, and knotty Problems, such as grown Men of the profoundest
judgments can scarcely fathom or understand; as if Hercules's Shoes would fit a
Dwarf, as if Lambs could wade where Elephants are forced to swim, and every
little Philistim could play at Quarter-staff with Goliah's Beam.

There is indeed a sort of Philosophy, which, as it was calculated for the
nonage of the World, so it is still best accommodated and suited to younger
Capacities, I mean, Poetry, the old Philosophy of all, flourishing many Ages
before Aristotle was born. So M. Tyrius calls it in one of his Sermons, (and he
was a pretty good Preacher for a Moral Man) (...); etc. Arts and Sciences were
then in their infancy, and their way of teaching was not to tell downright
truth, reason home and bluntly, and make irresistible Demonstrations; but to
insinuate Virtue and Knowledge by merry Tales, and innocent Fictions; and if I
mistake not, they borrowed that mode, as many other things, from the Hebrews,
who used then to be instructed about high and heavenly matters by Types and
Shadows taken from below. Now give me leave to show our Author the difference
even in his own story of Phaeton, which he imagines to be so tedious to Boys:
but that is his error, they naturally love stories; and though they have not
capacity enough to understand a Logical Definition of Rashness, and conceive a
clear notion of Presumption; yet they will easily apprehend the moral of that
Fable, and tell you the Young Man had better have taken his Fathers disswasive,
-- ( non est mortale quod optas) and that none but Fools will venture on
difficult Tasks they are not able to manage; and consequently I infer, that to
put Boys upon the most sublime and solid parts of Learning, were to make them
hazard Phaeton's destiny, i. e. breaking the neck of all their parts: so that
let him be as singularly wise as he will, and spend his breath in vain, which
might have better served to cool his Chicken-broth, the Books ordinarily read
in Schools, will still be found most proper for Boys, in order to their gaining
those two famous Languages, and sowing the seeds of Knowledge in their Minds.

Another abuse of Youth, and loss of time, he reckons the Homerick rumblers,
and large Repetitions of other Authors appointed sometimes for their
Break-fasts, which he will have to be as dreadful to them as an old
Parliament-Fast, (an odd similitude by the way; and had the Parson used it,
'twould have been laughed at sufficiently; for let the World judge if any Text
in the Bible be not more like an ingenious Picture, than a Breakfast is like a
Fast) whereas indeed they are not tiresom to any but Dolts and unhewen
Blockheads, who are never likely to be fashioned into Mercuries. Now if he
alone be ignorant that this practice of common Schools is not only pardonable,
but of very excellent use, who can help it? Every body else knows, that
Children have a moist and supple Brain, like soft Wax, capable of any
impressions, and that Memory is the most early faculty of the Soul, which
exerts it self in the very dawning of Sense and Cogitation, (whereupon Plato
calls it the Mother of the Muses) and is in its prime and meridian vigor
before Imagination or Fancy, much less Understanding and Judgment, come
perfectly to them; these requiring a much different, if not quite contrary
temperature: And common experience tells us, that we remember nothing so firmly
and lastingly as what we did and learnt in our younger years; and that Grammar
and Languages are gotten chiefly by Memory, and therefore more easily attained
by Boys than grown Men. The learned Spaniard in his Trial of Wits, observes
very well, that if a Biscain of thirty or forty years old come to dwell in
Castile, he will never master and speak that Language cleverly; whereas if he
comes a Boy, he grows such a proficient thereat in two or three years, that one
would swear he was born in Toledo. If Memory therefore be the first and
principal faculty to be improved for gaining Languages, it was capriciously
done to blame the custom of common Schools for what they ought rather to be
commended, viz. as well for exercising a Lad's memory often in the general, as
for committing high and brave-sens'd Poems to it in particular, since out of
that, as the common Storehouse, the Fancy is afterward enriched and raised to
an aptitude for Eloquence and Poetry, and the Judgment also by degrees comes
acquainted with the nature of things, be they never such high Moralities.

Nor do I know any such silly Academicks as he describes, who upon reading
Tully's Offices, and the best Poets over again at their maturer years, do not
take double delight and satisfaction to one that never saw them before.

As for that Objection in the close of his Paedagogical abuses, I suppose it
was started more to dally and play with, than to answer: for it is most true
still, that all mischiefs and faults in Schooling refer as well to other
learned Professions, as to the Clergy, and it neither is by him, nor can be
made out by all the Logicks in Europe, how it should come to pass that the very
same method of Schooling daily produces more learned Lawyers, more eminent
Physicians, and yet more ignorant Divines than ever.

The next complaint he makes, is of the inconsiderate sending all sorts of Lads
to the University; which because it is the first truth he has yet spoken, I
shall be so civil as to grant it, (not absolutely, and for his sake, but) upon
condition I be allowed to interpose some Remarks and Animadversions upon his
Discourse thereof.

Doubtless Socrates was in the right, that, as his Mother, though an expert
Midwife, could not deliver a Woman who was not with Child; so neither could her
Son make his Scholars bring forth any Science, unless they had understanding to
conceive it. And Cicero might have been so wise as to have examined his Son
Mark's Parts before he sent him to Athens: for albeit he committed him to an
able Tutour Cratippus his care; yet the Lad proved but a Cods-head, and the
Orator was forced to confess at last, that resisting Nature was but like the
Giants fighting against the Gods. Galen's Father was better advised when he put
him upon the study of Physic, perceiving he had a singular wit and inclination
for that Science; though Lucian's Parents again were as much out, who concluded
by the Bulls, Horses, and Men of Wax he delighted to make in his Childhood, his
Genius more suited with being a Statuary, than a Philosopher. However, it is a
truth generally confessed, that Lads ought to have Parts and Capacities for
those Professions to which they are respectively designed. What if a Borish
Parent be so partial or ignorant, as to think his great Head is an infallible
sign the Boy will make a sound Philosopher, or able Theologue? Other Men know,
that the biggest Oranges have the hardest and thickest Sculls, and afford the
least quantity of Juice: And what if a fond Mother, by the advice of the small
Pedant at the sign of the very same little House by the Church-yard-side, be
resolved to make her Zon Dick a Scholard, (of all the rest?) Certainly Tutours
are neither bound to work Miracles, nor yet to accept of Hobson's choice: for
(whatever is suggested to the contrary) I have known diverse returned by the
next Carrier, as insufficient, to the place of Execution from whence they came.
But all this while let Examinations in the University be never so strict, some
will prove Dunces to the Worlds end, through their idleness, misplacing their
Studies, or decay of their Parts, and others be rejected who might have proved
Miracles of the Age, though at present they seemed to be of slow and heavy
Parts: for we have no infallible Standard whereby to know assuredly this Lad
will, and that other can never make a Scholar.

My Spanish Author (honest John Huarte, who seems to be as well skilled in this
affair as my English one, yea, as T. B. and R. L. put together) tells it me for
a very truth, that there is sometimes a certain dullness in Children, which
argues a greater wit in another age; and some Boys of quick Parts, and a ready
Ingeny, like Summer-fruits, have flagg'd and withered in a short space, and
according to the Proverb, Soon ripe, soon rotten, proved very ordinary and dull
Men. And therefore I cannot but commend and recommend the practice of the
Jesuits in this, who make not a rash judgment of Children's faculties whilst
they are conning their first Elements, but stay till they come to years of
discretion, and then make a close enquiry what they are, and which way their
Parts lie, whether to Poetry, Physic, Oratory, History, Mathematics, Law or
Divinity; and then, by confining them to that particular Study, bring them to a
considerable perfection therein, whilst others gargling all manner of Books
that come next, content themselves with a smattering of all kinds of Learning,
but prove excellent in none. To sum up this particular, it appears by the
premises, that though we may be sometimes deceived in guessing at a Lads parts,
yet most certainly those Parents and Grammaticasters are blameworthy, who
pitch upon the most unlikely of all the number for the Scholar; and
Universities, are not much more to be excused if they receive such an one upon
their request or commendation.

After ability in reference to Parts, I must follow my Leader to examine the
Lad's abilities in Purse: And it is denied to be any common practice for Parents
or Friends to send a Boy to the University, who sit not down first and count
the cost and charges, and intend not to contribute something at least to his
subsistence: if they do, I would fain know what Tutour will admit him, unless
he resolves to be a Father to him, and adopting him for his own, designs to
furnish him with all necessaries for Back and Belly, as well as those for the
Head. It must be confessed indeed, that all have not so large Incomes as some;
but yet withal, that they whose supplies are two profuse, are in a fairer way
to miscarry than such as have rather too little: many are forced, for want of
that same, to live in honest servitude, and the narrow compass of Sizers; what
then? Must it therefore follow they are condemned to such drudgeries as
Chamber-sweeping, Water-fetching, and buying of Butter and Eggs? That Is as very
a Flam as all the rest: No, the main duty required at their hands, is only to
hold a Trencher, and College-Commons will not keep them at that from morning
till night, but afford them sufficient intervals as well for their Studies as
Recreations. What Man is ignorant that too large Allowances often make Lads
prove idle and debauched? whereas on the contrary, they whose maintenance is
short, as knowing what they must trust to, and being to lay the foundation of
their own fortunes, and live by their wits, are usually the closest Students,
and make the most eminent Scholars. Venture Magister artis, was Persius's Motto,
and Pythagoras his Golden Scrap -- (...) -- attributes a kind of Omnipotence to
Necessity. Poor Lads may be supposed to bring a considerable stock of Parts
along with them, though little else, and their own wants will spur up their
industry to improve them to the utmost, and therefore to shut our School-doors
against all of inferior quality and low fortunes, were an incomparable device
to advance all learned Professions, or rather to stock an University with a
loytering kind of Cattle, commonly called Drones and Dunces. Indeed the project
of maintaining all there till they come to be Masters in Arts, I could like
well, but that, upon consideration of the premises, I find it equally
impossible with the rest of his easy Proposals? What then? Must they down at
four years end upon the top of the Pack, and thence skip into the Pulpit? More
words to a bargain sure; let the young Man stay till he be out of his time,
before he sets up for himself: How then must he live till he come to be of
Spiritual age? for Philosophy is a very idle thing when one is cold, and the
small Systeme will not satisfy Nature: Is the Bishop of the Diocese bound to
give him Orders to keep him from starving, or being a Parish charge? No danger
of that, because he is too young, but that we are told there is a thing called
a Dispensation to be got, which will make you as old as you please. I thought
he had been old enough without a Dispensation to have had more wit and manners
than to slander and revile Gods high Priests, by making the World believe every
Novice may (prece vel pretio) procure holy Orders. Does not the Canon of the
Church say, Q. Eliz. Can. Chapter 1. 1597.
That if any Bishop Ordain a Man either without a Title, or under Age, he is
for every such default liable to Suspension for a whole year? There is indeed a
Proviso, that Fellows of Colleges (who are required by their local Statutes to
be in Orders at such a prefixed time) be dispensed with in respect of their
want of Age; but what is that to Country Parishes? That there may be, or is
actually a frequent abuse in this particular, (as he would needs intimate) is
no less than a downright forgery. Now whereas he enquires how all those
Stripplings that commence yearly must live till they come to an holy maturity,
I answer first in general, that they do live somewhere; and though we daily
meet with Jews, Greeks, Polonians, Hungarians, Germans, and other Foreign
Pretenders to Learning, begging our Charity, either indirectly, by admitting
our Names into their Calendar of great Men, or directly in their Latin
Gibberish; yet (such provisions there are made in England, that) we seldom find
one of those hundreds of our own Nation brought to such extremities. Secondly,
and more particularly I answer, That many of those Commencers design no other
but the Gentleman's Calling; many more betake themselves to the Law, Civil or
Common, and to Physic; several who intend the Ministry, have competent Estates
of their own; and himself grants that well nigh a fifth part are preferred in
the University: all these deducted out of his two hundreds, the Remanent will
not be very great, (and considering they are none of them more immortal than
other Men) if he please, he may assign them to be Governors of Grammar
Castles, or recommend them to some good Gentlemen's Houses, to be their
Childrens Tutours, and their own Companions. Indeed if our Gentry entertain
Scholars to save a Servants Wages, (sometimes crowding in the looking after a
couple of Geldings into the Ten Pounds a year) and allow them little more
respect than they do their Cooks and Butlers; or keep the young Levite against
the small Vicarage falls, to put my Cousin Abigail fairly off with it, I must
confess it to be an intolerable fault. I confess I Have read of a certain Roman
Lady, who received Thesmopolis the Stoic into her Family, and to testify the
singular respect and kindness she had for him, committed her beloved Bitch
(I Have quite forgot her Name) now very pregnant, to his care and tuition; and
who so fit as the Philosopher to be trusted with such a Jewel in his bosom?
For, as they journeyed, she had the advantage of easing Nature against his
prominent-silver- Beard; and not long after, by his careful management of the
Natural Causes, deposited her precious Whelps in his learned Lap. Whether
Lucian made the story to jeer the Stoic, or Lady, or both, or tells it for a
true relation, it matters not, since he was but a mere Stoic, and she but a
Heathen Madam. But there is as little wit as truth in that fetch, that any
Christened English Gentleman should make the same person his own Confessor (or
Companion at least) and the Groom of his Horses Bedchamber. His Tales are not
well laid together: for is it not extremely probable, that one who rubs his
Horses scabby heels, should be such excellent company for Sir John, that he,
forsooth, must be called down to say grace to every Health? (...)! What a
petulancy of humor is this, to invent such foppish Chimaera's not only to
abuse the Clergy and its Candidates, but to disoblige the Gentry also into the
bargain? But stay! whither will this Chevalier Errant lead me? for like a Dog
that has lost the scent, he is continually roving about for new Game. You see
what a Preacher he is likely to make, if ever he be effectually called by some
fat Benefice, where Henry the Eighth took no Toll; for he is quite run from his
Text; and if you please to call in about seven Pages backwards, you will find him
there only preparing his Lads for the University, whereas here he has packed
them down into Country again, and makes them stand sighing and picking their
teeth, while the Knight and my Lady are at their Dainties. And because he is
used to confess every ones faults but his own, I must tell him he forgets
himself much, and is preposterous: for had he designed to treat us
methodically, our first course should have been School-Butter, College-Commons
the second, and the Chickens and Tarts reserved till the last: and yet the Man
is so confident as to say, he now passes from Schooling to the Universities.
Which, that he may not seem to do very abruptly, he interlopes here one thing
more to bring the Boys and his Discourse together, that is, a good constitution
of Body necessary for Students. Well! how shall we do to know this? Why, repair
to the Physicians, cries he: Very good; but the best of them pretend to no more
than good Guessers, whether at Health or Diseases, and unless they had a Spirit
of Prophecy, and could foretell a Boy's Quomodo valet seven years hence, or
could fix a healthy constitution where they find it, or when they pleased, the
whole fabric of this advice will prove (says my Author) as thin as a piece of
Metaphysics: for if it be lawful for us to believe our own Senses in this
Skeptical Age, Constitutions are as variable as the Moon, (supposing no change
of Diet, Air, or wonted Exercises, for these make them vary more still) and
sickly puling Children often prove the more healthy and robust Men; and again,
lusty promising Boys do as often grow Consumptive and infirm at riper years, by
reason of some inward defect in the vital parts, which the most Microscopical
Physician could never discover, till he was sent for to dissect the Body.

Nor should he have needed to argue pro and con, whether by following his idle
Crotchets Universities should abate of their number and ancient splendor: for
if ever they be induced thereby to change theit laudable customs, for his
Eutopian Experiments, I Will venture to give him my Mother for a Maid.

As for ours, he professes a great esteem for them, and their Governors
Wisdom, (just as he complemented the Clergy in the beginning of his Book) and
therefore he does not prescribe them any new Scheme of Education: but yet such
a rare Architect he is, that you will find him building presently above the
Top-stone of Wisdom's own laying. Not that he does determine positively whether
the Old or New Philosophy be the best, not he for the World; but only tells us
in short, that Aristotle's Monarchy is long since at an end, (and all the old
moth-eaten Statutes (which mention him honorably) out of date, together with a
certain little Oath thereunto belonging) and we are at present absolutely under
the Government of a Democracy, or new Commonwealth of Atoms. To let that pass,
I shall enquire into those two things that so much obstruct
University-improvements, and he intends to regulate perhaps, but not till the
King makes him our Visitour; one whereof he reckons a defect, the other an
abuse. The great defect is, that English Exercises are not imposed upon Lads,
especially such as are designed for the Pulpit: A pretty piece of Reformation
indeed, though he must not think to claim the honor of being its first
Inventor: for there was a time when those heavenly Reformers at Westminster
voted down Latin for the Language of the Beast, and were clearly for throwing
the whole practice of the Law into an English Model. In imitation of them, the
famous Culpepper brought the design to admirable effect in Physic; ( Bonds,
you see, could oblige, and Purges work then without Latin.) Nor was it
reasonable that Divinity should stand out: for, to make a Through-Reformation,
the Independents, Anabaptists, Antinomists, and other Factions, set up public
Schools in St. Paul's, and other places, (by the connivence of one Tyrannus, but
not him in the Acts) wherein they frequently held Declamations and Disputations
in their Mother Tongue, to train up the Old, and gain New Proselytes to their
several Parties: so that he must not have the credit of this project. But that
he may go to work more like a Philosopher than they, he pretends to back his
design with some Reasons. The first is, That the Language learned Men must live
by, is the English, there being no use of Latin in the Country, but only to
checquer Sermons, and make Salveto's to some Dominatio vestra. Bate me an Ace,
quoth Bolton! The Language Plum-sellers indeed and Cheese-mongers live by, is
the English, and it is enough for them to read English Histories, Romances and
Plays, if not too much. But has the Parson no more use for Latin? Has he
none but the Assemblies Notes, and English Divines to consult? Has he neither
Councils nor Fathers, Philosophers nor Historians, Orators nor Poets,
Commentatours nor Critics, nor any Books in other Languages to advise with, to
perfect his own Knowledge, and convince all Gainsayers? If it be said that
Preaching, Oh Preaching, that is the All of his business, the very Marrow-bone
of the matter; yet there will be some use of Latin however, till Lycosthenes,
Polyanthaea's, and the German Systems be done into English; for these are the
only worthy Authors a great part of our Clergy are allowed by him. But in
earnest, what a strange Caprice is this, to put young Scholars upon reading
English Writers, as if the Language of their Country would not be familiar to
them as well as others without all this stir? Those old Dotards, our wise
Founders and Forefathers, thought they rather ought to be interdicted English
Authors, and confined wholly to Latin; it being too sad a truth, that many
Lads of very good Parts, having (by their Schoolmasters neglect) no great
skill in the Greek and Latin, sit down at English altogether, and by this means
are perfect strangers to the most learned Writers in the World.

Thus much I could grant him, were it for his purpose, that English cannot be
thoroughly understood and mastered without a competent skill in Grammar, and the
Greek and Latin, from which many of our English words have their origin*
which is the reason that Boys and Women, though speaking indifferently well,
yet seldom or never write true English. Nor is there any thing but vain
merriment in that observe, that some young conceited Students write bombast and
high-flown Epistles into the Country. Is this for want of English? No, nor for
want of Ignorance; but a childish affectation of being out of the vulgar road,
and rather for want of Brains and Latin: for I never yet met with a Lad that
could give you an ingenious and pithy Discourse in Latin, but he could frame
you the same with ease and advantage in his Native Dialect.

Another Argument he brings to commend English Exercises, is, That they are so
far from hindering their Latine-improvement, that they tend very much to its
advantage. Nay then, Gentlemen, look to your Pockets, and let them read
English, English, English, to the end of the Chapter. And how is this Paradox
proved? Why, by telling you a small story of a certain Academick Youngster, (
Nicholas Nemo by name) who having finished his postures at Table's end, made a
silly Oration in Latin, (though he gives it in English, and who knows whether
it be faithfully translated?) wherein he complains that his Muse and half never
drank above size q. of Helicon; that he has neither Stars nor Glories, Phrases
nor Pearls, nothing but a shady Grove, or purling stream to describe, etc.. And
so, for fear of wounding your patience, he makes his Leg, and exit: fare him
well! Granting all this were as true as that the Sea burns, though it is hardly
that, yet what does it argue? Yes, he tells us, That if the Lad had first
determined in English what he intended to say in Latin, he would have
discerned and avoided all these impertinencies; which is a postulatum we do
absolutely deny: for had he taken that course, he could but have done his best,
his utmost still, although it must cost him double the pains; and it is a fond
thing to imagine the Boy is wiser in English than in Latin, supposing he
understands both. The true reason why he made such a Chicken-broth Discourse,
was, not for want of skill in English or Latin, but for want of fancy and
(...), Parts, Judgment and Years; for Child is but Child, and Boy is but Boy
still, however this Man's Geese must be all Swans, his imaginary Lads able to
declaim against Quinctilian, and cope with Cicero himself at a solid and fleshy
Oration: so that if any one be so childish as to believe he comes to the
University to learn English, let him know he is abused, and made to begin at
the wrong end. Let him read and digest the best Greek and Latin Authors for
his purpose first, and lay in a stock of substantial Learning both Ancient and
Modern; and then when he comes of age, and years of discretion, (before he
engage in the Pulpit) we'll give him leave to read the choicest English Books
to advance his style, and give him a perfect command of his Mother Tongue.

The other Indictment he draws up against Universities, is for retaining an
ancient custom of Ioquing, as if himself were all this while grave and serious,
or above those small Dispensations. Like another Beardless Apollo, he summons
all Tripus's, Praevaricator's, and Terraefilius's to Parnassus, to give them
fair warning that nothing must henceforth go for Wit, but what is full measure
according to his Standard. As for their little conceits, he knocks them all
of the head with one solid and ponderous Argument, viz. They are useful neither
in Law, Physic, nor Divinity, Ergo, they are good for nothing: Tanquam ex
Tripode quidem dictum! But Sir Tripus would answer him with a non sequitur: for
they are not only innocent Recreations of themselves, (when they quit their
subjects indeed to fall foul upon Governments, Persons, and Functions, like you
know who, they expect to be called eoram Nobis, and sent to Bocardo or the
Black Rod, without Bail or Mainprise) but of excellent use too if handsomely
managed; it is to be considered that Laughter is a great Promoter of Health in
general, and an easy Amulet against some distempers that hang about sedentary
Men in particular: it unbends the Mind, loosens the distended Nerves of the
Soul, and revives its drooping Spirits after a wonderful manner; and why then
must it be deemed a Capital Crime to interpose one merry Scene, to set off a
serious and tedious Act, more resembling a Long-Parliament Fast than I know
what? And if Saint John diverted himself sometimes in playing with Partridges,
whilst he was writing his mysterious Apocalypse, why may not grave Men have
their Spleens tickled, though but with Straws and Feathers, rather than crack
their Sculls with Voluminous Positions, long-winded Speeches, and endless
Disputes about some Cross-grained Theory? Wherefore it is not material though
these lighter and more airy kind of Exercises are not, nor ever were intended
to be useful in Law, Physic, or Divinity, so long as they have a laudable end,
and wholesome effect of their own. Nor is it necessary one that has got the
right knack of Ioquing, should follow that trade all his life, more than he who
happens to act a Fool's part well in two or three Plays, may be supposed never
after to quit the Stage. Dulce est desipere in loco; a prudent Man at different
times and places knows when to be in jest or earnest. No Man ever dreamt that
King James made Dull-man in Ignoramus a Bishop, for acting a Dull-man all his
life, but for being one of the wisest Men in the company, as he afterward
approved himself.

In the next place, (like some Sir Politic Would-be) he traduces our
Terraefilius's and Praevaricator's not a little, in representing them as
Nibblers at an ambiguous word, and Quibblers upon Lilly's Poetry, or at best
but Tossers of an Axiom out of Logic, with a Hocas Pocas, etc. whereas they
oftentimes produce as good fancy, ingenious humors, lively action, well
contrived Ironies, merry Fictions, mimical Gestures, and Burlesque
Descriptions, as any I find in his little Letter, yea or the great Don of
Mancha. In a word, this difficult Province being usually assigned to the
choicest Wits, it is unreasonable to fancy they must needs prove Iack-puddings
in the Pulpit or elsewhere, especially when we recount how many of them of late
years have arrived at considerable Preferments both in Church and State.

And now let the World judge if these two little things are not mighty
Obstructions to a Clergy-man's improvement in Academick Studies! Indeed if he
could have impeacht our Universities of some real abuses, as that kissing goes
by favor, I mean, that a great number of the Youth are committed to the care
of such Tutours, whose ignorance has made them sordidly servile, and their
flattery preferred them to be Favorites; or of such others who are of too
large Principles and Practices in their Religion, and own no other, perhaps,
but Hobbs's Creed; or could he have complained justly, that our Degrees lie as
open as the Highway for all Comers; that Hands and Seals to Letters
Testimonial are common as Stones in the Streets, and never denied to the most
incorrigible Dunces, and the like, he might have lighted on something that did
really incommode all learned Professions, especially the Clergy; but since he
could find no such Camel-like faults amongst them worth the mending, I wonder
he should be so Boyish as to make all this noise and straining merely to catch
a few Gnats.

From the University he persecutes the Clergyman into the Pulpit; and though
he confesses he has no Authority to give Rules of Preaching, yet you must
expect him to be as free of his Censures thereof, as if he were Archbishop of
the Province.

Now as we advance to enquire into His abuses of Preaching, I must needs
whisper an old advice into his ear, ut Titulum Legate. For if I well remember,
he is now inferring the Contempt of the Clergy from the Topic of their
Ignorance: And is it not strange any Man in his wits should go about to prove
that, from the towering Eloquence, and profound Learning of some, and the
abundance of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, said to lard the Sermons of others?
Besides, it is strange any Man should be so loftily eloquent, and deeply learned
as to want common prudence, and not consider his audience, and distinguish
between an University and a Country Pulpit. But the Plot is very visible; for,
resolving to hook in the whole Clergy into his Lob's Pound before he had done,
he has now divided them into two Reverend Classes, of learned Madmen, and
ignorant Fools. It Is well his word is no slander. In the mean time, it is often
the People's more than Preacher's fault he is not clearly understood, who being
either captious or obnoxious (like the old Pharisees) will shut their eyes
against Truths made out as clear as the Sun, because against the grain, and not
for their turn; and though with Saint Paul he reason plainly of those plain
Doctrines, Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come; yet like Felix
touched to the quick, they either bid him go his way for this time, and stay
till they send for him, or cry out with Festus, The Man is certainly besides
himself.

Now I know no Law he transgresses if the Preacher now and then quote a Greek
or Latin Author in a vulgar Auditory: None but Calumny it self would have
charged him at a venture with Ostentation and Vanity. Why might he not rather
do it to distinguish him from a Gifted Brother in a Conventicle, who talks all
of his own head in homespun English? And why not to show that very learned Men
are of his Opinion, and that he desires not his Auditors to believe it because
he said it, but because it is true? Authority is a more effectual Argument ad
hominem, than a Demonstration, because seldom taken. What though few or none
understand him those very words, so long as they apprehend him in much more
than they can remember? Should he discourse all in English, and like a Scholar,
he must not expect to be intelligible all along to common capacities, more than
those (...) in a Chapter of St. Paul read in English.

There is a sort of Preaching our Author seems to favor, (if he favor any) by
dividing a Text into one part, I mean, by making a long continued Harangue upon
some certain subject; which, if well examined, would be found more useless and
unprofitable than those said to be spiced full of Latin, partly for its want
of method and due helps of memory, and partly for being full of
Latinized-affected-English. For I Will assure you, the Vulgar understand Saint
Chrysostom's easy Greek, and Saint Austine's, nay Tertullian's African
Latin, as well as they do the particular passages, and whole frame and drift
of such a Discourse. They know not without an Interpreter what you mean by your
rational Notions, ingenious Principles, and sublime Moralities; your fervid
Parturiencies, parturient Agonies, and zealous Presages of the People; your
Accommodations and interchangeable Ratifications of Peace; your adjusting
differences between the Animal and Divine Life, and a thousand more some of our
pretended Masters of Reason have raked out of Gazets and late Rodomontado
Authors, to make them a Schibboleth of distinction, whereby they would be
thought wiser than the common Herd of Mortals. Every Man in his way; yet they
are not always the wiser and more rational part of Mankind, who are so
charitable as to think themselves so.

But the Greek and Latin Shreds are not always lost; for there is sometimes an
all-wise Patron, or all-understanding Justice of Peace at Church. Not to envy
him his wonted happiness in Epithets, though he lay it down dogmatically for a
certain Maxim, That there is as great a future reward in saving one that takes
Collection, as the best Man in the Parish, and consequently they should be
preached at both alike; yet other Men think they may warrantably take more pains
to convert a potent and public Person, than any one of the little People,
because in gaining him they usually gain half a Parish. Harmonides the Minstrel
being now Master of his Art, asked his Tutour Timothy what course he must take
to get him a Name and esteem all over Greece? his answer was, That it would be
a tedious and endless piece of work to show his skill to every ordinary
Mechanic, besides that such are no competent Judges: But the most compendious
way to do his business, was to give a Specimen of his Art to some few of the
Potentates, of the chief and leading Men in all Greece, and when they are
possessed (said he) with an Opinion of thy Excellency, all the World will
presently commend and admire thee by their example, as Lucian tells the Story.
And we know that the World lives more by Example than Precept, that the Farmer
is ordinarily of his Landlord's Religion, and that it is sometime more in His
than the Parson's power to make his Tenant a good Churchman, or an idle
Sectary.

But our Savior and his Apostles (says he) make no such distinction in their
Discourses. A Metaphor taken from the Fanatic way of arguing; because they did
not in some Circumstances, we may not in any. What if our Savior's Auditors
were all of a piece, all of the (...), or at least the (...); the Text does not
say any of the Learned, or any Knights and Squires were there: Nay, another
private Text asks the Question, (which I take for little less than an universal
Negative) Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? The
Gospel was first preached to the Poor, and not many Wise, not many Noble were
called, they being loath to stoop from their Grandeur, and renounce all their
Carnal Wisdom, as it required: but since the Learned and Noble have embraced
the Faith, surely there is more use of Learning and Eloquence to convert and
confirm them, than the rude Vulgar.

As for the sequel of his Discourse about Preaching, an hundred to one if it be
not like something or other. It is not like the Picture of a French Lady, who
gave the Painter five Livres more than ordinary to correct the defects of
Natures Pencil, and make her an exact Beauty: But rather like some Dutch piece
representing a company of Anticks and Apes-faces, where every one squines or
grins, snears or mumps even as it pleased the Painter. Or if you will, it is
like a Pedler's Stall, I have seen, managed by the little John of all Trades in
his narrow-brimm'd Beaver pincht to a point; how busily he struts about,
crying, ( Come buy my rattling Metaphors, my Ginger-bread Similitudes, my dainty
laced Prefaces, ingenious Pictures, exact Compasses, Iews-Trumps, Hobby-Horses,
Thimbles and Bodkins, Divine Knicknacks and Conceits: Here Is your Aqua fortis,
Sal Armoniack, Tops, Pears, and Pomegranates, Violins, Trebbles and Gingles,
new Songs, new Moons, new Almanacks, new; see here, what is it you lack?) till
all the Infantry in Town flock about him to gaze at his little less than
Tredeskin-variety of Miracles. Even so --

But in earnest, let us enquire seriously into the main things he says make
Preachers ridiculous, i. e. Harsh Metaphors, childish Similitudes, foolish
Prefaces, affected Divisions, cunning Doctrines, odd Expressions, and such
like, and how far they are true, or concern the present Clergy.

In the first place, we are much obliged to the Gentleman that he does not
confine and tie us up so strictly, as that we must upon all occasions call a
Spade a Spade, (at our peril) but allows us the common privilege of all
Orators, to use Improprieties sometimes, whether Simile's at large, or
Metaphors, which are the same thing contracted into one word, provided they be
grave, decent, significant and pertinent: and had he denied us, the case would
not have been much altered; for we are not to learn from him what singular use
there may be of them many times for informing Vulgar Judgments, and influencing
their Affections; which is a reason special enough why our Savior used this
way of Preaching.

But secondly, We deny all those instances to be ridiculous which he is pleased
to vend for such. For what if a Text should chance to be like an ingenious
Picture, or Moses's Rod, or Noah's Dove, yea or like the very Man going to
Jericho? Where Is the false Latin all this while, provided the Application be
natural and apposite? Every Mechanic can tell him, that Similitudes are not
designed to agree as one Plain does with another; if they touch but in one
point, as a Globe upon a Plain, it is sufficient. And if he quarrel with these
and such like Comparisons, he is in a fair way to fall foul upon the most sober
and even sacred Writings. What if the Preacher should upon occasion compare a
Cloud to a Man's Hand, wise speeches to Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver,
(provided they be not ingenious Pictures) Israel to the dust of the Earth, Job
to a Cruddled Cheese, Man to a wild Asses Colt, and his own dung, Confidence to
a broken Tooth, Spirits to Frogs, the Soul to the Chariots of Amminadab,
Hezekiah to a Weaver, a Crane and Swallow, the Jews to roaring Bears, the Word
of God to Fire, a Hammer and a Sword, the Kingdom of Heaven to a Grain of
Mustard Seed, a little Leaven, a Net, a lost Groat, the Son of Man himself to a
Shepherd, a Lamb, a Lion, a Vine, a Branch, with hundreds more of that nature?
I Will assure you it may be done soberly and significantly, for it has been done;
and none but a profane Wit would dare to play with the least and smallest
things when once made sacred. -- Procul O procul ite Profani.

But amongst the rest of his Prefaces, I wonder he could not light upon one
grown too common of late, and is perhaps more needless (to say no more) than
any he has mentioned; I mean, a long conceived Prayer before Sermon, wherein
the Preacher presents God Almighty with a large train of Titles, and recommends
several persons to him under the notion of Right Honorable, Reverend,
Worshipful, Learned and Worthy, Earls, Bishops, Knights, Doctors, Esquires,
Gentlemen, Mr. Proctours, Mr. Taxers, etc. He could have told them that God
Almighty needed not to be informed of any Man's Worth or Quality, and that those
Titles were improper to be offered up to God in a solemn Prayer, but to be
directed to the People in an Exhortation (according to the LV Canon) to mind
them of that due respect they owe to their Superiors. But because he says
nothing hereof for some reasons best known to himself, I shall for others say
no more.

Thirdly, You must know that our ingenuous Author has lately been with the Man
among the Tombs, and raked in dead Men's Ashes for several of the Stories he
entertains you with. For instance, that Text against Non-residence and the
device of the Triangular Heart, are both as old as Paul's. He that could not run
without feet, was a famous Divine in his time, (he tells you) but that was long
before himself was out of the shell. Parson Slip-stocking, and the Author of the
Discoveries, and many others whose Ghosts he brings in, have long since quitted
the Stage; and admitting they were once of our Church, and did any of them act
their parts ridiculously, yet what is that to the present Clergy? If he cannot
find in his heart to speak well of the Dead, and bury their infirmities with
them, yet it is the height of injustice to charge the Living with their
personal faults.

Fourthly, You may guess he was once of Mr. Nye's, or Mr. Calamy's, or some
such Reformado Congregation, or at least has frequented Conventicles since
more than the Church, by a great deal of the idle stuff, and lamentable
fooleries he has the honor to bring to light, it being well known, that
canting expressions, and all that way of talking, is the proper and
Characteristical note of a Separatist: And if he had been as ingenuous as the
worthy Author of the Friendly Debates, he would have set the saddle upon the
right Horse, and not have pinned the extemporary effusions, sanctified
nonsense, and intolerable fooleries of those factious Pulpiteers and Intruders,
upon that Church they made it their whole business to pluck down by way of
Reformation. It is no news to tell how instrumental many of the precious
Authors he cites, were in that Great Work. Nor is it any Miracle that Preaching
was abused in those days, when a learned Orthodox Clergy was silenced for their
malignant Loyalty, and their Pulpits filled with Shoe-makers, Tailors, Weavers,
Threshers, Cobblers, Tinkers, Brewers, Bakers, Fishmongers, Wool-Combers, and
all manner of Russet-Rabbies, and Mechanic Divines: No wonder if there was
rare work made with Texts and Preachments, when every one borrowed his
Similitudes and Language from his own Trade, comparing Jacob to a
Threshing-Worm, Repentance to a Bull-rush, Man's Body to an Apple, his Soul to
an Oyster, etc. But to lay their grievous extravagancies at the door of the
present Church, is done so like a faithful Historian, as if the Sacrilege,
Murders, Treasons and Regicide of those black-soul'd Rumpers should be
unreasonably wrested to reflect upon this present most Loyal and Renowned
Parliament.

Lastly, The residue of those little passages and stories he laughs at, are
either purely of his own invention, or abused and perverted into ridiculous by
his Additions or Explications: Whereby it appears his Genius inclines him to
Plays, Poetry and Romances, rather than History: in those indeed he has no
Law, but to write what he and his Muses please; but in this he must expect to
be confined wholly to Truth.

Now I demand what mortal Man ever heard such terms as Star-board and
Lar-board, Sterns and Fore-castles in a Sermon, since Pulpits made of Ships
Beaks have been out of fashion? No, no, they are his own, as well as the
rering, flanking, intrenching and storming a Text, together with those touches
of Ptolemy's Systeme, solid Orbs, and the points of the Compass, and comparing
the Moon, Mercury and Venus to Violins and Trebbles, all his own, devised
merely to give us some hints of his general Accomplishments. First he gives you
a taste of his skill in Navigation, then in Military Discipline; for I can
assure you he has seen a Ship, and heard of a Fight: but for Astronomy, Oh
Astronomy! -- let him alone; and yet, if he make no better use on it, it is to
be feared he was born under a three-penny Planet, (whether according to the Old
or New Hypothesis it matters not) however he talks sometimes of keeping Ten
Foot-boys, and being Secretary of State.

Again, Those choice Phrases of hacking, hewing, and splitting of Texts, (soft
and gentle Metaphors taken from riving a tender Oak) making Faith, Hope and
Charity a little Ring of Bells, together with the Latin Materials, Hic labor,
hoc opus -- silvestrem tenui -- are all his own still. And if he be so good at
the Forge, and can beat you an entire Fiction out of his own Brain, no wonder
he has a little dexterity at the File and Hammer, to work his matter into what
shape he please, to add or detract, bend or straighten it as occasion serves.
Indeed he wrests Men's Sermons like a Nose of Wax, as Heretics deal by the holy
Scriptures, and makes the poor Parson wind and turn all manner of ways, as a
Rider would do his Spanish Iennet. For instance, the story of making Christ a
Shopkeeper, (however it comes not in hobbling with a reverence be it spoken)
is most shamefully misrepresented, the greatest part of it owning no other
Author but himself. He must pardon me if I credit my own Ears more than his
lavish Pen, and any Man that will believe his own Eyes, may find the truth of
what I say by consulting the Copy.

Another he brings in Preaching about Episcopacy, from that Text Acts 16.30.
Sirs, What must I do to be saved? And this (I must tell you) is nothing more
than a confident Calumny: for Episcopacy was not the business of that Sermon.
It Is true, the Preacher did by the way reflect upon the word (...), (for it
does signify Lords in plain English) and thence insinuate what respect and
honor was given to the Apostles and Pastors of the Church by those Primitive
Converts: but that he should infer, that Bishops were formerly Peers of the
Realm, and did hereby claim their privilege of sitting in the House of Lords,
is such a monstrous forgery as you can scarce match it in all Lucian, though he
is so civil as to tell us beforehand his true Histories are all false. And yet
when his hand was in, he could not forbear slandering another person of Worth,
with another of the same; who, though he did from that Text in St. Matthew,
Seek ye the Kingdom of God -- Observe in transitu, that Monarchy was the best
of Governments, as bearing a nearer resemblance to that of God himself, than
any Aristocracy or Commonwealth; yet that he should use any such ridiculous
Expressions as those, -- It is not said the Parliament of God, the Army of God,
or the Committee of Safety of God, -- is a great untruth, second to none but
that I told you of before; so easy a thing it is for a Splenetick Momus to
take every thing by the wrong handle, and make that look ridiculous which was
spoken never so well and soberly. Now (as we use to say, ex pede Herculem) by
these instances you may jude of the rest, and guess at the Man's Ingenuity, the
greatest part of all those Absurdities charged upon Preaching being either his
own, or none of ours, who have but the least relation (so much as that of
Journey-men) to the present Clergy. Wherefore, to shut up this Stage, though we
account of such as tell us of our faults truly, modestly, and in private, as of
our best Friends; yet we shall beware of them that do not only publish and
divulge our private failings to reproach and upbraid us, but make them ten
times more than we acknowledge, as of the most ill-natured and pernicious of
all our Enemies.

And so I pass on to his second Topic, the Clergy's Poverty, to examine
whether he has betrayed more integrity in representing that. And because I
have already showed that the generality even of our Inferior Clergy are not so
dismally poor and shrimped things as he makes them, I shall content my self
with some short Remarks upon him now, to leave a little room for my third and
last Proposition, which, I presume, will end the whole Controversy.

And here he proceeds to talk after the old wild rate, and has set the second
Part to the same Tune exactly with the first, taking the same extravagant
liberty in his Expressions, Figures and Forgeries. There is the
never-enough-to-be-commended Irony, that dispatcheth one half of the business,
and what remains is made good by the prodigious all-confounding Hyperbole, by
which he can blow up a Fly into the full proportion of five hundred Camels put
together. When he seems to commend, he mostly jeers; what he pities, he
abuses: when he would deplore his Clergies ruinous Circumstances, he only
laughs till the tears stand in his eyes. Take him at one end of his Glass, and
he will show you a Molehill grown up into a Mountain; and if there be occasion
to look at the other, high jingo, tanutus -- the old massy Mountain dwindles
presently into a young Molehill. At first he makes a formal face like some
piteous Statue in the Wall, that would have us believe it bears up the whole
Fabric by its shrugging; as if it were a burden to his little Conscience that
our Clergy is not so well provided for as the Priesthood of old: but all he
drives at in the end, is only to let off a Querk or two, and certify Mankind
that the Souls of Men are a greater charge than Sheep and Oxen, and that Money
and Victuals were not Types and Shadows to cease with the Ceremonial Law. At
length he shows upon the High Rope, and advances to the top of his design, his
elaborate Description of the Vicar, which, that it might be to the life, he
has ransacked all the Romances and Plays written since the King came in, for
Accoutrements to make him the most despicable Lazarillo in Nature: For he
discovers him walking pensively alone in his Churchyard, either without a
Cassock, or without Breeches, (according as it happened to be the Breeches or
Cassock-year) and studying merely how to live; casting with himself what Piggs,
Geese and Apples are toward, who is likely to marry or die next, and sadly
remembering that the last Kilderkin of Drink is near departed, and that all his
Treasure is reduced to one single Groat. Returning to the little Hut, his
Mansion House, he meets with new disasters to enhance his sorrows, a scurvy
Mole had plough'd up most of his Globe, and the malicious Crows trampled down
the remaining Grass: then sweep comes the Kite, and robs him of the most
hopeful Chick in all the brood: And to make up the Scene and ruin him quite,
the Jack-daws and Starlings (idle Birds that they are!) scattered and carried
away forty or fifty of the best Straws from his Thin-thatch'd Roof. Thus racked
and tortured, he tries to weather out his melancholy by retiring into the
little hole over the Oven, called his Study, (contrived there, I suppose, to
save firing) a pretty little Vatican, the whole furniture whereof is a German
Systeme, a Geneva Bible and Concordance of the same, a Boudget of old stitched
Sermons, some broken Girts, with two or three yards of Whip-cord behind the
door, and a Saw and Hammer to prevent Dilapidations. But finding his Family
cannot be maintained with Texts and Contexts, (the Child in the Cradle crying
all this while for want of Milk) down he creeps again, and betakes himself to
those Heavenly employments, of filling the Dung-Cart in dry weather, pilling of
Hemp, and heating the Oven in wet; and, to evidence his willingness to turn a
Penny in an honest way, one day he went to Market upon a Pannier with Turkies
and Geese bobbing out their heads under his Canonical Coat: but alas, alas, in
his absence the beloved Duck miscarries, or the never-failing Hen forsakes her
wonted Nest, at which he either runs raving about the Yard like a Lunatic, or
else confines himself to the little Hole aforesaid, being even overwhelmed with
grief and despair. -- Now did you ever meet with such a Romantic Whimsie as
this in all your Travails? Do you believe he really thinks this is a Man of God
he thus sets out, and makes so bold with? Does he not fully betray that mighty
reverence he has for the holy Profession, thus to prevaricate, and coin an
Eutopian Vicar merely to laugh at? Besides, granting there ever was such a
forlorn Creature as he describes, yet how ridiculous a thing is this new way of
Argumentation which concludes from Particulars? For if you will take his word
for good Logic, one instance or two reflects disparagement, and procures a
general disesteem to all that Order of holy Men, page 98. As much as to say,
that, if some of the Gentry of England, being decayed in their Estates through
their Loyalty to the King, or by their own imprudence, their Children come to
be Tapsters or Hostlers, or any other servile Officers, there must needs be a
blot in the Scutcheons of all the rest, though never so flourishing, till
Doomsday.

Now I shall not undertake to answer his mad Description, but only crave leave
to tell you a Story, and give him the honor of bearing a considerable part in
it, which (though it be a mere Fiction, and you are requested beforehand not to
believe it, yet) may seem perhaps as probable and plausible as that he makes no
scruple to publish for true.

Spending some time in my Travails at the famous Hecdecapolis, I was conducted
to a certain Covent of the Eleutheri, who are said to have been formerly a
Religious Order, and I guess they might, by the ruins of a Chapel I found
there, (looking now like a decayed Dove-Cote, from which the Inhabitants are
fled for self-preservation) and many ancient Inscriptions in the Walls and
Windows: but since they are irregular and free from all Laws, Vows and Duties,
(however it came to pass) having no Obligations upon them but to live as their
own Genius shall prompt them. In habit they differ not much from other Covents
in Greece, excepting only this, that they more resemble some of the old
conceited Philosophers by their Beards, which are above a Cubit long, and set
accurately in mood and figure. But lest I be mistaken, you must know they hate
to be very like those Old Men either in their Opinions or Beards; for whereas
they used to hang their Beards before in the natural place, these wear them
most behind in opposition: besides, their Beards were truly and properly their
own; but these by keeping their Heads too hot, have none of their own, (40 or
50 Straws of natural Thatch growing upon the place, being with them almost a
Miracle) but make them artificial ones of the Manes of certain She-Asses, cut
off once in so many years for that purpose. As for Diet, I know no Covent in
Europe which outdoes them; for rejecting all the old methods of living upon
Bread, Water and Herbs, and such mean Dispensations, they are plentifully
furnished with all sorts of provisions, from the Wing of an Ox to the Leg of a
Lark, all manner of varieties Seas or Rivers produce, together with all kinds
of Vehicles, commonly called Liquors, from the most Chymically prepared and
spirituous, down to those of the inferior Brew House. Nor do I speak all this
by conjecture or hearsay, but as I found by experience; for one of the
Fraternity perceiving me curious and inquisitive, as strangers use to be, would
needs engage me to eat at their common Table to see their fashions, which I was
easily persuaded to, as well to gratify my hunger as curiosity: the manner
whereof was briefly thus: We being summoned together by their Automaton or
Clock, and the Table spread, Proclamation was presently made by one of the
Machines or Novices, in this short Grace, Ede, Bibe, Lude, and then down sat
every one as he pleased, and fell to where he liked best. But they had the
strangest names for their Meats as well as all things else, that, had not I
kept to my old rule of believing my senses, had I not seen and scented good
store of real Provender before me, I should have thought my self decoyed to
some Magical Banquet: for they called a good round Pudding, a solid Orb, (the
Plumbs resembling fixed Stars;) a Collar of Brawn, a Callous Cylinder; a
Shoulder of Mutton, a Triangle; a couple of Capons, Platonic Eunuchs; a Veal
Pie, a Pentagone; a French Quelque Chose, a fortuitous concourse of delicious
Atoms; and the Chafing Dish under it, an Hypothesis; Sausages, a Dish of
Circles; a heap of wild Fowl, a Pyramid, to mention no more. If they want any
thing, they disdain to ask it in the Language other Men use, but one cries,
Transfuse me some brisk Lyaean Blood into that same Flute; another, Reach
hither a few of those Saline Particles; a third, Pray anatomize that
Quadrupede, and accommodate me with a quantum of the Spina dorsi; and much more
I either understood not, or was not then at leisure to remember. When they had
taken a free Dose of the Creature, as they call it, and their Bellies were
grown hard as Drums, the Room began to echo with their swaggering and bidding
defiance to all the Learned Men that ever were in the World, always excepting
themselves. One calls the Stoics Fools for resisting Natural Causes, and
curbing their Appetites; and the Pythagoreans Madmen for abstaining
superstitiously from good wholesome Flesh: another does but name Aristotle with
his green Bag of Occult Qualities under his Cloak, and all the Company laugh
out right, as if they had found a Mare's-Nests a third brags of the antiquity
of their Order, pretending with those Arcadians they are elder than the Moon,
and had a state of Prae-existence: a fourth relates his Telescope-Travels, how
many Stars he found out that never were seen before, and peopled with
Inhabitants: another jeers Ptolemy's Systeme off the Hinges, for by this time
it was a Demonstration that all the World turned round. But I took special
notice of one above the rest, (called Boccaline Junior, Secretary to the Order)
who in less than an hours space, beginning with a Preface from Adam, ran
through all Ages, Nations, and Orders of Men, and abused them pleasantly as he
went: At first I took him for a Conjurer, for he could raise the Ghosts of a
hundred old Philosophers, and make them all dance after his Pipe; he could make
a Cat to speak; he could transform a Man into an Ass; dress the wisest up like
Fools; and play with Religion it self, as if it were an old Dotage; but
afterward I understood he did all this by the Art of Memory, and only repeated
the several Acts, Dogmes, Resolves, and Philosophical Decrees, (clubb'd and
agreed upon by a Grand Committee of the whole House) which he is to keep by his
place. Thus when they had filled their Bellies with Laughter, and other good
Cheer, the Company broke up, and each retired to their several apartments: only
my friendly Guardian took me aside, and honored me further with a sight of
their Public Library, which I wondered to find so thin of Books, their whole
store being only Epicurus's Works, Lucian's Dialogues, Carts, Hobbs, and two
or three more modern Authors, with two large Files, one of Gazets, and the
other of Philosophical News-Books; but he soon resolved me, by informing me
that those Shelves were not long since crowded with all sorts of ancient
Authors, but by a common decree they had lately Voted them all to be burnt, as
so much useless Lumber obstructing the growth and perfection of Arts and
Sciences; and were agreed upon a new Model of Learning, more compendious and
demonstrative than the old, which was shortly to be published. At the far end
of the Room he showed me a pair of fair Globes, full of Atoms as they could
hold, which (he told me in my ear) were Materials to make new Worlds: for if
one take never so many Bushels out, they still continue top-full, being
supplied, he said, by a constant Effiuvium from some invisible Rock or Mine.
The Classes formerly filled with Books, were now taken up with all sorts of
Mathematical Instruments, Glasses, Pot-Guns, Crucibles, Powder of Experience,
Louse-Traps, Scheletons of Ants, Fleas, and other little Gentlefolk, Tubes for
Transfusion, the the Spleens of Gnats yet alive, several Limbs of Chimaera's,
diverse pairs of Unicorn's Horns, Phoenix's Feathers, Remora's Fins, and ten
thousand Mechanical Knacks I cannot reckon. When I had sufficiently admired all
these Rarities, I desired to be satisfied what Principles their Order owned? He
was somewhat shie in answering at first, but when I importuned him, he told me,
they embraced few of those vulgarly received, some of their main and
fundamental ones being to doubt of all things that are not demonstrated,
gratify their appetites, preserve themselves, Philosophize freely, laugh at
all the World for their ignorance, and close with no Sect of Religion, but
comply outwardly with that which is most in fashion, with this proviso, That
they may abstain from Superstitious fasting-days and fasting-nights, and all
other morose means of Mortification, they acknowledging no other but the
present Life. And thus in short, having thanked him for all his Cavilities, I
took solemn leave of him at his Covent-Gate, and now return home again to my
little Doctor of Atoms, (not doubting but he will heartily interpret Trick for
Trick, and swallow one Pill himself for those many he has offered a whole
Clergy) who by this time finds it to his purpose to caution us, that we have a
special care of comparing Ours with the Primitive Church under Persecution, or
the present small-preferr'd Clergy in that of Rome: for if we do, it is a plain
case that Poverty does not always expose to Contempt, for then they were more
obnoxious than we; it was not Money, but something else that preserved their
esteem, the want whereof may possibly lessen ours, as I shall prove before I
have done. And though he be seldom or never in, yet by and by he is still
farther out, in giving us a reason why our Liturgy has not its just estimation
in Cities and Corporations; namely, because it is sometimes read there by
unlearned Men: for he must either make us believe, that there were never any
such Cattle in England as the famous Smectymnuans, whose task it was to Pray
and Preach it out of reputation, to make room for their goodly Directory, or
that the whole Tribe of Adoniram are since cut off and extinct, and don't carry
on the same work still in their private Meetings, or at least that their giddy
Followers would quickly forsake Conventicles, if they could hear the Churches
Prayers read constantly by some Reverend Prelate, or Learned Priest. -- credat
Iudaeus apella!

His last complaint is, that it is a great hazard if so Poor a Clergy be not
idle, intemperate and scandalous. This indeed was an old Article devised by
foul-mouthed Sequestrators, against such as were fat and full, whose very
Benefices were scandalous, but never urged before against the twenty or thirty
pound Men: And all Calumnies ought to have some little probability in them, or
the Devil himself cannot believe them. He told you before that his Vicar had
but one Groat in the House, and who can imagine he should break an entire Sum
to spend his Penny, especially when there is an Execution out against it too
for Milk and Eggs? Nor is it likely those Parishioners should be so bountiful
as to bear him out, whom he had described before to cheat him of his Geese and
Pigs, and have so despicable an opinion of him for his tattered old fashioned
Habit. Thus he has done with his Grounds of the Clergies disesteem, Ignorance
and Poverty, before I proceed to mine, I must consider a little those
particular Occasions (he says) concur to make them so pitifully Poor and
Contemptible.

The first whereof he makes the great scarcity of Livings in respect of that
infinite number who either post, or (to show the vigilance of our Pastors)
steal into Holy Orders; there being scarce employment for half of those that
undertake that holy Office: so that, unless they should take up the Romish
Tricks of rambling up and down to cry Pardons, Indulgencies, etc. or unless we
had some vent for our Learned ones beyond Sea, as we have for other Commodities
with which the Nation is over-stock'd, one moiety of the Clergy must be
condemned to beg or starve. But art thou in earnest, my excellent Contriver? Is
the holy Function grown such a mere Drug in England, that it lies so much upon
our hands? Have we so many Tun of Divines to spare? (a mannerly Comparison,
pardonable from none but an empty Hogs-head:) so many hundreds ready to mount
upon Pegasus, and ride down Sun and Moon for 25 or 30 l. a year? If this be
true, then certainly it is not probable, that, having so great choice, we
should be so meanly provided at home, as he has been lamenting all along, but
rather (small Preferments being better than none) that all our Churches and
Chapels are filled with Persons of no inferior Worth. But is it so in very
deed, that we have scarce employment for half their number? What then becomes
of the other half? Who maintains them? or do they live upon the Camelion's
Diet? or how got they into Orders? Either they were Ordained to a Title, or
not; if to a Title, (be it Spiritual or Temporal) there is somewhat to live on;
if to none, their Spiritual Fathers are bound to provide for and maintain them
by Law: so that here is yet no visible necessity of recurring to the Old
Ordinance of clapping under Deck again for Transportation. But that one half of
the Priests and Deacons now in England are Ordained to no manner of Title (as
he would persuade the World to the great disparagement of our Prelacy) is a
wild supposal savouring neither of Wit nor Truth. All that the greatest candor
can say in his excuse, is only this, That upon the Kings Return possibly there
were fuller Ordinations than before or since, the Bishops not knowing but there
might be a scarcity and want of Clergymen to supply the places of those
intruding Lay-brethren, besides that the Churches Lands lately alienated were
now restored, and the holy Profession began to retrieve its former Reputation:
And if we be at present over-stocked, I have given the true reason of it, the
only ill consequence whereof will be this, that unless our Reverend Bishops
shall please to hold their hands awhile, the old ones are not likely to be worn
out first; I mean, many Persons of good Worth and Learning will be fain to spin
out their days in a College Cell, who might have done better service abroad in
their Generation.

The next thing so much concurring to heighten our Clergies Poverty and
Disesteem, he lays at the Gentries door, wherein he shows himself as much a
Gentleman, as a Master of Reason. Indeed I thought he owed abundance of thanks
to his Stars, if he came off fairly in the business of my Cousin Abigail: But
in for a thousand, in for fifteen hundred; and having already set out the
Clergy, he now proceeds to render the Gentry also ridiculous. But have not the
Gentry and Nobility too deserved better at our hands, than thus to be traduced,
for dedicating some of their Sons to Gods Service?. Is this so ready a way to
bring more Contempt upon the Clergy, and not rather a mean to redeem their
credit, to make Church and State a compacted Body of one common interest, and
keep a fair correspondence between Clergy and Laity, and prevent all future
quarrels between them, which used to be grounded upon an old mistake, that they
are naturally as little related, as the outward and the inward Man, or the
Flesh and Spirit? Yea, but (he says) they design the weak, lame, and most
ill-favored of their Children for the Ministry, having just limbs enough to
climb the Pulpit, and an eye or two to find out the day of the month, and then
leave them to Gods blessing and the warm Sun, without one penny of Money, or
inch of Land, excepting only a small stock to buy a broad Hat at second hand,
and a small Systeme or two of Faith, whereupon you shall meet with few of them
worth above two Spoons and a Pepper-Box, besides their Spiritualities. And now,
Gentlemen, as you were. A very pretty Relation indeed! which if it were true, I
would fain ask our little-mighty Oracle whether it reflects more upon the
Clergy or Gentry? Oh! without doubt it adds a great luster to the Family, and
commends his Paternal Wisdom, Care, and impartial Providence, when a Father
leaves a thousand Pounds per annum to his eldest Son, and and plentiful
Portions to all the rest of the Brethren, excepting only the Divinity Thing,
who is left so poor it can but just creep, having nothing but two Spoons and a
Pepper-Box to keep it from starving. But the World is grown too wise to account
all Gold that glitters, or to shut their eyes till they be trapann'd into the
belief of a falsehood, though never so plausibly varnished over with specious
Whimsies, and merry-mad Conceits.

In the little residue of his Letter, he plays the mere Child, and takes great
pains to blow up a few Bubbles and Chrystalline Globuli into the Air, standing
at gaze after them till they burst and vanish: only in the close of all, he
reminds his Reader, that he found the word Religion in the Title* And how much
he has betrayed in the whole Book, let other Men judge, and himself consider
whether he be not obliged to a second Epistle, to beg pardon of God and Man for
writing the Name of Religion upon such a Fardel of scandalous Petulancies and
Legendary Tales, unless he will be so ingenuous (now the High-Commission-Court
is asleep) to undergo a voluntary Penance at some convenient Market-Cross, with
the Title of his Accusation written under him, The Author of the Contempt of
the Clergy and of Religion. Where I shall leave him, and proceed to my third
and last Proposition, which is this, That if the English Clergy be not truly
valued, it is to be attributed to other, and those far different Reasons: which
once demonstrated and made good, it will appear evidently that his Letter being
built upon a wrong Foundation, falls of it self, and may be burnt without any
prejudice to Truth or Reason, and consequently I hope the deluded World will be
undeceived.

We must confess to our sorrow more than shame, that the holy Function has
been little set by, nay much disparaged and affronted of late years amongst us,
(for by the Grace of God they have deserved better at the hands of Men than
every rash young Shimei will allow them) the true Reasons whereof will soon
appear, if we consider who and what manner of Persons they are who do most
industriously throw Contempt upon them; and they must be either our professed
Enemies, or pretended Friends. Now our Churches Enemies are reducible to three
principal Herds or Bands: The first whereof are the openly debauched, profane,
and Men Atheistically disposed, who think they were born at all adventures, and
came into the World, as the Leviathan was sent into the Deep, merely to sport
and take their pastime therein; who are as wise in their own eyes as David's
Fool, and say in their hearts, There is no God; who laugh at all things sacred,
as being out of their Element, and make no more account of Religion than of an
ordinary piece of State Policy. It may be they wear the name of Christians at
large, and own themselves of ours rather than any other Church for fashions
sake, or saving their credit, or some secular interest: but if you examine
their Principles and Practices more narrowly, they will be found to belong
rather to the Devil's Chapel. For were they hearty and in earnest, they could
not possibly differ from all Sects of Religionists in the World, who do
constantly admire and reverence their respective Priests and Preachers in what
quality or circumstances soever they be. But the Grandees and most robust among
these modern Sadduces don't level their scoffs and reproaches so low as the
inferior Clergy, the little Vicars and Curates (that were impar congressus,
and a fitter task for some young beginner, some Novice in Raillery, who has
just parts and skill enough to make a Cobweb-Net that will take the lesser
Flies) but aim rather at the chiefest of our Church-Governors, it being a more
noble Conquest, a more sure and expedite way to wound Religion (that is the
great project) through their sides. They are so far from accompting the Elders
that rule never so well worthy of double, nay single Honor, that they fear not
to revile Gods highest Priests, to deride, slander and lampoon the most
renowned Prelate, even when he has his most solemn audience, when he is
delivering his Embassy from the great Monarch of Heaven, to his Vicegerent
here on Earth. So that it is no fault of our Religion, or of the Ministry
thereof, but ruinous decay of Christian Piety supplanted of late by Unchristian
Practice, (for the true Causes whereof, I refer my Readers to that excellent
Tractate, whose Author's Name the World is hitherto unworthy of) which prompts
this Herd of brutish Hectors to defy and contemn our Clergy and Religion both.

A second Band of our Churches Enemies are the Popish Recusants, who, taking
the advantage of our late intestine differences; and having learnt of St.
Peter's pretented Successor to fish most advantagiously in troubled waters,
have much augmented, if not doubled their ancient number. And he that made such
a grievous complaint of our being so much over-stock'd with Divines, had never
heard of the Jesuits brags beyond Sea sure, Sir Edwyn Sandys tells us of, that
the English Seminaries abroad send forth more Priests than our two Universities
at home do Ministers: And where should the Scene of their Action be laid more
properly than in their own Country? What greater service can they do the Court
of Rome, than to infect and poison their Native Air with foreign Vapors? Who
more fit to throw the Kingdom into a Church-relapse, than they who are so well
acquainted with the Temper, Language, Manners, Customs, Laws and Religion of
the Country? It is not to be questioned but they, and all the Proselytes they
either find, or make amongst us, are no Favorers of our Religion or Clergy,
but do privately and openly (when they dare) calumniate and decry both, as
destructive to the Game and Interest they are to manage; and the true and only
reason of their contemning and vilifying us, is an eager desire of enlarging
their own Territories, that the Romans might come in once again, and take away
both our Place and Nation. And therefore that our Church neither is, nor
expects to be prized by them, more than others they are pleased to call
Heretics, (because they cannot digest their corrupt Innovations for current
Gospel) is their Goodness more than our Desert.

The third and last Body of our Churches Enemies, are the Fanatic Recusants in
the other extreme: for though Manasseh declares fiercely against Ephraim, and
Ephraim exclaims as much against Manasseh; yet both combine and unite their
forces against the Common Enemy, poor Judah. And truly to speak freely, and
give these latter their due, I must needs say the Church of England has
suffered very much of late in her Reputation by their means: for they are a
sort of clamorous Zealots, restless and troublesome Saints, as ever pretended to
be of Christ's retinue, who are for reforming Church and State, and all things
but themselves and their own pernicious Opinions. Seneca's character of
unstable Men seems to be calculated particularly for them, Nihil libere volunt,
nihil absolute, nihil semper: for they know not what they would have; and if
you grant all their unreasonable demands, they are not satisfied, but still
crying with the Daughters of the Horse-leech, Give, give. They had too precise
thoughts of themselves to continue in our Communion; and therefore, like the
young brood of Vipers, made their way through their Mothers Bowels to procure
their own liberty: And that there might be room for a new Model of Government,
necessity obliged them to pluck down the old one first. To this end all their
artifices, especially Preachments, were directed, they crying out against
Episcopacy, as the children of Edom did of old against Jerusalem, Down with it,
down with it, even to the ground; making nothing to call it opprobiously the
Prelatical Faction, (though themselves are forced to confess it is such a
Faction as has troubled the Church ever since the Apostles times) and by this
means they quickly begat an odium in Men's Minds as well against the ancient
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, as against the Persons of the Bishops and
Orthodox Clergy for their sakes. To them we owe all that Anarchy in Spiritual
and Civil Matters, which, like a thick Cloud, did so long overspread us, and
broke out at length into Thunder and Lightning about our ears; 'twas the fruit
of their worthy Labors that our Goshen was turned into an Egypt by Usurping
Tyrants who knew not Joseph, and the Rod of Aaron served for no other use a
long time but to scourge the Sons of Levi. Nor is it any wonder that the
prejudices they raised against our Liturgy and its Assertours are not yet worn
out, considering how presumptuously and in despite of all Law both Sacred and
Civil, the Nonconformists still keep up their private Conventicles to confirm
the Brethren in all the false Notions they had formerly imbibed. But all this
while the true reason that this whole Party (taking in all its sub-divisions)
despise and oppose our Reverend Clergy, is, for their constant and approved
Loyalty to God and the King, and sticking close to both in all Weathers, it
being their most sacred Principle, Not to meddle with them that are given to
Change.

How great a part of the Nation these three Squadrons of our Churches Enemies
make, is too sad a Theme for me to enlarge upon; they have overspread the Land
like Locusts, and 'twould puzzle a very good Arithmetician to compute them; it
is sufficient for my present purpose that none of them dislike our Clergy
either for their Ignorance or Poverty, (for the more Rich and Learned it is,
the worse they hate or envy it) but upon vastly different Motives; the first
speak evil of them (and all things sacred) purely on the account of their own
irreligion; the second, for their opposing the corrupted Doctrine and
Discipline of Rome; the third, for their malignant Loyalty and resolved
Obedience to God and his Church, maugre all Scottish Covenants or Geneva Models.

The residue of the Nation we shall allow to be either in reality or pretense
at least so far the Churches Friends, as that they are not likely to be tempted
in haste to throw off her Communion upon any score; and yet I must freely
grant, that neither have many of them so just an esteem and value for the holy
Function as they ought to have.

However, if we find out a more probable and substantial Reason why they are
also wanting in their due estimation of the Priesthood, than either of those
two our small Conjecturer has hit upon, his business, I presume, will be
completely done; he may even sit him down and guess again, or rather take the
Poets advice along with him for the future, Sumite materiam vestris qui
scribitis aequam
Viribus --
and choose some fitter subject for him and his idle Muses to play with next
time, and not (...), not intrude into those things he understands not.

Now if we would speak out, and answer plainly and truly how it comes to pass
that so many of our pretended Friends give us not due respect and honor, we
must say it is because our Clergy are not publicly allowed the Authority due
to their Function, and necessary for executing the power of the Keys; I mean,
the want of that godly Discipline of Confession and Penance in the Primitive
Church, which our Church of England has long since wished for, and Sir Edwyn
Sandys says might have been better restored in all the reformed Churches to
its Primitive sincerity, than utterly abolished and neglected as in most places
it is: for although we do justly charge the present Church of Rome for
corrupting and degenerating from this ancient holy Discipline by their
notorious abuses of it, particularly by their laying the main stress and
efficacy of it, upon the definitive sentence of Absolution, (which, according
to the Trent Council, is given before any fruits of Repentance are produced,
and requires no after penance, but a few Ave Mary's and Pater Nosters, with
some easy Alms to them that are able, and a little fasting to such as are
willing; and sometimes for horrible Blasphemies, and other lewdnesses, imposes
only the bare saying of their Beads thrice over, which they may dispatch too as
they go in the streets:) their believing and teaching that by such like
Penances the debt of temporal punishment is redeemed after the sin is pardoned,
the people all this while making account of Confession as professed Drunkards
do of vomiting, and the Priest using it as a Pick-lock to tyrannize over, and
torture Men's Consciences, and make way for the dangerous delusions of
Indulgences; yet, I say, no Reformed Church can excuse it self, which to avoid
their extravagant abuses, is fallen into the other extreme, and lets the sober
use of so excellent a piece of Discipline grow into utter desuetude and
neglect: for it must not, it cannot be denied in the first place, but that the
power of the Keys (to be executed not only in admitting Disciples to
Church Membership by Baptism, but also in rejecting Heretical, Schismatical and
immoral Professors, and then absolving and re-admitting them into Communion,
upon their unfeigned submission, and demonstrations of sincere Repentance) is
founded immediately upon our Lords own Institution, and the Apostles and their
Successors to the Worlds end, derive their Authority from, and act by the same
Commission given them, St. Matthew. 18.18. Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be
bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven;
or as it is explained and renewed, St. John 20.23. Whole sins soever ye remit,
they are remitted unto them; and whose sins soever ye retain, they are retained.

Nor, Secondly, can it be denied by any Man that is acquainted with the Sects
of the Montanists, Novatians, Donatists, and Meletians, and understands the
practice of the Primitive Church, legible in the Writings of the Apostles,
ancient Fathers and Councils, (particularly that of Elvira in Spain, held
diverse years before that at Nicaea, and therefore counted as ancient as any the
Church has) but that the cure of sin by penance is an unquestionable Tradition
of the Apostles. Not to mention many other obvious Texts to that purpose, the
most natural and primary meaning of St. Paul's charge to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.22.
Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins, must
needs be fetched from that known Apostolical Custom, of admitting lapsed
Christians to penance and the Prayers of the Church by imposition of hands.

Thirdly and lastly, Secret Confession of Sins (otherwise not notorious) in
order to their cure, has been the inviolate practice of the Western (bating
their abuses aforesaid) and also of the Eastern Churches, particularly that of
Constantinople, even to this day; and it is recommended and pressed as a duty
incumbent on the generality of Christians, as well by the ancient Fathers as
modern Authors both of the Roman Church, and also of the Reformation. The
Augustine Confession says peremptorily, Impium esset ex Ecclesia tollere
privatam Absolutionem, That it were an ungodly, a sacrilegious thing to rob the
Church of Christ of private Absolution. And Chemnitius in his Examen Council.
Trid. gives a fivefold account of the use and profitableness of this Discipline
of private Confession.

1. For the information of the ignorant concerning the true knowledge, the
degrees and heinousness of sin, and the right way of performing repentance.

2. For Physic, viz. how each sin is so to be cured and mortified, that it may
be avoided for the future, and what amendment of life is to be opposed to such
and such sins.

3. For Counsel, that in doubtful cases Pastors may advise and instruct their
Flocks out of Gods Word.

4. For Spiritual Comfort, to relieve disturbed Consciences.

Lastly, (because Absolution is to be given only to such as appear truly
penitent) that the Pastor himself may be assured whether he ought to bind or
loose.

Our Church of England in particular refuses the benefit of it to none, urges
it in extremis, and requires it for quieting of troubled Consciences, as is
manifest in her several Offices of the Communion, and the Visitation of the
sick. Notwithstanding all this, woeful experience tells us, that the practice of
this holy Discipline has been declining every day more and more ever since
that desperate opinion was first broacht in the World, That Men are justified
by believing they are predestined to life, (which resolves all Christian
Duties into a new notion of Faith, little different from a strong fancy) and is
now grown almost utterly out of fashion amongst us, and never (I fear) likely
to recover its ancient practice. Now the want of this most reasonable and
necessary Discipline, is attended with very many dangerous consequences, such
as these: The practice of religious Duties in general runs to decay: Men grow
accustomed to, and at length hardened in their sins, by satisfying themselves
with a superficial repentance, or none at all: They content themselves with a
palliative cure oft-times in stead of a sound one, by reason of their own
ignorance or partiality; for every Man has not skill enough to be his own
Physician; and they that have, do wilfully mistake sometimes a Cordial for a
Corrosive: They rush unworthily upon that Tremendum Evangelit Mysterium, (as
Saint Augustine calls the Sacrament of the Eucharist) without due preparation:
They fall into Heresies and Errors by leaning to their own understanding, by
mis-interpreting or mis-applying the holy Scriptures, and not consulting with,
and submitting to better Judgments: Their Consciences are seldom quiet, but
like the troubled Sea, boysing up despairing thoughts, because they apply not
themselves to the Delegates and Commissaries of Him, whom the Winds and the Sea
obeyed, I mean, the Priests of the living God: They venture their Salvation
upon slender and uncertain Evidences, and hinder their Pastor from doing the
best Offices he can for them, (and most likely to succeed) in order thereunto:
All that they will allow him, is, to shoot at rovers, and preach his heart out
in chastising sin in general, whereas an occasional private conference with Him
now and then, were much more probable to effect their particular cure. No Man
ever doubted, but one good remedy well applied by a skilful Hand, is more
likely to cure a Man of the Gout or Dropsy, than the hearing of five hundred
Anatomy-Lectures to that purpose. And amongst many other ill conseqences, this
is evidently one, That the power of the Keys is in part taken away, the due
Authority of the Priesthood restrained and impaired, and consequently their
esteem lessened, their Function not valued as it ought to be by the People, and
their Persons sometimes exposed to Contempt: And therefore let but this ancient
holy Discipline be restored amongst us, either by a public Act of the Church,
or by the unanimous practice of those that profess themselves of our Communion,
and then let common sense judge if these effects will not necessarily follow
upon it: The Life of Religion will quickly grow more into fashion: Men will be
more careful of discharging their Baptismal Vow, more afraid of sin, more
sincere in their Repentance, Fastings, Prayers, and Works of Charity, and
consequently the People must needs believe that their Pastors belong to God
more than ordinary Folks; they cannot but have a hearty respect, and honorable
esteem for their Spiritual Guides and Physicians, who watch daily over their
Souls, by whose prudent Conduct, faithful Advices, and ghostly Comfort, they
live quietly and peaceably here in all Godliness and Honesty, and in the end
attain to Everlasting Life.

The Conclusion.
NOw having so fair an occasion offered, give me leave to expostulate a while
with all those who profess themselves of our Communion, and yet do not heartily
respect and value the holy Function, merely because they neglect the use of
that Catholic and Apostolic Discipline aforesaid, and I have done.

When our Enemies reproach us, we can bear it cheerfully, rejoicing (with the
Apostles, Acts 5.41.) that we are counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name.
But if you that are our Companions and dear Brethren, who walk together with us
to the House of God as Friends, Psalm. 55. who have eaten frequently (not of our
Bread perhaps, as David complains, but) of the Bread of Life administered by us;
if You also undervalue our Persons or Office when we deserve it not, (so far we
are compelled to boast of our Infirmities) Forgive us this wrong. (...); -- an
undeserved slight from her own Sons is the greatest stab you can make at your
indulgent Mothers Heart. Wherefore let me beseech you in Her Name to take these
few short particulars into your most serious and impartial thoughts.

Consider, First, that whilst you continue unkind toward us, you are all this
while much more cruel to your selves: for we lose only a Temporal Good, your
favor, but you deprive your selves of many Spiritual Comforts, and possibly
hazard your Eternal too.

Consider, Secondly, that you are easily persuaded to send for a Physician when
you lie sick of a malignant Fever, and to conceive a good opinion of him when
(under God) he restores you from Death to Life; and what should be the reason
that a mortal Body is prized so highly above an immortal Soul? or what prudence
is it to be more sollicitous for preserving a Temporal, than for securing an
Eternal Life? Neither Physician is likely to do you much service, if you defer
consulting them till the last gasp upon your Deathbed, as the manner of some
is; and if you be shie of discovering your Disease to either, what expectations
can you reasonably have of being cured? Si erubescat aegrotus Medico vulnus
confiteri, quod ignorant Medicina, non curat, says St. Hierome upon this very
subject: Although our Lord and Master has committed the power of the Keys to
us, yet you must give us power to exercise them upon you by your own voluntary
act, or you cannot reap due advantage by them.

Consider, Thirdly, that the Apostles express command is general, that ye
should confess your sins one to another, St. James 5.16. Now the reason of that
command is clear both by the Context and the reason of the thing, viz. that ye
may have the benefit of the Prayers, and Christian advice of others, no Man
being a competent judge in his own cause. Much more then ought you to unbosom
your selves, and disclose your grievances to your Pastors, who are presumed to
be best able to solve your doubts, and supply your spiritual wants, and who
only are entrusted by Christ as his Delegates to absolve sincere Penitents from
all their sins.

Consider, Fourthly, that you have been often importuned in the former
Exhortation before the Communion, to repair to your own, or (in case of his
sickness, impotent age, or any like infirmity) some other discreet and learned
Minister of Gods Word, and to open your grief to Him, that ye may receive
ghostly comfort, counsel and Absolution for the relief of your distressed
Consciences. And how many sad instances did our late Times produce of those,
who by neglecting this (very) old Christian Duty, and puzzling their Brains
with new Notions of Gods unsearchable Decrees, not only lost their Wits, but
fell into utter despair of ever being saved?

Consider, Lastly, how provident and tender your Mother the Church is, lest
your secrets should be at any time betrayed, your privacies made public by an
unfaithful or imprudent Confessor: for in her 113 Canon she pronounces such an
one Irregular ipso facto: that is to say, the party so offending does not only
forfeit all the Ecclesiastical Preferments which he has at the present, but
renders himself incapable of receiving any other for the time to come: and
Confession made upon such security, will be as saving to the fame of the
Penitent, as the Absolution to his Soul, as the Learned Doctor H. well observes.

And so I conclude all with my hearty Prayers to God for you, that He would
enlighten and quit your Minds from all Prejudices, and incline your Wills to
the unanimous and speedy practice of so important a Christian Duty, (or
Privilege rather) so immediately concerning the advancement of Gods Glory, the
redeeming the Honor of His Priests, and the eternal Salvation of your own
Souls, through Christ our Lord. Amen. Amen.

POSTSCRIPT.
THese Papers had long since been in the Press, but that I heard of a second
Part of the Contempt of the Clergy coming out, by the same Author, which I was
willing to see and peruse before I published them. And although I find it to be
another man's Province to make a Reply to that, (if yet such a trifling piece of
Impertinence be worthy of any) and am resolved not to be so pragmatical, as to
thrust my Sicle into another man's Field; yet I think my self concerned briefly
to animadvert upon those particular passages therein, whereby the Author seems
to mince the matter, and excuse himself, or put by the thrusts, and weaken any
argument I have made against his first Letter. I begin with those passages,
where he alters the scene, and commends the Learning and Wisdom of our Clergy,
which (says he, page 33.) the whole world have always admired, and have reason
still to do, and our Adversaries to dread, And again, page 35. I know no reason
to deny that the Clergy of the Land does daily considerably improve. And again,
page 184. It is a sign of nothing but perfect madness, ignorance, and stupidity
not to acknowledge that the present Church of England affords as considerable
Scholars, and as solid and eloquent Preachers, as are any where to be found in
the whole Christian World. This is somewhat like; I hope we shall bring him to
speak truth in time. Now our Clergy is either strangely improved in a very
short space, or else T. B. has changed his mind; for it is not a year ago
since he laid the imputation of Ignorance and Folly upon the very same Clergy
to which he now attributes so much Learning and Wisdom. I have already shown
that his first Letter is built upon a false foundation, and consequently, that
the superstructure thereof is as weak and senseless, as if he had spoiled so
much paper to give us an account of the grounds and reasons why a Tub should
hold as much water with a Carp of twenty inches long in it, as without it, when
all this while, upon experiment, there is no such matter: and I have only this
to say now, that he makes us but a poor requital in this; He first breaks our
head, and then pretends to give us a Plaster. He calls us all at naught, and
then says he did not design or intend us harm: He wounds and stabs our
Reputation so deep, that it is past his skill to cure it suddenly (as good a
Mountebanck as he would be thought) without leaving a dreadful skar behind; and
he is much obliged to the world, if they will rather credit these his second
thoughts, and take them to be as unalterable as his last Will and Testament.

In the next place he is forced to confess what I had urged at large against
him, by acquainting us ( p. 62.) who they were he chiefly intended to charge
with rude, immodest, and almost blasphemous discourses in the Pulpit, and
putting them off with those little mollifying sentences, as it were, as I may
so say, and with reverence be it spoken; they were those (says he) who in the
late times (and have not as yet left it off) called themselves God's special
Saints, his Favorites, and (as I may so say) his Intimado's, but in reality
were more Oliver's than Gods; (meaning, I suppose, St. Hugh Peter's, who was
canonized at Charing Cross, and the rest of those Trumpeters of Sedition who
were Chaplains to that Grand Usurper.) And again, to stop the Non-Conformists
mouth, he tells them ( p. 101.) that their dear Brethren are as much concerned
as any body else (in his first Letter) and have as great a share in those
Instances that are produced out of idle Sermons: So that his way of arguing is
most prodigiously clear and convincing (as I have formerly intimated.) Peter's
and Sterry, etc. preached Rebellion, and Treason, and Blasphemies: ergo, the
present Clergy did cut off the Kings Head. Now I appeal to all mankind, if it
be fair play to make a Linsey-woolsey History of Conformists and
Non-conformists, of the Loyal and Orthodox Sons of Levi, and those persidious
Apostated Sons of Korah, without all manner of distinction, (they being of more
irreconcilable Principles and Practices, than a Protestant and a Papist,) and
then father the faults of the guilty upon the innocent; as Nero charged the
Christians with firing of Rome, when he knew it was done by himself, and his
own Faction. Nay, he is not content to do it himself only, but brings in the
reverend Mr. Thorndike to bear false witness for him ( page 81. of the first
Letter) by wresting his words from their intended and plain sense, as his
manner is: for the usual Preaching Mr. Th. chastises as a hinderance rather of
Salvation, is that of the factious Separatists, (not of our Orthodox Clergy)
whom he there calls their Preachers, and charges them further with their
Will Worship Prayers after Sermon, whereby evil Doctrine (says he) is repeated
to God, for a blessing of his Spirit upon it, as you may see at large in his
Book of Just Weights and Measures, cap. 22. page 152, 153. And therefore this
ingenuous Gentleman must not think to shelter himself under the sober Author of
the Friendly Debate his wing (although he would fain make him his Voucher and
Parallel, page 83.) for the comparison (as I may so say) is very odious. A
Garment suited to the fickle Moon, cannot well fit the constant Sun. Surely
there is some small difference between one that relates the true and real
absurdities of false Brethren, spurious Churchmen, who have renounced the
Faith of English Christians; and another, that presumes to pin false stories
and fooleries upon our true genuine and learned Clergy: as much as to say,
because that Author calls it murder to kill a man upon the Kings High way, ours
may be allowed to say it is also murder for a Judge to sentence a Felon to die,
upon Conviction, or for the Executioner to do his Office.

In other places he makes a face as if he had a mind to commence Modesty, eat
his words, repent of his manner of expression, and persuade us of his good
meaning, and honest intentions at the bottom: for he says ( page 81.) I am not
yet come to that degree of self-conceit and confidence, as to recommend my own
words, phrase, or style; and I had rather the Answerer should find fault with
the manner of my expression, and delight himself in thinking, that it is not
suitable to the subject, than be guilty of so much folly and impudence, as
vigorously to maintain or magnify the same: Only thus much Sir (speaking to R.
L. his endeared Friend) may possibly be believed by you, and perhaps by some
few besides, that I did not put in one idle or extravagant word on purpose to
render any of the Clergy contemptible, but did only just endeavor to keep
people awake till they read it. And again ( page 91.) In my first Letter I did
rather make it my business to give a short History of what was derided or
blamed, than study to invent or complain of what might be represented
unprofitable, or ridiculous: And ( page 101.) It was altogether against my
design to bring any of the Clergy into contempt, etc. A fair profession one
would think, but it must be examined with much tenderness and charity, or there
will be found very little of reality in it: For if it be folly and Impudence to
maintain the style and manner of expression in the first Letter, as not
suitable to the subject, why does he carry on the Metaphor, and continue the
same strain in the second? He says further, he did not put in one idle or
extravagant word (into the first part) on purpose to make any of the Clergy
Contemptible; and it is strange men will not believe him, when they find it one
great business of his second Adventure, to keep people awake still, that is, to
rake up some hundreds of idle extravagant words, merely to expose his Answerer,
who is one of the Clergy. No question it was altogether against his Design to
bring his Answerer (and the rest of his Brethren) into Contempt, when he laughs
all along, rather than writes at him, and only tickles the skirts of the
business with affected flourishes, answering his most material objections, with
fine stories of a Cock and a Bull, and Heyte Teyte's, or to morrow morning I
found a Horse-shooe; but I must tell him, that, to persuade the world we intend
no hurt, and design honestly, when our actions visibly run counter, is an old,
an antiquated cheat that will not down with wise men now adays, being fit to be
owned by none but such ungodly miscreants, as could take up Arms against, and
at length murder their lawful Sovereign, under pretense of meaning well all
this while, and intending only to make him a glorious King.

To proceed; better late than never, ( p. 86.) he takes notice that the Bishops
have augmented the Vicarages in their gift, (and who knows but he intended to
put in the Deans and Chapters too) and tells us of sums of money employed
toward the redeeming of the great Tithes, of Impropriations restored, and of
the good Inclinations of this present Parliament, etc. but this should have
been done in his first Letter by right, and perhaps he had done it there, but
that he did not think on it; or rather because he did think on it: for it would
have taken off somewhat from the Poverty and shrimpedness of his Clergy, he was
then describing. However he falls to salving again at the foot of this page,
saying, I hope I have said nothing to abate the charity, or good purposes of
pious Benefactors, or to stop the assisting hands of our present Governors.
No? then he is infinitely obliged to them that they don't believe him; for if
all those he calls the Poor Clergy, be so Ignorant as he makes them, (assigning
the particular reasons to show it impossible it should be otherwise, viz. their
mean Education, want of Money, Books, Time, and such other things, without
which few men prove very great Scholars) It Is pity their maintenance should be
made better; 30 l. per an. being rather too large and magnificent an allowance
for such pitiful fellows as he most invidiously and falsely makes them. But
thanks be to God, our present Governors and Benefactors don't take all for
current Gospel that every gifted Lay-Brother talks at rovers, knowing full well
that the generality even of our inferior Clergy are of good worth and note;
and see no shadow of reason in both his Letters (nor ever will in an hundred
more of the same stamp) to alter their noble and pious Intentions.

Lastly, whereas he fancies ( page 101.) that, if any are so weak, and so
regardless as to mistake him, (viz. by thinking his design was to bring the
Clergy into Contempt) they are either some of the giddy and soft-headed
Non-Conformists, or some of the idle and inconsiderable Laity, I must assure
him that a very great part of the Orthodox Clergy and most considerable Laity
too are very much of the same opinion, it being past their skill to find out
any more rational and plausible end that should prompt him to make such an
Adventure in English, since, had he clothed his Discourse in (that so much
despised thing called) Latin, it could not have been half so obnoxious. And
albeit in the sequel of his discourse he bids the Papists, Non-Conformists,
conceited new Philosophists, modish Gallants, Hectors, and Atheists of the age
hold their tongues, showing he can make the best of them all ridiculous if he
please; yet what satisfaction is this to the injured Clergy? he sends them more
company indeed, but such as they never much delighted in; and he must not think
he can undeceive such men with as much ease as he has deceived them: for (let
him write till Doomsday to the contrary) they will take him at his first word,
and believe he has given them susfficient reason, grounds, and occasion to
blaspheme the holy Function. In the mean time, since, a man of this Authors
parts and confidence may play with any other subject in the world as well as
this, and abuse any profession of men whether Gentry, Lawyers, Physicians,
Citizens, etc. whilst he takes the liberty of saying what he pleases, by
inventing false stories, adding to, perverting, and wresting such as are, in
part, true, and carrying on the whole work of a Romancer, I hope all sober
Christians, will think never the worse of, but rather increase their esteem and
good opinion of so Reverend and Learned a Clergy.

FINIS.

