JUSTIFYING FAITH: OR, That Faith BY WHICH The JUST do LIVE, Briefly described
In a DISCOURSE on 1 John 5. 12.

By the Author of a late Book, Entitled Summum Bonum, or, An Explication of the
Divine Goodness, etc.

(...) S. Basil. in Psalm. 115.

To this Discourse is added, an Abstract of some Letters to an Eminent Learned
Person, concerning the Excellency of the Book of Common Prayer, etc.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Sign of the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar. 1679.

ILLUSTRISSIMO Virtutum Omnium Exemplari, Domino HENEAGIO FINCH, BARONI
DAVENTRIAE, Summo ANGLIAE Cancellario.
AEQuum videtur, ut Lingua non Vulgari Te Alloquar, Colendissime DOMINE, Quem
Genii, and Indolis adeo non Vulgaris esse Expertus sum. (...) Tuam Vere
Coelestem Ego sane Naturam potius SERAPHICAM vocarem, quam HUMANITATEM. Nimirum
hujusmodi in Me contulisti Beneficium, ut Quale sit Solus DEUS Cognoverit, nec
quisquam poterit Mortalium Rem aliquam Tot, and tam Miris Involutam
Circumstantiis Animquantumvis Perspicacissimo penit^ Inspicere. Hasce nostras
Bonitatis Infinitae Explicationis Nostrae Vindi^ as, and Liturgiae Anglicanae
Lauds T^ by Dicatas velim; namque Anim Tuo Gloriosissimum Bonitatis Infinitae
seu Divinae Characterem Impressum V^ disse gestio; ac Tui sane Me semper
Oportebit, in Precationibus Nostr^ Quotidianis Meminisse, utpote, Q^ sum, and
ero -- Dum Spiritus hos r^get artus,

Amoris, ac Reverentiae Vinculo Arctissimo Dominationi Tuae Obstrictus E. E.

To the Learned and Pious READERS.
THE more just the Complaint is of the Excessive multitude of Books, so much
the greater cause there is for the Publication of such short Discourses as
This, by which I have contributed some assistance to Persons Virtuously
disposed, to observe that Excellent Precept, (...), Simplifica Teipsum, viz. to
draw off their Minds from the Distracting multiplicity of Imaginations
concerning the Truth, to the Life and Practice of the Truth it self, which
chiefly consists in the Efficacy of this Apprehension, That the Divine Essence
is Absolutely One, And that Our Lord Jesus Christ, with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, is the Only True God He that believes This as he ought, will certainly
despise this present World, an^ love the Lord our God with all his Heart, and
with all his Soul, and with all his Strength, and with all his Mind; and his
Neighbor as Himself.

I doubt not but you will readily join with me in this Fervent Aspiration,

(...).
He that has the Son has Life, he that has not the Son of GOD has not Life.
1 John 5, 12.
THese words are such a kind of Epitome of the Gospel, as that is of the Law,
which is given us by our Savior, Luke 10. 27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy Heart, etc. For what is the Subject of the Gospel, but the Good
Will of God toward Men, through His beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord, that to
Believe in Him is the Way, the only Way to Life and Salvation, which is fully
employed in these words of the Apostle, He that has the Son has Life, etc.

Here let us consider first what Life is, as we are to understand it in this
place. Secondly what it is to have the Son. Life, I shall define thus: It Is a
Principle of Acting according to the Nature of Man. By the Nature of Man I do
not understand his Essential Form, That without which he cannot be a Man; but
that Course, Mode, or Kind of Acting which he was Made, or Constituted in. Now
you know, Moses says, that Man was Made after the Image of GOD, and Solomon
says, that GOD made Man upright, to wit, He appointed him to Actuate his
Intellectual Faculties Chiefly and Principally upon Himself, the Fountain of
all Goodness, Infinite Beauty, Infinite Love: and his Senses with his Passions,
or Sensitive Affections upon Objects fully Agreeable, and Satisfactory to their
several Capacities: In a word, Nature is to abhor that which is Evil, and to
cleave to that which is Good, (...) (says the Stoic) (...).

Man may be said to be Alive, or Dead either in respect of his Animal, or
Sensitive; or of his Rational, or Spiritual Faculties: In respect of the
former, every Man lives till there be a Separation of the Soul and Body: for
all the Sensible Motions of any Man's Body in this present World, that tend
Directly to the Support, or Conservation of the Sensitive Nature, viz. to the
keeping of the Soul and Body together, are in some measure Pleasing, or
satisfactory. But by reason of those manifold Pains and Diseases, anguishes,
and dissatisfactions of our Senses External, and Internal, which in this
present World we are subject unto, the Church may well say as she does, In the
midst of Life we are in Death. Non est vivere, sed valere Vita, says the
Epigrammatist. The Rational or Spiritual Life He only Lives, whose Heart is set
upon God, as the Principal Object of all his Love, so that all his other Loves
flow from and back again into the Love of God, as Lesser Waters from, and into
the Ocean.

Even those, who habitually love the Lord their God with all their Heart, and
with all their Soul, when they exert any Act of the Will that is not Formally,
nor Virtually the Love of God, they are Dead, and they abide in Death, 'till
they are Renewed by Repentance, 'till the Course of their Souls be turned by an
Act of Holy Love. Thus a great Number of those that are truly Godly, that live
the Rational, Divine Life, by reason of their manifold Backslidings may say of
themselves, as St. Paul speaks in respect of his temporal Calamities, that they
are in Death often. 2 Corinthians. 11, 23.

The best Life Rational, or Sensitive, which most men Live, as to this present
World, differs little or nothing more from Death, than a Shadow from Darkness.
I conceive the Penmen of the Holy Ghost have so often compared the Life of Man
to a Shadow, not only in respect of his Vanishing, Perishable Condition, but
also of that Deficiency of Light; or Life, which All of us in this Mortal Body
are Subject unto. But that little Portion of Spiritual Life (if I may so speak)
which He that has the Son is Partaker of even here upon Earth, is Infinitely
more worth than the whole World, and as for his Sensible Death, or
Dissatisfactions, which he suffers at present, they continually work together
for his Good, they are no other than the Instruments of the Holy Ghost working
upon him, to fit, and prepare him for an Eternal Life of Soul and Body in
Heaven. This Notion of Life and Death, which I have endeavored to Express unto
you, we may easily Demonstrate to be most suitable to the Sense, and Import of
several Texts of Scripture. She that lives in Pleasure is Dead while she
lives. 1 Timothy 5. 6. What can be more plain than this, that the Apostle
attributes Life and Death, in diverse Respects, to the same Person, at the same
Time? and whereto are those Respects but to the Animal or Sensitive; And to the
Rational or Spiritual Life? She is Dead, i. e. is Separate from God the
Fountain of Life, the Fountain of All true Joy, and Comfort: while she Lives,
while her Sou^ remains in Conjunction with her Body: who lives in Pleasure,
i. e. who indulgeth to her self such Pleasures as are either in their own
nature unlawful, or else become so, being inordinately i. e. Absolutely desired
or enjoyed. i. e. without respect to their due Subserviency to the Spiritual,
or Divine Life, which requires them only for this End, that our Bodies being
Recreated, Strengthened and Refresht by them may become more Vigorous in such
Operations, which the Blessed God commands us to exercise them in. Let the dead
bury their dead, says our Savior, Matthew 8. 22. What can be meant by the
Dead in this place but those that embrace this present World, and so Despise
the glorious Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Of whom, says St.
John, In Him was Life and the Life was the Light of Men. You know, all sinsul
Actions are in the Holy Scriptures called dea^^ Works, being the Fruits or
Effects of Spiritual Death or Separation of the Soul from God.

Thus, you see, that the Scriptures plainly demonstrate, that Sin, the
Separation, or Disunion o^ the Heart from God, is Death: And as for all
Troubles, or Disturbances of our Senses External or Internal, as such, as they
are to the Wicked, that is to say, the Wages of Sin, you know what the Apostle
says of them, The Wages of Sin is Death. Death I: but that is Everlasting
Death. Indeed we an^ here to understand chiefly and principally Even lasting
Death. Indeed we are here to understand chiefly and principally Everlasting
Death, those horrible Gnawings of the Worm that shall never Dye, the Burnings
of the Fire that shall never be Quenched: But that All Trouble is the Wages of
Sin, who can deny that considers what he says? In what we have already
delivered, it is employed, that Godliness, or a Pure, and Heavenly temper of
Mind, is Life, which we shall show expressly; and then shall proceed by Gods
assistance, to declare unto you what it is to have the SON. In testimony of
this Truth, we shall produce but one Text of Scripture, that one being so
plainly and unquestionably Agreeable to what has been said, Romans 8, 6. To be
Carnally Minded is Death, but to be Spiritually Minded is Life, and Peace.

The former words of this Verse are a further Proof of what we have spoken of
Death, To be Carnally Minded is Death; But, to be Spiritually Minded is Life
and Peace. And what is it to be Spiritually Minded, but to have our Minds set
upon GOD, who calls himself a SPIRIT, and the Father of Spirits, as the
Principal Object of All our Thoughts and Inclinations? But here it may be
Objected, that Life is the Reward of Godliness, or Holiness; and Death the
Wages of Sin: How then is Godliness Life it self, and Sin Death? To this I
Answer, First, that whatsoever is properly Life of the Body in this present
World, is Really Distinct from Godliness: and the Great and Good GOD gives unto
All the Godly, All those that have the SON, so much of it, as He in His
Infinite Wisdom sees them to stand in need of for the working out of their
Salvation, for the preparing of their Souls for Heaven. And that Glorious Life
of the Body, which they that have the SON shall have for ever and ever in
Heaven, this also is Really Distinct from Godliness, of which it is the Reward.
But it has indeed a great Affinity therewith, or Conformity thereunto, which we
can have but little Knowledge of at present, but somewhat of it we may
apprehend by that Saying of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 44. It is raised a
Spiritual Body. Here it is most Evident, that the Bodies of the Saints after
the Resurrection, shall be thoroughly Affected with the Temper of their God-like
Spirits; as they are in some measure even in this present World. All these
several Acts of Godliness, CHARITY, or Divine Affection, which the Elect of GOD
perform in this Mortal Body, have the Nature of OBEDIENCE: But that One
Continued Act of the most Intimate, Full, Perfect Adherence to the ONE INFINITE
GOOD, being by the Free Mercy of GOD in CHRIST made Absolutely for ever and
ever Incapable of the least Defection, is the REWARD of All the Godly, or Holy
Actions, which are Performed by Gods Elect, whilst they are in the World.
Finally, These Holy Performances are in Diverse Respects Acts of Obedience, and
the Reward thereof. In Respect of their Conformity to the Will of GOD, they are
Acts of Obedience; in Respect of the Joy, and Satisfaction they impart to the
Soul of the Doer, they are in a manner their own Reward. That Poet had a
Glympse of this Truth, who said Ipsa quidem Virtus Pretiumsibi, Virtue's its
own Reward. But it shines forth most Gloriously in the Holy Scriptures. David
says Expressly Ps. 19. 11. In keeping of them (viz. the Judgments, or Just
Commandments of GOD) there is Great Reward. In the three Precedent Verses he
does most Pathetically set forth the Great Joy, and Satisfaction they import to
the Souls of the Obedient, upon which account he says here, In keeping of
them there is Great Reward. The Statutes of the Lord are Right, Rejoicing the
Heart etc. Her ways (says Solomon Prove. 3. 17. 18.) are ways of pleasantness,
and all her Paths are Peace (this he speaks of the ways of Wisdom, and what
are her ways but the Ways of the Commandments of the Only Wise GOD?) She is
a Tree of Life to them that lay hold on her, and happy is every one that
retains her. We may easily conceive how the Service of God, which is the Life
of a True CHRISTIAN, is Perfect Freedom, if we consider that a Man's Freedom
is to Do What He Would Do, For certainly He only Does What he Would, that is
to say, He only Satisfies his Will or Intellectual Appetite, who Conforms It
to the Divine Will, which we cannot Do, unless we have the SON. Without Me
(says the Son John 15. 5.) ye can Do nothing. And John 8. 36. If the Son shall
make you Free, ye shall be Free indeed. He that has the Son (says his Beloved
Disciple) has Life, etc. But what is it to have the Son? That we may know what
it is as We Ought to Know, Shine upon us O FATHER by the Influences of the HOLY
GHOST in the Face of the Son JESUS CHRIST the Brightness of Thy Glory, that in
Thy Light we may See Light.

To Have the SON is to Believe in Him, which is To have Him Dwelling in Our
Hearts by Faith, for so the Apostle phrases it in his Prayer for the Ephesians,
that they might syncerely Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, That Christ says
he, may Dwell in your Hearts by Faith. But, alas, what Stirs, and Petulant
Controversies have there been, and are still continued amongst those, that
jointly Profess the Christian Religion concerning the Nature of Faith in
Christ, of the Faith of GODS ELECT! A man can hardly say any thing by way of
Description of it, but presently up starts one, or other, with some Argument to
Disprove what we say. I shall do what I can in Declaring my Sense of it to
speak Convincingly, and Unexceptionably, and therefore I shall pass by all such
Descriptions of it, as I have found to have been Controverted, though I do
heartily Approve many of them, as Implying the same Truth, which I shall
endeavor to set forth in these words: The Faith, we speak of, Faith by which
the Just do Live, Faith that Overcomes the World, Faith that works by Love,
is Such an ASSENT to the Truths contained in the Holy Scriptures, which
includes in its Nature the Trusting in God the Father Almighty Maker of Heaven
and Earth, for Grace and for Glory, through the Merits of the Past Sufferings,
and the Power, and Virtue of the Present Intercession of Jesus Christ His Only
Son, Our Lord.

By Grace I understand Principally All those Measures of Holiness, of Purity of
Heart, of Participation of the Divine Nature which are Attainable here upon
Earth, and Secondarily whatsoever the Only Wise God Judges to be the Means of
Attaining thereunto: By Glory I understand the Full Perfect, Eternal Enjoyment
of the Holy, Blessed and Glorious TRINITY, in the Kingdom of Heaven. By
Trusting in God for Grace, and for Glory Through the Merits and Incession of
Jesus Christ I understand a Sincere Absolute Expectation from God of whatsoever
He Knows to conduce to our Eternal Happiness, that is, a Perfect CONFORMITY to
Our Blessed Redeemer, both in Body and Soul, Upon the bare Account of His
Promise to Give us Freely whatsoever we shall Ask of Him in the Name of His
SON, that is to say, in a Sincere Belief that the SON, Being Over All, GOD
Blessed for Ever, did in Time, for Us Sinful Creatures to Reconcile Us to the
Holy Creator of All Things, Take upon Him the Nature of Man, Was conceived by
the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
Crucified, Dead, and Buried, he descended into Hell, the third day he rose
again from the dead, he ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of
God the Father Almighty, from thence he shall come to judge the quick, and the
dead.

The Syncerity of this Belief consists in a True, and Real Bent, or Intention
of the Heart to Live no longer unto our selves, but unto him that Dyed for us,
and Rose again. But here it may be said, why do you not mention the Pardon of
Our Sins? must we not Trust in God for that also? I Answer, God's Pardoning of
our Sins is employed in the Giving us his Grace, in making us Partakers of the
Divine Nature, in shedding abroad his Love in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost: For
they that are Partakers of the Divine Nature, they that Love God Above All
things, from whence Necessarily flows the Loving of Every Man as themselves,
They are in Christ and Christ in Them: And, you know, the Apostle says There
is no Condemnation to Them who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit. Romans 8. 1.

From the Due Consideration of what has been said, This most Important Truth
shines forth most evidently, That we cannot Do any thing Acceptable unto God,
but only in the Power of the Holy, Blessed, and Glorious TRINITY: and hence it
is that the Frequent Repetition of the Gloria Patri, that most Excellent
Doxologie, Glory be to the Father, etc. And the like Frequent Mention of the
Name, and Merits of Jesus Christ Our Lord, Hence it is, I say, that these
Excellent Passages in Our Liturgy, which some Naughty men have called Vain
Repetitions, cannot but be exceeding Pleasing, and Satisfactory to All Truly
Christian Devout Souls. As for those, who are still so Mad, as to Dislike this
Truly CATHOLIC Doxologie, they are more Fit for our Pity, than our Arguments.
And let that Pity ever Move us to Pray Our Almighty, and most Merciful Father
to Draw them out of those Waters of Strife, those Loose, Variable, Turbulent
Opinions and to Lead them by His Good Spirit in the Pleasant Ways of Truth,
and Peace.

And now, my Brethren, Let us seriously Examine our own Hearts, and See whether
or no we are Spiritually Living or Dead Men. Does the main Stream of our
affections Run out not upon the things that are on the Earth, but the things
that are Above, where Jesus sits on the Right Hand of GOD? Do we find any
Rational Contentment, and Satisfaction even in the Objects of our Sensible
Sorrows, in our Sicknesses, and Reproaches, in ^he Sicknesses, and Reproaches
of our nearest Friends and Relations, or in any other kind of Affliction?
Certainly, he that has the SON, he that Dwells ^n Love, cannot but Know, and
Feel that the LORD Our GOD is as constantly GOOD in All that he Does, as True
in All that He Says: that ^^her's nothing Absolutely, and in its own Naure
EVIL, but only the Aversion of the WILL of the Creature from the Infinite Wise,
and Good Creator, that All things work together for the Good of those that love
GOD, and therefore he Rejoices in Tribulation, and gives Thanks Always for all
Things to God even the Father, in the Name of Jesus Christ.

Do we indeed, and in Truth Resolve, through Christ enabling us, to do Always
to All men, as we Would that in the like Case any one should Do unto Us? If so,
then we begin to Live, Then we begin to Satisfy our Immortal Souls, which
Finite Objects can never in any measure truly Satifie; Then I say we begin to
Satisfy our Thirsty Souls with the Participation of the Divine Nature, with
the Real Enjoyment of the Lord Our God, who calls Himself the Fountain of
Living Waters, and He that drinks of this Water shall never Thirst, but it
shall be in him a well of Water springing up into Everlasting Life. Joh. 4. 14.

Here (it may be) some Unsanctifyed man may say in his Heart, but what if I
find that I am in a State of Death, what shall I do? I cannot give Life unto
My self. It Is true, Thou can not, but CHRIST will give thee Life, if Thou will not Reject it. Awake thou that sleep, and Arise from the Dead, and
Christ shall give thee Light, the Light of that Glorious Day that shall never
End, that Light in which thou shall for Ever See, and Enjoy Him in whose
Presence there is Fullness of Joy, and at whose Right Hand there are Pleasures
for ever more. But I am not able to Arise from the Dead: Not, in Thine own
Natural Power, but thou may Certainly by the Power of the Lord of Life, that
Calls upon Thee to arise: This Call, this Commandment is Life Everlasting. If
Thou will not Stop thine Ears against it, Thou shall Live for ever. But I do
not yet understand this Mystery, how I should Act in the Power of Christ. Take
it for Thine own, Rely upon It in a Sense of Thine Interest, or Propriety in
It. How shall I do that? why It is in a manner Thine own already, because It is
Freely offered unto Thee. So that there can be no other Cause of thy Abiding in
Death, but the Perverseness of Thine own Will, Because Thou will be a Fool, and
Embrace this Present World, and Despise the Lord of Glory, Because Thou will be
the Worst of Mad men, a Destroyer of Thy self, a Lover of Death. But oh! why
Will Thou dye? Receive the Lord Jesus, and He will give thee Power to become
one of the Sons of God, to have thy Conversation in Heaven: He will make thee
Partaker of Eternal Life, of Joy Unspeakable, and full of Glory. And, O, that
We would All Hearken with the utmost Propensity, and Intention of our Hearts,
and Minds to the Voice of the Lord Our God, Calling upon Us in the Words of the
Blessed Psalmist, with which I shall Conclude my Discourse: Kiss the Son, lest
He be angry, and ye Perish from the way, when his Wrath is Kindled but a
little. Blessed are all they that put their Trust in Him.

AMEN. HALLELUIAH.
AN ABSTRACT OF SOME LETTERS TO AN Eminent Learned PERSON, Concerning the
EXCELLENCY Of the BOOK of COMMON PRAYER, etc.

(...). 1 Cor. 8. 1.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar,
1679.

SIR,
I Humbly entreat you to tell me whether you do not Judge it Sinful to stay at
home on the Lords Day, rather then go to Church only to hear the Common Prayer.
Preaching doubtless is in no wise to be Neglected, but this I must say, that I
cannot apprehend that that person has any Actings of that Faith which works
by Love (without which All the Knowledge we gain by Hearing Sermons does not
Edify, but only Puff up the Mind) who when he comes to the Place of God's
public Worship, knowing that he may not expect a Sermon there, is not
Confident that he shall be as much Edified by the Prayers, and Chapters etc. as
he should be by never so good a Sermon. But however, by reason of the Rarity of
the Habit of True Christian Faith (even in that part of the World, which we
call Christendom) and the frequency of the long Interruptions of its Actings,
where it is, Various, and fresh Expressions of Saving Truths (which are apt to
Excite the Minds of the Unsanctifyed by the Fantasy to give heed to the Sense
they import) are very Necessary. But This is most evident, that People are
exceeding apt to take the Sensible Workings of their Soul stirred up by the
Novelty of Expression in Sermons, and the Emphatical Pronunciation of the
Preacher etc. for Fervency of SPIRIT; which Sensible Motions I presume you will
grant are of no value, otherwise than as they are Subservient to Rational
Abhorrence of all Sin, of all Inordinate Affection to Finite Objects; or to a
Rational, or Spiritual Inclination to the ONE INFINITE GOOD through JESUS
CHRIST OUR LORD, the Effectual Notices of which INFINITE GOOD how is it
possible but we should be continually stir'^ up unto in the Hearing of the
Common Prayer, we would Apprehend the Free Offers of the Spirit of Truth, which
the Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ makes unto us in an Unlimited Abundance in
the Use of all such Means of Grace, as He calls us unto. Here I could Run out
with much Fervor o^ Indignation against the Despisers of these Means o^ Grace,
and Strong Guards from those Accursed Errors, Socinianism etc. which whilst I
lived in Oxford, seemed to me to be coming in like a Mighty Torrent upon this
Distracted Kingdom, while the Frequent Professions of Belief of the TRINITY,
Gloria patri, and the Three Creeds were ca^ out of Our Churches. If it be
said, what Reformation have we now? etc. I Reply, that one Reason of this
Kingdom's Miscarriages, I might say Abominations, is, that some of those that
are syncerel^ Learned, and Pious have not such an Esteem of ou^ Liturgy, as
they Ought to have; And hundreds ^^ those that are thought by the Vulgar to be
so, ^^ themselves Despise it, or Countenance others in doing.

You give me not any punctual Answer to my Question, whether you do not Judge
it Sinful to stay at home (though to read Good Books etc.) on the Lords Day,
rather than come to Church when nothing is to be heard there, but the Common
Prayer. You say you are more against spending the Lords Day in Idleness or in
any thing which is worse, than in Hearing that alone. I thank God I was never
so Mad, as to make a question of This: I have nothing to say to it but that I
dislike these words, worse than the Common Prayer, which seem to insinuate that
It is not Good. I am not guilty of ^lighting Preaching (as it is taken in
contradistinction to Reading etc.) as you seem to Conceit.

I Affirm, that to Suit, or Proportion our Expectations of Grace, in the Use of
All Means whereunto we are Called, to the Apprehensions of INFINITE Bounty,
etc. is a Property of Saving Faith.

But, say you, GOD who appoints several Means, does usually work according to
them; and when he withdraws them it is a Judgment, which it were not, if he
had promised as much Grace without them as with them.

I grant, that God who appoints several Means, does usually work according to
them. But I utterly Deny, that when he withdraws any Particular Means of
Grace it is a Judgment to Him who is in the Act of sincere Love to the Blessed
Jesus; for such a one is at All Times, and in All Places Under the Gracious
Influences of the INFINITY of Light and Love, directing him how (by Submission
to the Divine Will withdrawing any Particular Means of Grace, and by the
Renewing his Resolutions to make a Right Use of all such Means as God shall at
any time call him unto, etc.) He may Receive of the Fullness of Christ, in as
great Measures, as he could have done in the Use of the Means withdrawn from
him. The LORD give us both Understanding in all Things.

Now I have found the way by your Letter to discover your Thoughts concerning
the Common Prayer, in your Printed Papers; I shall not trouble you with any
more Post-Letters on that Subject: but shall stick to the Defense of this Great
Truth, that the withdrawing of any particular Means of Grace is not a Judgment
to him that is in the Act of Divine Love -- Against which you Argue thus: That
which tends to hinder his continuance in that Act of Love is a Judgment, but
such is the withdrawing of some Means of Grace. I Answer, the withdrawing etc.
is so far from being Directly, and in its own Nature that which tends to
hinder etc. that, as It is in its own Nature, viz. the work of the Infinitely
Good GOD, It is the Means of Grace, and he takes it for Such that is in the Act
of Divine Love, as I endeavored to show you in my last. We question not, say
you, Gods bounty, but his Will: show us a Promise that when a man is deprived
of the Preaching of the Gospel, the Communion of the Church, the Company of all
good men, and cast amongst impious deceivers, and haereticks, he shall have his
love continued, and increased as much as if he had better Means. I Answer, This
Promise of Our Savior, Whatsoever ye shall Ask the Father in my Name he will
give it you (John 16. 27.) would Engage the Heart of any one in the Act of
Divine Love, if God should put him into such a Condition, as you express, to
expect from GOD through Our LORD JESUS, as much Grace or Improvement of his
Divine Temper under that Dispensation of Providence, as he knows he could have
grounds to Expect in the Use of those Means of Grace which the Only Wise GOD
has thought fit to Withdraw from him. But I am ready to say with you, If God
should take away the Bible, and Preaching from the Land, I would take it for a
Judgment, though the Common Prayer were left us: neither did I ever say any
thing to the contrary: but I have said implicitly, and shall upon all
occasions say expressly, that nothing retains the Nature of a Judgment, or Sign
of the Wrath of God, to him that is in the Act of Divine Love, which
Essentially implies Rational Complacence in Every thing that proceeds from the
Will of the Infinitely Good GOD, I do not Grant (as you may gather from what I
have said) that any Particular Means of Grace are Better, or more Spiritually
advantageous, than the being Deprived of them, will certainly be to him that
Complies with the Divine Will in that Dispensation, Doing whatsoever is his
Duty to do in Relation thereunto. If in saying we question not Gods Bounty, but
his Will: and Gods bounty gives Grace according to his Liberty of Will, you
imply this Proposition (which I find asserted by a very Ingenious Person E. W.
in his NO PRAEEXISTENCE p. 13.) that the Will of God sometimes Obstructs the
Effluxes of his Goodness; your meaning is False, as I shall Demonstrate, if you
shall call me thereto. 'T would be Absurd indeed to say that Gods Bounty
gives Grace per modum naturae, quantum in se, but Gods Offers of Grace (as I
have formerly expressed my self) are in an unlimited Abundance. Grace is Received
by the Faithful Ad modum Recipientis: it is only the Measure, or Non-Ultra of
the Recipients Expectancy that Stints its Influence.

I shall not give you, and my self the trouble of writing unto you any of my
Reflections on the former part of your Letter, supposing that whatsoever is in
it Opposite to my Assertion will be fully Refuted in my Reply to your Direct
Answer to my last, beginning thus: But you have a Promise that whatsoever we
ask shall be given. Ans. yes; whatsoever you ask according to Gods Will: but it
may be his will to punish a cold Love, and other Sins consistent with Love, and
not to remove the punishment upon our asking; and indeed why should any man ask
i^ that is of your opinion? But you describe him to be one that wholly
complieth with the Divine Will, doing whatsoever is his Duty. You do not well
to leave out these words of mine in that Dispensation and in Relation
thereunto, for by them I signified the praying conditionally for the
Restoration of the Lost Means of Grace, and the using of all possible means for
the Recovery of them, because it is our Duty so to do; not but that we may have
sufficient grounds to Expect from God, in case he Judged fit not to Restore
them, the same Grace we should Expect by the Restoration of them. This is a
full Answer to those words of yours: one part of his Duty is to ament the
Judgment of the removal of the Means, and to pray for the restoration (so that
here you are self-contradictory) and to these words, why should any man ask it
that is of your opinion? By an Act of Divine Love I understand such an Act of
the Will, or Tendency of the Heart to God, as implies an Aversion (...). Finite
Objects, unless as they stand in (...) Him, or (to speak more Accurately) As
they (...) Him. He that is in this Act has all things that are of God, actually
Good unto him. And whatsoever he Asks being Actually in this Divine Temper of
Mind (which implies that Faith which Punishes the Heart) is certainly According
to the Will of God, which is Our Sanctification (as the Apostle speaks) which
certainly implies thus much: that God would have us to Ask nothing of him
Principally and Absolutely but that we may be HOLY as He is HOLY. And that when
we ask in Syncerity for Grace or Holiness in the Name of Jesus, It is always
the Will of God to supply the Defect of any Particular Means of Grace. But if
you mean, say you, that as long as a man is perfect, and never sins no want
of Means hurts him, etc. I mean, as I have often said, that when a man is in
the Act of Divine Love (as I have described it) no want of Means hurts him,
but it does not follow but it is Our Duty, as earnestl^ ^^ Desire any
particular Means of Grace when (...) Deprived of them, as to make use of them
when we have them, but this Desire, as of all things else but Grace, or
Holiness, is but (...) Exception (...) (as the Royal Philosopher speaks) the
Use of the Truth I Assert in this, and my other Letters, is to cure the Souls
of men o^ this most dangerous Disease, viz. the Conceit tha^ any thing can be
Directly, and in its own Nature the Hindrance of our Attainment to further
Degrees of Grace, or Holiness, save only the Naughtiness of Our own Hearts.
From hence also it is manifest to those that understand that the Common Prayer
is Agreeable to the Scriptures, that no man can be a Loser (as your word is in
one of your Letters) by coming to the Place of Gods Public Worship to Hear
those Prayers when there is no Preaching there, unless by the Perverseness of
his own Heart. I do not speak this to derogate from frequent Preaching; I know
it is very Necessary, especially for Unsanctifyed people. I do not apprehend my
self concerned in what you bid me to demonstrate: but this proposition, Gods
Will is the Same with Infinite Goodness, is a Demonstration of the Falseness of
this, that Gods Will sometimes obstructs the Effluxes of his Goodness. I say
further, that it is Essential to God being Infinite in Goodness, to Fill the
Capacities of his Creatures According to His Infinite Wisdom. Though the
Almighty may not be said to give Grace per modum naturae, quantum in se, yet
he may rightly be said to do it Secundum Naturam Bonitatis Infinitae. You do
well to join Wisdom with Free Will, for All that the ALMIGHTY Does is According
to the Council, i. e. the Wisdom of his own Will, which imports the
Communicativeness of his Goodness to all the Capacities of his Creatures. In
Answer to my Saying that Gods Offers of Grace are in an unlimited Abundance,
you write thus: Say you so? who made thee to differ? does God do no more for
any but offer them Grace? is the Recipient's ^xpectancy none of his Gift? can
God make no man ^etter than he is? nor take the Heart out of any man, otherwise
than by offer? is not Faith whereby we accept that offer, the Gift of God? does
a clod, or stone so ^int Gods Influence that he could not make it an An^el, if
he pleased? nor make any creature nobler, or other than it is? Does God give as
much Grace to all he Infidel Heathen World, as to Christians? or do they so
stint his Influence that he can give them no more? Woe to us, if we have no
more than the general Offers of Grace, and yet I believe not that this offer is
unlimited, or equal to all the World. Good Sir, Be not so hasty, do not run on
in a conceit that my words import that we make our selves to Differ from the
Unsanctified. Does God ^o no more, say you, for any, but offer them Grace? I
Answer; that Gods Offering of Grace is he making of men presently Capable of
Doing ^is Will, by the Assistance of his Good Spirit; ^o that All the Acts or
Inclinations to Act, of Gracious Souls, as such, are the Gift of God. The
Re^ipient's Expectancy is the Gift of God, but the Non-Ultra, or Deficiency of
it, is of himself. Can God make no man better than he is? To this, I Answer;
Any man's being Better than he is, is not the Object either of Gods Volition, or
Nolition: Not of the former, for then (you know) His Will would be Resisted:
Not of the latter, for ^hen he would be the Direct Cause of the Creatures not
Doing what He has Commanded him ^o Do: the only Cause then that any man is
not what he Ought to be, is the Perverseness of own Will. As to the words
following, Nor t^ etc. If you think fit to continue this Dispute, a express
what you mean by them in a plain way Opposition to any thing that I have said,
I she give you an Answer. Does a Cold or Stone, ^^ I Answer; Any such Creature
may be Annihila^ and another Angel Created, but that It shou^ be made an Angel
(if we speak in sensu rigoros^ implies a Contradiction. Every Creature is in
own Nature Res OPTIMA, though some Creatures are Better to Us than others,
because they ^ more Exhibit to us the Notice of the Divine Goodness; and some
Creatures are better to themselves than others, because they do more Enjoy It,
whi^^ is ALL in them All. God knows, I do not Aff^^^ Obscurity of Expression,
but such Deep Thin^ cannot be set forth in Vulgar Phrase. To wh^^ you say of
the Heathen World, I shall make other Reply but this, that Gods Judgments are
U^searchable, and his Ways past finding out.

But though we cannot show How Many Trut^ concerning his Boundless Goodness
etc. do co^port with what we apprehend of His Ways in many Instances of His
Dealings with the Sons of Me^ it does not follow, that we should thereupon the
least Scruple at these Truths.

That Gods Offers of Grace are in an Unlimi^ Abundance (which you say you do
not believe I prove thus: If God cannot be the Direct Cau^ of Stinting the
Influences of His Grace or Goodness into the Hearts of Men, Then his Offers of
Gra^^ in an Unlimited Abundance: But God cannot the Direct Cause, etc. The
Minor is evident in ^, That the Essence of God is Infinite Goodness.

I shall in this Paper give you my Reflections but some part of your last
Letter, wherein there many things so pertinently Expressed in Op^^sition to
what I have written to you, that my ^^flexions, or rather Animadversions
thereon, are ^eeding Advantageous unto me, for the Im^^ovement of my most
Satisfactory Speculations ^^^cerning the Divine Goodness, whose Infinity we
^^st be ever Careful that we do not derogate ^^m, upon any Pretenses of
Preserving the Liber^^ of the Divine Will. Liberty of Will (so far as ^^mplyes
Perfection, must of necessity be implied the Notion of the Infinity of Being. I
Declare is to be the Root of all my Apprehensions in ^^eological Matters, EST
UNUM SIMPLICI^R INFINITUM.

^ shall now betake my self to the Consideration what you say in your last
Letter. I think I ^^d not give any other Reply to that you say, man does use
all possible Means for the Recove^^^ etc. but only to tell you, that by all
possible ^ans, I understand All things which we Know ^e such Means, being also
Assured that it is possi^^ for us to use them as such. On my Explica^^ of what I
understand by an Act of Divine ^e, your Animadversion is this: How easy had it
^ for you to have told me, whether you mean a per^^ Love, or an Imperfect
culpably, and a perfect Aversion, etc. or a culpably Imperfect? I must confess
I have observed so many Learned men needlessly Entangling themselves in the
hardest Knots of Controversy by reason of these words, Perfection, and
Imperfection Attributed to the workings of men Hearts, that I have thought it
my Duty to do what I can do to avoid the use of them; but since you Urge me to
it, I shall Tell you that the Motion, o^ Tendency of the Heart, which I call an
Act of Divine Love, does not imply, or include in its Nature any culpable
Imperfection, but is as contrary to all Love of Creatures, or Finite Objects
(unless only such as arises from their Relation to the First Being) as Light is
to Darkness.

To my saying that he who is in the Act of Divine Love has All things that are
of God, Actually Good unto him, you Answer thus: While he is sinfully imperfect
in this Act, he has not the perfection which he wants, nor that complacential
acceptance with God, nor that perfect freedom from castigatory Penalties
internal, or external, nor that Glory which would be good to him; and all this
is of God. I Answer; As to Castigatory Penalties, so far as they import nothing
but what may be imputed unto God, as the Author thereof, they are Actually good
to Him, viz. they All work together for his Good whilst he is in the Act of
Divine Love, and all his Reflections thereon are the Rejoicing of his Heart The
Perfection he wants etc. are not, but only in GOD, the Fullness of All that he
Wants: and certainly it is actually Good for him, That there is in God
whatsoever is Wanting unto him. By being Actually in this Divine Temper, I mean
the exerting of an Act of Divine Love, or Adhaerence of the Heart unto God, in
which Act there is nothing Culpable, though there may remain Dispositions in
the Heart very contrary thereunto, from which it often comes to pass, that many
of us who are in some measure Sanctified Sink deep into such Impurities of
Heart, and Mind, as we sometimes Fancy our selves Elevated so far Above, that
there is no Danger of Falling into them. But I can far more easily Describe what
it is to be Holy, i. e. to be in the Light, than Discourse accurately, and
Clearly of the Works of Darkness. He cannot Ask any thing not Agreeable to the
Divine Will, who Desires nothing, but This, or in Subordination thereunto, that
his Will may be Conformable to the Divine Will in All things. Whether he Pray
Directly, and Expressly for Things Temporal, or Spiritual, he Actuates his Heart
in a way of Conformity to the Will of God, who Prays, as he Ought, viz. Asking
in Faith, which works by Love. I suppose by what I have already said, you
will perceive, that ^n Asking for Holiness we Virtually Ask for Justification,
or Pardon, and the continuance of being etc. And when we expressly Ask for these
According to the Mind of Christ, We Virtually Ask for Holiness, or Purity of
Heart. The Consummation whereof is the Fullness of Life, and Glory. All Desires
of Holiness are Acts of Holiness Considered with Respect to their Efficacy to
make way for further Acts, or Tendencies of Heart unto God. The Free Mercy of
GOD in JESUS CHRIST OUR LORD is the Root, and Principle of all that Good which
grows in Us, or (if you will) in which We Grow the Sense of which is employed
in all Motions ^^ the Heart acceptable unto God. By Absolutely I mean but what
we are to understand by Fi^^^ in the Gospel, where Our Savior says, Se^ye
First the Kingdom of God, etc. i. e. Chiefly, an^ Principally, so as to Ask
nothing else but in Su^ordination thereunto, and upon Condition, if ^ may
conduce to our furtherance in the Way of Holiness, which Lead unto Everlasting
G^^ry. I do still most confidently Averr, that this is most Dangerous Disease
of the Soul, to Conce^^ that any thing can be Directly, and in its own Nature,
the Hind'rance of Our Attainment to farther Degrees of Grace, save only the
Naughtiness o^ Our own Hearts. But, say you, Must we not carefully avoid that
which Indirectly hinders also? I Answer, We must Avoid, or Set our Heart
against nothing but what we find to be the Will of God Revealed in his Word,
that we should Loath, or b^ Averse from. Any thing, which for ought w^ know,
God will bring to pass, as to the Deprivin^ us of any particular Means of
Grace, we must endeavor to prevent by all ways of Duty to God and Man, which
we Apprehend probable to prove Successful for the Prevention thereof. But we
must have a Care that our Heart be Moved again this, which for ought we know
God will effect for the Glory of His Name, (...), with Exception, as I spoke in
my last.

You say the penal withholding of the Operations the Spirit is a Direct
Hindrance, and in its own Nature.

If it be True that whatsoever God is the Author ^f, can never be in any wise
Evil to us, but only ^y our Wrong, or Perverse apprehensions of it, then ^
suppose you will grant that this Proposition of ^ours bears no Force against
me. And whether this be a Truth or no, I shall referr you to Consider by taking
a Review of what I have already Written of the Divine Goodness. And by your
most ^erious, and unprejudiced Judgment of what I shall say hereafter in
giving my Reflections on your Animadversions, on my saying that Gods Will is the
Same with Infinite Goodness, etc.

The Good Lord Lift up the Light of His Countenance upon Us, that we may at
length attain to the Full Enjoyment of the Way, the Truth, and the Life.

I shall here present you some more of my Apprehensions of the IMMENSE
Influence of the Divine Goodness upon All, and Every Part of the Creation. I am
Conscious to my self of the smalness of my Abilities to Express such a Truth in
any way answerable to the Excellency, and Importance thereof. But some
Sparklings of that Light, viz. the Notion I have of the IMMENSITY of the Divine
Goodness, which from my Youth up has given me far greater Satisfactions than I
should ever have had in all the Learning in the World without it, some
Sparklings, I trust, you will perceive in these following Lines.

You say to these words of mine, Gods Will is the Same with infinite Goodness,
Very true: but the Question is, what that Goodness is? I say it is not a Wi^ to
communicate to Creatures as much Good, as he can* For then the World had been
Eternal etc. I Answer that the Goodness of God is Himself, the INFINITY of
Goodness, Wisdom, Power, of all Excellency, and Perfection. 'Twas not Essential
to Him to Create, i. e. not necessary for the INFINITY of Being to Produce out
of Himself these Finite Essences, But they being Produced by His Power,
according to His Wisdom i. e. the Council of His INFINITELY Good Will, it is
Essential, or Necessary to His being INFINITE, to be ALL in them All. The
Divine Power being INFINITE, such Expressions as these, as many Creatures as
God can make etc. can in no wise import any Reality to the Understanding. To
your saying that All Saints, and Angels would have the same Degree of Glory, I
Answer, that there is no Want in Heaven, no Absence, or Privative Not-Being of
any Degree of Glory, or Communicated Divine Goodness; there is nothing but
Refulgency of the GLORIOUS DIVINE NATURE. That one Creature should be better to
It self, and to other Creatures, is most Rational to conceive, it being no way
Inconsistent with the Notion of the One Infinite Goodness. As for Damnation,
this I say, So far as it imports nothing else but what is of God; It is in its
own Nature altogether Good: It becomes Evil only to those to whom the Infinity
of Love is a Consuming Fire. There Is nothing Absolutely, and in its own Nature
Evil but SIN. But of all Instances, say, there is none that confuies me more
than the per^^sion of Sin. To this I Answer, that by Permision of Sin we must
not conceive any thing of which ^e may say It is of God, but only His making
such ^eatures, whose Nature implies a Possibility of ^nning, and the continuing
them in Being after ^^ey have Sinned.

There is, say you, an Higher thing in God, which his Goodness, even his
Infinite Perfection, and Love himself, which is to be communicated according to
^^ Wisdom and Free Will, and not as a natural necessary emanation from his
Essence to the utmost of his ^^solute Power. To this I Answer, first, that
Utmost ^ower is in no wise to be spoken of God, whose ^ower is INFINITE.
Secondly, I do conceive ^^at your Notion here is not Contrary to mine, ^^ough
it come somewhat short of it. I think your ^^eaning is not Opposite to what I
Understand by ^^e Diffusiveness of the Divine Goodness, but only any Conceit of
the Limitation of the Divine Pow^^ which no Creature is Able to Resist. There
can no Impediment to It ab extra etc. but I add neither ab Intra, call it
Negative, or Self-Limiting, or that you please. Therefore I say again, it is
Essen^^^l to Infinite Goodness to fill the Capacities of His creatures etc.
which, I think, I shall clearly De^onstrate thus: That which does not Fill all
Cre^^ed Capacities is not Infinite, Therefore etc. But perhaps you will say is
not a Sinner Capable of being Sanctified. I Answer, that Sin is the Creatures
^^king It self Incapable for the present of the ^ivine Goodness through a false
Conceit that the Creator is not All in All. For I hold, yea I know and am
perfectly Assured, that this Conceit is Virtually, if not Formally employed in
all Sin, or Aver^ on of the Heart from Our HOLY ONE. My using these words
Secundum Naturam Bonitatis Infinit^ was not (as you say) to hide the Sense, but
to prevent your Opinion that I should hold such an Absurdity as this, that God
Acts any thing ad ul^mum Posse, which words can in no wise be spoken of God:
but it seems I had not my Aim. For in the Close of your Letter you tell me that
you think m^ work is to Prove, that God communicates Goo^ Naturally to the
utmost of his absolute Power, as the Sun does its influence of Light, Heat and
Motion God Forbid that I should undertake to Prove tha^ God acts like a Finite
Agent, as Finite, as having any Utmost, or Limited Power. Whether I misu^
derstand Goodness (which is another Passage in you^ Letter) I shall entreat you
to Consider, by what shall say of it in my present Reflections upon the words of
yours. His Goodness, even his infinite Perfection, and Love to Himself. This is
GOD Himself, He is His own infinite Joy, and Life, and Glory. He is All in all
Things, and Ecents, Sin only excepted, Enjoying Himself in these small
Creatures, which are so contemptible in the Sight o^ Men, no less than in the
most Glorious of the Heavenly Hosts. And the more we Partake of the Divine
Nature the more we Delight Ourselves in a^ the Works both of Creation, and
Providence.

Here I cannot but tell you, that I Hate as the Gates of Hell the Folly and
Madness of some of the Adversaries of Our Liturgy, which prompted them ^o
speak contemptuously (under Pretense forsooth ^f Zeal for the Pure Service of
God) of that Excellent Hymn.

O all ye Works of the Lord, Bless ye the Lord, Praise ^im, and Magnify Him
for Ever.

O all ye Angels of the Lord, Bless ye the Lord etc.

There is, say you, a Negative Limitation which is ^ot in Gods Power, and you
seem to grant it to be in ^is Wisdom, which you truly call the Council of his
Will. But what Wisdom does, it does as the Guide ^f the Will, and therefore as
Wisdom is the reason of ^ [I suppose you mean of a man's not being Actually
better than he is; for you say in the next Page, that our want of Goodness is
the consequence of a ^eer Non Velle] negatione Directionis, so the Will ^ust
needs be the cause of it negatione Volitionis. To ^his I Answer, that the cause
that any man is not ^etter than he is, is not that God cannot make him Better,
i. e. that there is any Defect of Power in God: neither can it be rightly said,
that God can make him Better than he is, For I understand those words, as you
rightly conjecture in sensu composito. But perhaps you will say God could have
made him Better than he is. To this I Answer, that the making him better than
he is was never the Object of the Divine Power, of which there can be no other
Object ad Extra, but what is judged Fit to be brought to pass by that Wisdom
which is Essentially the Same with Infinite Goodness. This deep thing (let me
presume to tell you in all Humility) ^equires your Utmost Attention. Neither
are these Negations (if we may put a Periphrasis of Noth^ in the Plural number)
of Wisdom to Direct, Will to Execute the Cause, etc. For of m^ Negation there
is No Issue, or Consequence. ^ that you say, Reflecting upon my words
concerning the Object of Gods Volition or Noliti^ etc. I do most Affectionately
Approve, as i^porting very much of the same Truth, for wa^ of which Dr. Twisse
(whom you mention) see^ to me in many Passages of his Controversial Wr^ings, to
Rave (and Talk indeed like a Schol^ but like one out of his Right Wits) rather
than Dispute. But you seem to Faulter very much when you come to say, that our
want of Goodness the Consequence of a mere Non Velle. For (as I sa^ but now) of
a mere Negation, or Nullity, i. e. Nothing, there is no Issue or Consequence at
a^ I think, say you, that it is not true, that Voli^ qua Talis efficit ad
Extra, sed tantum quatenus ^^ Potentiam Operatur. To this I Answer, Volitio
D^vina ad Extra, qua Talis, Divina inquam, Efficit ^ Extra, nam Essentialiter
includit Sapientiam, and P^tentiam Infinitam. To these words, Omnis Volit^ non
est Efficiens (for God wills himself) much less omnis Nolitio, I Answer thus:
Gods Willin^ of Himself may not properly be termed Efficien^ but it is
Effectual, or to the Purpose; that i^ which He Wills to Be: And every Object
o^ His Volition ad Extra, Is, or Shall be, Through the Efficacy of His Power,
set on work by the Infinite Goodness of the Council of his Will. As for the
Divine Nolition, this I say: By it we mea^ not the Negative of Volition, but an
Adverse Act the Will, which Essentially implying Infinite ^^^sdom and Power,
can never be Frustrated, but ways Effects the Opposite to that, to which it is
^^verse: So that if any man's being Actually Bet^^ than he is, were the Object
of Divine Nolition it ^^st needs follow that God would be the Direct ^use of
the Opposite thereof, viz. that the man is ^^tually so Bad, as he is. What then
is the Cause ^^? I say again, Only the Perverseness of his ^n Will: Sin only
can be the Cause of Sin. What ^use than had the first Sin? why (as in effect I
we said already) none at all. Man's own Perversess of Will, say you, was not
the Cause of his First ^rverting, or Sin. When we speak of Perverseness of Will
with Reference to the First Sin, we mean ^^thing but the First Sin under that
Notion, not at this Perverseness of Will is Really Distinct ^^om the First Act
of the Will Perverted. I can^^t translate OPTIMA into any English, so suitable
^^ my Conceptions, as these words FULL of Goodness. I did not retire into
Silence (as you speak) at ^e Instance of the Heathens, but Told you this Cer^^n
Truth, That we Ought not to Deny our As^^t to such Evident Propositions, as
this, that It Is ^ssential to Infinite Goodness to Fill the Capacities ^^ all
Creatures; so that properly, and in the strict^ sense there is no Evil, but the
Aversion of the ^ill of the Creature from the Will of the Infinitely ^ood, and
Wise, and Powerful Creator: To this, say, we ought not to Deny our Assent,
because we ^^nnot give an account of some Particular Ways of Providence i. e.
of the Modes, or several Kinds the Influence of Infinite Goodness upon some Pa^
of the Creation. Modes etc. we Attribute only Extrinseco to the Divine
Providence, they being only in the Creatures. The Reason, or Proof of the
Consequence, if God cannot be the Direct cause (...) Stinting etc. is this,
because if He cannot be t^^Direct Cause of Stinting his Influence etc. It is
(...) His Part Unstinted, that is to say, in an Unlimit^ Abundance. But, say
you, God may Non Age^^ without any Stinting Cause: what restrained him fr^^
making the World from Eternity? To this I Answe^ though God may Non Agere
without a Cause such a Sense as you Instance in, yet there is a^wayes some
Cause of his Not-Giving Grace to a^man to Do what He Commands him; not that
th^^ can be any Impediment put upon God, but the He is ab Extrinseco
Denominated Not-Giving Gra^^ for that the Creature does not Receive it from his
the Cause of which Non-Reception is only the Pe^versness of his own Will, which
indeed is nothing else, but his Aversion from the Divine Goodness.

To your Objection against my Description (...) Gods Offering of Grace. viz.
Offering is less the making, and making is more than offering etc. I Answer
thus: Every Real Offer must needs imp^^ the Presenting of the Object of
Reception: wherever there is an Object of Reception, there is a Capaci^^ or
Power to Receive: There can be no Power to Receive that which is Good, but only
from GOD: Therefore I do again most Confidently ^verr, that Gods Offering of
Grace is the making men Presently Capable of Doing His Will, or (as we ^ay
speak) of receiving His Commands, By the Assi^ance of His Holy Spirit.

From my Description of Gods Offering of Grace here may be an Objection raised
against what has ^een so Earnestly insisted on, viz. that the Divine Goodness
fills all the Capacities of His Creatures etc. ^ut the Answer is Easy. viz.
that the Present Ca^acity of Doing the Will of God is Filled, i. e. the Will of
God is Done According to that Capacity, where the Capacity is not Instanly
Nullifyed by the Creatures Sinning, or Averting itself from the Di^ine
Goodness. The Sense whereof that I may more ^igorously Excite in the Mind of
the Learned and Pious Reader I shall here give him my Latin Translation
(together with the Original) of an Excellent Prayer composed in English Verse
by the ^ncomparable Mrs. K. P. The Same Sense in two Languages seems to me to
Condense the Thoughts of the Reader, and to give the greater Strength to their
Influence upon His Affections.

ETernal Reason, Glorious Majesty,
* Compared to whom what can be said to be?
Whose Attributes are Thee, who art alone,
Cause of all various things, and yet but One?
Whose Essence can no more be searched by man,
Then Heaven thy Throne, be grasped with a Span.
Yet if this great Creation was designed,
To several ends fitted for every kind;
Sure Man (the Worlds Epitome) must be
Formed to the best, that is, to Study Thee.
And as our Dignity it is Duty too
Which is summed up in this, to Know, and Do.
These comely Rows of Creatures spell thy Name,
Whereby we grope to find from whence they Came
By thy own Chain of Causes brought to think
There must be one, then find the Highest Link.
Thus all Created Excellence we see
Is a Resemblance faint, and dark of Thee.
Such Shadows are produced by the Moon-Beams
Of Trees, or Houses in the running Streams,
Yet by Impressions born with us we find
How good, great, just Thou art, how unconfined
Here we are swallowed up, and gladly dwell,
Safely Adoring what we cannot Tell.
All we know is, Thou art Supreamly Good,
And do Delight to be so understood:
A spicy Mountain on the Universe
On which thy Richest Odours do disperse.
But as the Sea to fill a Vessel heaves
More greedily than any Cask receives
Besieging round to find some gap in it,
Which will a new Infusion admit;
So do Thou covet how Thou may dispense
Upon the empty World thy Influence,
Love to disburst thyself in Kindness: thus
The King of Kings Waits to be Gracious.
On this account, O Lord enlarge my Heart
To entertain what Thou would fain impart.
Nor let that Soul by several Titles Thine,
And most Capacious formed for things Divine,
(So nobly meant that when it most does miss
It Is in mistaken pantings after Bliss)
Degrade it self, in sordid things delight,
^r by prophaner mixtures lose its right.
^, that with fixed, unbroken thoughts it may
^dmire the Light which does Obscure the Day.
and since it is Angels Work it has to do,
^ay its Composure be like Angels too.
When shall these clods of Sense, and Phantsy break,
That I may hear the God within me speak?
When with a silent, and retired Art
shall I with all this empty hurry part?
To the Still Voice Above my Soul advance
My Light, and Joy placed in his Countenance,
^y whose dispense my Soul to such frame brought
May tame each treacherous, fix each wandering Thought,
With such distinctions all things here behold,
And so to separate each dross from Gold,
That nothing my free Soul may Satisfy
But to imitate, enjoy, and Study Thee.
O Ratio Omnipotens, Majestas, Gloria Summa,
Cui si In cujus Essentiae comparatione Esse nostrum non Esse est. S. GREG.
Ior. 16. c. 16.
Confertur Quicquam Non Esse probatur,
Cui Quod inest, est Tu, Qui cunct is Rebus habere
Esse suum Varium das Unus Semper, and Idem;
Cujus non magis Explorari Essentia possit
Humano Ingenio, quam Summi Culmina Coeli
Comprendi Palmo. At fuerint si Cuncta per Orbem
In certos generis diversi condita Fines,
Ipsum Hominem, Mundi Specimen, Quo Maxima Spiret
Nasci constat, idest, Quo se Tibi, MAXIM, Reddat.
Hoc Nostrum Officium est, haec Nostra est Gloria, Sc^
Et Facere usque, Jubet quicquid Divina Voluntas.
Condita quaeque Tuum, quasi Sculpta Vocabula Nome
Designant: Fontem hinc pervestigamus eorum:
Scilicet ostendit Causarum longa Ca^ena
Esse Unam Summam, ^ Qua Pendent Singula, Causa^
Naturae quicquid Praeclarae lumina s^argit
Hoc levis IMMENSI perhibetur LUMINIS Umbr^
Quales in Fluviis Tectorum, aut Arboris Umbras
Producit tenui splendescens Cynthia Cornu.
Ideis tamen Innatis BONITAS Manifesta est
Illa Tua, and nullis Te clausum Finibus esse,
Hic Alto Absorptos nos LUX IMMENSA recondit
Tuto Admirantes Non Enarrabile Verum.
Novimus hoc solum de Te, BONITATE SUPREM
Gaudentem, Titulo Te Velle Agnoscier Isto.
Mons es Aromaticus: Jucundos Suavis Odores
Divite profluvio totum diffundis in Orbem.
Ut coit Unda aliquod Vas impletura receptum
In Mare, scrutando Rimas, quibus Influat usque
Prosiliens, plus quam possit Vas accipere urgens:
Ut, Pater Alme, Tua possit Bonitate repleri
Sic urges Vacuum Foecundo Numine Mundum.
Ipse Benignus Amas Te Dispensare: Favorem
Exhibet Indignis, condonat Crimina gratis
Rex Regum. Amplifica DEUS O Ter Maxim nostr^^
Cor: Avide Arripiat, quod Tu Largir is Amanter.
O, Anima haec Titulis Tibi soli Debita multis
Magna, Tuique Capax (tam purum, nobile cui sit
Ingenium, ut Sitiat Verum, quod Devia linquit)
Ne se Deliciis Pravis illapsa, Minorem
Quam Quae Facta fuit, Faciat, revoluta deorsum,
Jus adeo Antiquum potiundi Numine perdens.
^ utinam certis immotae viribus Ipsa
Mentis in Augustum sit Sacro Rapta Stupore
^umen, quo victi vel lucida Tela Diei
^n Tenebras abeunt. Quam fungi Munere Oportet
Angelico, Angelicam tandem, Pater OPTIME, reddas
^lli Temperiem. Quando ista Repagula, Sensus,
^laudentes Animum, penitus Rumpentur, ut Intus
Alloquio DEUS ipse Suo me Personet? Art
Quando Ego Tranquilla, Cura semota Metuque
Despiciam stolidi Bacchantia Gaudia Mundi?
Tu Rape sursum Animam: Lenem super Aethera Vocem
Audiat: inque Tuo semper Mea Gaudia Vultu
Ponantur. Nostras Te Disponente Medullas
Ne Superet Fallax, Agitet nec Mobile. Coenum;
Clarius ut valeam rerum cognoscere causas,
Atque Auro caute Scoriam distinguere vilem,
Ut ruptis tandem Men's evolet Ignea Vinclis,
Et Tibi se jungens Aeterna Pace Quiescat.
FINIS.
Page 7. of the Letters, line 12. for Punishes read Purifies.

Books Newly Printed this Year, 1678. for William Crook.
1. THe Wonders of the Peak in Darby-shire, commonly led, the Devils Arse of
Peak. 2. Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Philosophy, M^ and Natural;
treating of the Philosophers of all Count^ and Ages. 80. 3. Melpomene, or the
Muses Delight; being New Poems Songs, written by several of the great Wits of
the pres^ Age. 4. Decameron Physologicum, or ten Dialogues of Natural losophy.
By Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury. 80. 5. Tunbridge Wells, or a Days Court-ship; a
Comedy Ac^ at the Dukes Theater. 6. The Man of New Market, a Comedy, Acted at
the Thea^ Royal. 7. A Discourse, Whether it be lawful to take Use for Mon^
Written by Sir Rob. Filmer, and published by Sir R^^ Twisden. 120. 8. The
School of Righteousness: A Sermon Preached before King by Dr. Sandcroft,
Archbishop of Canterbury. 40. 9. Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae.

