POLEMICA CHRISTIANA: OR, AN Earnest Contending For the FAITH, Which was once
delivered unto the SAINTS.

IN I. A Letter to the Author of the DIALOGUE, etc. II. A Vindication of the
Doctrine of Mr. RICHARD HOOKER, against the Mis-representation of an
Anti-Trinitarian, in a Pamphlet Entitled, "Considerations on the Explications
of the Doctrine of the Trinity. III. Reflections upon some Passages in a Book
Entitled, "The History of Religion. IV. A Vindication of VINCENTIVS LIRINENSIS,
from the unjust Reproach cast on him, by an Anonymous Writer, in a Book
Entitled, "Animadversions on Mr. HILL's Book.


By EDMUND ELYS, sometime Fellow of Baliol College in OXFORD.

Magna est VERITAS, and Praevalebit.

Printed in the Year, 1696.

TO The AUTHOR of the Dialogue, etc.
SIR,
I Entreat You, by the Common Principles of Humanity, that You would seriously
Peruse what I have here written, Considering that within a short Time both You,
and I shall be Called out of this World, to give Account of all our Doings, to
the Maker of all Things, and Judge of all Men. Since you Profess, you believe
all the Sayings of our Blessed Savior, I pray consider these sacred Words,
Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall see GOD. I suppose You
will not Deny, but that Purity of Heart consists in the True Love of God, and
our Neighbor. It seems to me, that you are Guilty of great Irreverence toward
the Divine Majesty, in that You throw out such Words as these at every Turn:
Good God! But Good God then, etc. Bless me! again and again. You show your self
to be most Barbarously Uncharitable, in Reviling Priests of all sorts. In plain
Terms, say you, the Priests of all sorts hope insensibly to raise themselves a
Dominion over us.

The Priests of all Ages have rather strove, as a Faction of Men, to raise
themselves Great, than to seek through Self-denial, and Humility for the truly
Glorious and Incorruptible Crown. Answ. Those Holy Men in the Four First
General Councils (the Arians themselves speak well of the Priests in Former
Ages) were such Glorious Examples of True Virtue and Godliness, that whosoever
is thoroughly acquainted with Church History, and has read the Writings of the
Ancient Fathers, that Assented to the Doctrines Explicated, and Defended in
those Councils, he cannot but Reflect upon the Reproach you cast upon the
Priests of all Ages, with the greatest Abhorrency, and Detestation. This Black
Turbulency of Spirit is not like to compose a Clear Confutation of any Error,
nor can it consist with a clear Speculation of any Sanctifying Truth: But, I
must confess, It is very suitable to your impious Boasting, in calling what you
write in your Second Sheet, A clear Confutation of the Trinity. Before we
Reflect upon your Argumentations here (which can hardly be found in the Crowd
of such a Multitude of Invectives, and Vain Boastings) we shall consider some
Passages in your Dialogue.

Quest. Are there no Texts in the Gospel, where Christ himself Preached up the
Father to be the One, and only God, exclusive of all others, as well as of
himself, Pray repeat them, if there be.

Answ. Mark 12. 29, etc. And Jesus answered him, the First of all the
Commandments is, Hear O Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord, etc.

These words do no more Exclude our Savior from being the One God, than from
being the One Lord: Neither does his being the One Lord Exclude the Father from
being the One Lord. But say you in your Clear Confutation, To say of Three
Persons each severally God, that they are One God, is as much a Contradiction,
as to say, Three Men are One. Answ. This Saying of yours is as manifestly
False, as it is to say, There is no difference between an Infinite, and a
Finite Nature, or Essence. I shall here recite some of the words of my brief
Animadversion on The Naked Gospel. Is there any thing more Reasonable, than to
conceive, that in God, the One Infinite Essence, there may be a Certain
Trinity, which cannot in any wise appertain to any Three Persons of a Finite
Nature? Can there ever be a more Impious Absurdity than this, to Deny the Truth
of that which the Almighty, and Incomprehensible GOD, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, in whose Name we are BAPTIZED, has Revealed unto us concerning Himself,
because we cannot find any thing like it, even amongst the Best of his
Creatures? To say, that we ought not to Believe any thing, but what our Reason
can Fathom, or Comprehend, is in effect to say, We ought not to Believe there
is a GOD, it being Essential to the Deity to Be infinitely beyond the
Comprehension of our Reason.

In your Dialogue you say, that our Savior is called Alpha, and Omega, Rev. 1.
8. in Opposition to I AM in God for pure and simple Being. I Beseech You, as
you believe there is a God, and that these words which you recite, were written
by Divine Inspiration, consider what I say: Alpha, and Omega, the FIRST, and
the LAST, is that which is beyond al^ Bounds, Absolutely Infinite, The One Pure
and Simple Being. It Is manifest therefore, that the WORD, which from
Everlasting was God, which is Alpha and Omega, the FIRST, and the LAST, has the
same Eternal Essence with God the Father.

Quest. But pray, what Authority have you to call the Son a God-Angel, as you
do? You used to say, That there is a Text, where the Son as God, is said to
have the Angels for his Fellows; if there be such, pray let us see it, to
satisfy us in what you do.

Answ. Heb. 1. 4. Being made so much better than the Angels, as he has by
inheritance obtained a more excellent Name than they.

5, For unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to
me a Son?

6, And again, when he brings in the first-begotten into the world, he faith,
And let all the angels of God worship him.

7, And of the angels he says, Who makes his angels spirits, and his
ministers a flame of fire.

8, But unto the Son he says, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; a
scepter of righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom:

9, Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, even thy
God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy Fellows.

Answ. It Is Evident, that by Fellows we are not to understand ANGELS, but MEN:
For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed
of Abraham. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
Brethren, that he might be a merciful, and faithful High Priest, in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the People, Heb. 2.
16, 17. I desire any Man that understands the Greek Tongue to compare these
words, Heb. 1. 8. (...), with those, Heb. 2. 14. And let him tell me, if there
can be greater Evidence for any Assertion concerning the meaning of any Word,
or Phrase than we have for this, That by Fellows we are not to understand
Angels, but Men. (...).

In your Clear Confutation (as you call it) you have these words: A Trinity
supposes Three Persons in God: And why but Three? Surely all between One, and
Infinite's imperfect; if diverse Personality were a Perfection in God, therefore
Infinity should be the Number. Answ. The Divine Infinity is Absolute Infinity;
and it is the grossest Nonsense to say, That Number can be absolutely Infinite,
since it has a Beginning. We believe that The Father is God, The Son is God,
and the Holy Ghost is God; and yet they are not Three Gods, but One God,
because the Only Wise God himself in the Holy Scriptures has Revealed it unto
us. Our Trinitarians would tell us, say you, that God is the most pure and
simple Being; and yet again they can say, That he is Three Persons, and has
Three Wills, and Three Understandings, etc. Answ. Nothing can be more False
than to say, That we hold that God has Three Wills, etc. we grant, that it
implies a Contradiction to say, There are not Three Natures Numerically
Distinct, where there are Three Wills, and Three Understandings, as in Three
Men we affirm, That The Father, The Son, and The Holy Ghost, as they have One
Divine Nature, have but One Will, and One Understanding: But God the Son, as he
has Two Natures, the Divine, and Humane, has Two Wills, etc. but his Humane
Will is most perfectly united to the Divine Will in all things: It was so in
all his Sufferings, which were the Objects of his Aversion, being considered as
in themselves, but of his Volition, being considered as the Effects of the
Divine Will. This calls me to an Animadversion on those words, which I tremble
to recite. I am confident, no truly Learned sincere Christian, that was to
write in Confutation of the Religion of the Turks, would pour out such
Contumelious Speeches against Mahomet, and his Followers, as you do against the
Blessed Jesus, Our LORD, and Our GOD, and against Us, his Followers, Your
Present Mystery-men, and Metaphysical Madmen.

Sometimes, say you, by a kind of Ventriloquy they make Christ, as God, to be
able to tell us all things, but by, and by again, as Man, they attribute
Ignorance to him. So sometimes again, they make him Omnipotent, and yet by, and
by again Hocus pocus, we must have an Angel to comfort him against his
Sufferings. Good God! shall we never be delivered from these Labyrinths. Answ.
We do not attribute Ignorance to Christ, as the word Ignorance signifies
Imperfection, viz. Any want of Knowledge, but as it signifies simply, Not
knowing all Things. Such Ignorance the most Perfect Finite Understanding must
be subject unto: And Christ's Understanding, as Man, is Finite. Upon
supposition that He subjected Himself to Sufferings, where is the Absurdity that
he should be Comforted (by an Angel) in that Nature, in which he suffered? But,
say you, What! Did only the Man dye? Was only the Man Tempted? Christ then was
but inhabited by the Godhead; and when the Man was in his streights, God left
him to comfort himself, but where is the Room for the Merit^, and Sufferings of
the Godhead then? Answ. God the Son Assumed, or United to himself the Humane
Nature, that so he might be capable of Suffering, to Demonstrate that the HOLY
ONE hates Sin, with an infinite Hatred, and loves Men, though SINNERS, with an
infinite Love. In which Demonstration of the Divine Justice, and Mercy toward
Men, is implied the greatest Efficacy, that can be to bring Sinners to
Repentance. So that the Only Cause that any Sinner does not Repent, is the
Perverseness of his own Will, in that he Shuts his Eyes against this
Demonstration, and so Rejects the Offer of the Only Effectual Remedy for all
his Diseases.

I beseech Almighty God by the Death and Passion of the Holy Jesus, who
together with The Father, and The Holy Ghost is Worshipped, and Glorified, to
have Mercy upon you, to give you true Repentance, and his Holy Spirit, that you
may be Reconciled unto God, before you shall Go from hence, and be no more seen.

If You, or any of your Companions have a mind to Dispute with me in Private,
if You will send me any Letters by the Post, I promise you, that by the Help of
God, I shall return an Answer to every Letter I shall receive from any of you:
And that I shall never Publish any of your Letters without your Consent, but I
will not Promise not to Publish mine own. I am

Your Servant, and the Servant of all Men, For CHRIST's Sake, Edmund Elys.
Totness in Devon. May 1st. 1694.
A VINDICATION OF THE DOCTRINE OF Mr. RICHARD HOOKER, etc.
THis Anti-Trinitarian tells the World, and that truly, that Mr. Hooker says,
That the Substance of God with this Property To be of None, does make the
Person of the Father; The very self-same Substance in Number with this
Property, To be of the Father, makes the Person of the Son; The same Substance
having added to it the Property of Proceeding from the other Two, makes the
Person of the Holy Ghost. So that in every Person there is implied both the
Substance of God, which is One, and also that Property which causes the same
Person really and truly to differ from the other Two.

On these words of the Excellent Mr. Hooker, this Disputer makes this
Animadversion. Now to be of none, to be of the Father, and to proceed from
both, are but other words for this Sense, To Beget, to be Begotten, and to
Proceed. But that Father of Modern O^thodoxy, Peter Lombard, denies that these
beforementioned are Properties in the Substance of God, or that they can belong
to it: He says, Essentia n^^ est Generans, nec Generata, nec Procedens, i. e.
The Substance of God neither Begets, nor is Begotten, nor Proceeds. It Is
impossible to make this consist with Mr. Hooker, who expressly ascribes those
Properties to the Divine Substance, or Essence, and says that being in the
Divine Substance they make it to be Three Persons. To this I answer, That Mr.
Hooker does not Contradict Peter Lombard: For it is Evident his meaning is this,
That the Divine Substance, or Essence, as in the Father, is of None, as in the
Son, is of the Father, as in the Holy Ghost, is of the Father, and of the Son.
The Property belongs to the Person, and not to the Essence, as Communicable to
Three Persons. In every Person, says Mr. Hooker, there is implied both the
Substance of God, which is One; and also that Property, which causes the same
Person really and truly to differ from the other Two. It is a most palpable
Falsehood which this Man delivers in these words: Here is the same Substance
Unbegotten, and Begotten. Answ. The Person of the Son is Begotten, in that he
has his Substance, or Essence of, or from the Father; he would seem to Obviate
this Answer in these words: They will say, Mr. Hooker does not affirm, that the
self-same Substance is Begotten, and Unbegotten; this indeed were a slat
Contradiction: But he says, That as it is in the Father, it is Unbegotten, as in
the Son, it is Begotten Answ. This is a most notorious Falsehood: Mr. Hooker does
not assert, That the Essence, as in the Son, is Begotten, but that the Person
of the Son is Begotten, in that he has his Essence of, or from the Father.

Let us now consider what a Fast Friend this Disputer is to the Phanaticks, i.
e. The Despisers of the Liturgy of the Church of England, which Mr. Hooker has
so judiciously and irrefragably Defended. What shall we do here, says He, shall
we say Reverend Hooker has mistaken, and misled his Sons (who are all the
Church of England) into an Error concerning the Trinity? Has he ascribed to
the Divine Essence Properties which he calls Persons, that are not in it? To
give up Hooker, is to dishonor the Church of England it self; to part with
Father Hooker, is to endangerthe very Surplice, and even the Cross in Baptism,
nay that Book of Books, the Common Prayer. If Mr. Hooker could Err about the
Trinity, what will the Phanaticks and Trimmers say? Will not they be apt to
pretend too, He may have Erred in his profound Dissertations, and Discourses
for the Rites and Discipline of the Church.

Now I appeal to any Person of common Ingenuity in the whole World to Judge,
whether I had not Just Cause to Publish that Paper Entitled, An earnest Call to
those Non-conformists, who really Believe the Doctrine of the Holy Blessed, and
Glorious Trinity, To come into the Communion of the Church of England, That by
their Constant Regular Confession of the Christian Faith, they may Confound the
Devices of those Gainsayers, whom by their Separation they have so much
Encouraged.

I cannot imagine how it is possible, that any Nonconformist, that has the least
Spark of Grace, that has in any measure the true Love of the Holy JESUS in his
Heart, should not be Inclined to the Communion of the Church of England, upon
the reading of these words of the most Judicious and Heavenly-minded Mr. R.
Hooker, in the Fifth Book of Ecclesiastical Polity. The very Creed of
Athanasius, and that sacred Hymn of Glory (the Gloria Patri) than which nothing
does sound more Heavenly in the Ears of Faithful Men, are now reckoned as
superfluities, which we must in any case pare away, lest we cloy God with too
much Service. Is there in that Confession of Faith any thing, which does not at
all times edify, and instruct the attentive Reader? Or is our Faith in the
Blessed Trinity a matter needless to be so oftentimes mentioned and opened in
the principal Part of that Duty which we owe to God, our Public Prayer? Has
the Church of Christ from the first beginning by a secret universal instinct of
God's good Spirit always tied it self to end neither Sermon, nor almost any
Speech, which has concerned matters of God without some special words of
Honor, and Glory to that Trinity, which we all adore; and is the like
Conclusion of Psalms become now at the length an Eyesore, or a Gauling to
their Ears that hear it?

Against which Poison ( Arianism) if we think that the Church at this Day
needs not those ancient Preservatives, which Ages before us were so glad to
use, we deceive our selves greatly. The Weeds of Heresy being grown to such
Ripeness, as that was, do even in the cutting down scatter oftentimes those
Seeds, which for a while lay unseen, and buried in the Earth, but afterward
freshly spring up again, no less Pervicacious than at the first.

I shall not at this time recite any more of the words of this most Pious and
Learned Man, but only these (with which I find my own Heart most Zealously
affected:) Wisdom, to the End she might save many, built her House of that
Nature, which is common unto all, she made not this, or that Man her
Habitation, but dwelt in Us.

The Good Lord give Grace to Thee, and Me, Dear Reader, to Hold the Mystery of
this Faith, in a Pure Conscience. Amen.

Reflections UPON Some Passages in a Book ENTITLED, The History of RELIGION.
IT is to me most Evident and unquestionable, that this Gentleman's Design is
this, in the Crowd of his Invectives against what he calls Priestcraft of
Heathens, and Papists, closely and subtlely to Convey into the mind of the
Reader a Contempt of the Authority of the Church of England, in Enjoining all
those that will be of her Communion, to make Profession of Believing the
Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, expressed in those Forms of sound words, which we
commonly call the Creed of St. Athanasius, and the Nicene Creed. He tells us
plainly, p. 85. that The Council of NICE it self showed a Spirit of Contention,
rather than of Peace, and Charity. Truly this Man shows himself to be a Person
of very ill Quality, in using such vile Artifices to Delude the Reader, as to
endeavor to make him Conceit, that St. Hilary, and St. Gregory Nazianzen did
not approve that most Orthodox Council.

Having thus Reviled those most Orthodox Fathers of the Council of NICE,
affirming that they were led by a Spirit of Contention. Hilary, says he, Bishop
of Poictiers describes this, saying, we Decree every Year of the Lord a New
Creed concerning God, nay every Change of the Moon our Faith is altered, etc.
Answ. It Is evident to every Man that knows any thing of Ecclesiastical History,
that St. Hilary speaks against those Creeds that were made in Opposition to the
Council of NICE, and that he would not allow the Arians to have the Name of
Christians: CHRISTIANUS sum, says he, non ARIANUS, Lib. ad Constantinum
Augustum. Those other words of his, which I shall here recite will most
certainly put this Gentleman to a Blush, if it be possible for him to Blush at
any thing.

Deus Alius, quam qui est Ex Deo Nullus est.

-- Hoc fidei nostrae secundum Evangelicam, and Apostolicam Doctrinam
Principale: Dominum Nostrum

Jesum Christum Jesum Christum Deum, and Dei Filium a Patre nec Honoris
Confessione, nec Virtutis Potestate, nec Substantiae Diversitate, nec
Intervallo Temporis separari.

Gregory Nazianzen, says this Gentleman, was so full of Detestation at these
Quarrels of Christians, that at last he resolved never more to come into an
Assembly of Bishops, because says he, I have never seen a good and happy End
of any Council. Answ. Whatever St. Gregory Nazianzen said of any other
Councils, most certainly no Man ever had a greater Esteem of the Orthodoxy of
the Council of NICE, than this Blessed man abundantly declares in his Writings,
particularly in his most admirable Oration, In Laudem Magni Athanasii.

Our Historian is not ashamed to own as great a Respect for the Arians, as for
the Christians, calling the former One Part of the Christian Church. P. 86, It
was still, says he, One Part of the Christian Church that vexed the other. P.
115, He has these words: From the Two great Springs, Athanasius, and Arius the
Church over-flow'd with Divisions, etc. Answ. Nothing can be more False, and
more impudently Slanderous than to say, that Athanasius was the Spring, or
Cause of those Divisions, for he steadfastly adhered to the FAITH, which was
once delivered unto the Saints. This Gentleman tells us, p. 63. That a Man must
be his own Expositor, Minister, Bishop* and Council. Answ. This is Contrary to
the common Sense of all sincere Christians, who Abhor all Self-conceit, or what
arises from their own Minds, as dis-united from the Minds of other Christians:
They Know, and are Assured, that no man Knows any thing as he ought to Know,
but as he is In the Communion of Saints. Their principal way of Attaining to
more Knowledge of what they ought to Do, is the Doing of what they Know
already: And they know they ought to show all Meekness to all Men, and that
they ought to behave themselves Lowly, and Reverently toward any Council,
Professing to suit their Determinations to the Holy Scriptures. Any man that
will but Peruse the First Chapter of the Learned Animadversions upon Dr.
Sherlock's Book, will clearly perceive the Folly and Madness of this Man's
Cavilling about Mystery. Such as are Assertors of Mystery, says he, p. 59.
choose rather to search into some Dark Places of St. John's Gospel, or St.
Paul's Epistles, to fetch out from thence a Wonderful Divinity, than to attend
to the general, the plain, and easily intelligible Current of the Gospels, and
Epistles.

To fetch from thence a Wonderful Divinity! what would the man be at? Would he
have a Divinity that is not Wonderful, or Incomprehensible? We have seen what
mad work has been made (by his Fellow-Champions against Mystery) of what he
calls, The general, the plain, and easily intelligible Current of the Gospels,
and Epistles, upon Conceit that all those Places of Scripture, where our
Blessed Savior is spoken of as Man, are so many Proofs that he is not God.

Let us now consider this Historian's Attempt to make People to have but light
Thoughts of the Doctrine of the Trinity, upon Account of the Difference betwixt
Dr. Sherlock, and the Excellent Animadverter. History of Religion, page 116. We
have even at this present, an unlucky Instance of the strange Differences among
Learned men. Dr. Sherlock writes a Book in Answer to certain Brief Notes on the
Creed of Athanasius: He says his Undertaking is to vindicate the Athanasian
Creed, and the Doctrine of a Trinity in Unity; which (he says) he has now made
as clear, and easy as the Notion of One God. But another, and a very Learned
Person too, in his Animadversions upon that Book of Dr. Sherlock, calls the
Explication of the Trinity advanced in Dr. Sherlock's Book, a silly, a
contradictory, and an Heretical Notion; wholly of his own Invention, and a Stab
to the Heart of the Doctrine of the Church of England: He charges another Book
of Dr. Sherlock's, being a Discourse of the Knowledge of Christ, with vile and
scandalous Reflections upon God's Justice; and says moreover, that it may
deserve to pass for a Blasphemous Libel. Page 117. What Measures, or Opinions
then can the Unlearned take from their (disputing) Leaders? Guides that cannot
forbear to impose Faith in dark, and unnecessary Points, and yet rate their
Imaginations at the Value of Holy Scripture, even while they dis-agree among
themselves in the very Points, which they would Enjoin others to Believe.

I shall say nothing here of Dr. Sherlock's Opinion of the Doctrine of the
Trinity, having said enough of it elsewhere: But I must Aver to all the World,
that this Person of Quality deals most Ingentilely, and Dis-ingenuously with
the Learned Animadverter, in Endeavoring to Persuade the Reader to Conceit,
that this Worthy Person would Enjoin him to Believe any thing concerning the
Holy Trinity, but what every Man, that Professes himself to be a Member of the
Church of England (if he do not swerve from all the Principles of common
Honesty) does really Believe. The Animadverter does not desire, that any man
should Assent to what he says against Dr. Sherlock, in the Vindication of the
Catholic Faith, any farther than as he may be Convinced by the Force of his
Arguments. Here I think it my Duty to wipe off one of the foulest Aspersions
that have been cast upon the Animadverter, viz. That he is the First Man
amongst all the Sons of the Church of England, that ever showed such a Dislike
to Dr. Sherlock's Book Entitled, A Discourse of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ,
as if he did it merely out of Spite, having no rational Inducement thereunto.
I am certain that about Eight Years since, there was sent to Dr. Sherlock, from
a Divine of the Church of England (whom the worst of his Enemies will
acknowledge to be far enough from any Priestcraft) a large Letter, containing
a Refutation of several of the gross, and most detestable Errors in that Book.
Some Part of that Letter I shall here recite. Abraham's Faith was not a Faith
in Christ, say You: But the holy Apostle says expressly, that The Gospel was
preached unto Abraham. Now if Abraham Believed the Gospel preached unto him,
did he not Believe in Christ? The words of our Savior, which you recite, do
most evidently Prove, that Abraham's Faith was Faith in Christ: Joh. 8. 56.
Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my Day, etc. St. Chrysostom was not of
your Mind; his words on this Text are these: (...). The same Truth is Attested
by St. Ambrose: Hunc Vidit Abraham in isto Sacrificio. Hujus Passionem Aspexit:
Et ideo ipse Dominus ait de eo, Abraham Diem meum Vidit, and Gavisus est. Let
us now return to our Historian: It Is very observable, says he, p. 99. that For
real Heresies of the Flesh there are no Inquisitions set up, nor any particular
Persecutions; not for Drunkenness, or Whoredom, or other Vices: They increase
as much by Temptation and Example, as those sort of Vices can; and yet were
never made Objects of the (pretended) pious Zeal, or of any Persecution. I
cannot give a softer Term to this, than that of a Notorious LIE: For can any
English Man, that knows any thing of the Proceedings of our Ecclesiastical
Courts be ignorant of this: That at the Bishop's Visitation all Parsons,
Vicars, and Curates; at the Arch-Deacon's Visitation, the Churchwardens are
Bound to Present Drunkards, common Swearers, Fornicators, Adulterers, etc. The
most Reverend Archbishop LAUD never showed himself more Zealous in any thing,
than in the Prosecution of a Great LADY, for Living in Adultery. I shall here
relate the whole Story as I find it in Cyprianus Anglicus, p. 266.

The Lady Purbeck, Wife of Sir John Villers, Viscount Purbeck, the Elder
Brother by the same Venture to the Duke of Buckingham, had been brought into the
High Commission, Anno 1627. for Living openly in Adultery with Sir John Howard,
one of the Younger Sons of Thomas, the First Earl of Suffolk of that Family,
Sentenced among other things to do Penance at St. Paul's Cross, she escaped her
Keepers, took Sanctuary in the Savoy, and was from thence conveyed away by the
French Ambassador. The Duke being dead, all further Prosecution against her
dyed also with him; which notwithstanding the Proud Woman being more terrified
with the fear of the the Shame, than the sense of the Sin, vented her malice
and displeasure against the Archbishop (who had been very severe against her
at the time of her Trial) when he was come unto his Greatness, spending her
Tongue upon him in words so full of deep Disgrace, and Reproach unto him; that
he could do no less than cause her to be laid in the Gate House: But being not
long after delivered thence by the Practice of Howard aforementioned, Howard
was seized upon, and laid up in her Place; which Punishment, though it was the
least that could be looked for, he so highly Stomach'd, that as soon as the
Archbishop was Impeached by the House of Commons, and committed to Custody by
the Lords (which happened on Friday December. 18. 1640.) he Petitioned for Relief
against the Archbishop, and some others of the high Commissioners, by whom the
Warrant had been signed. The Lords upon the reading of it, imposed a Fine of
500 l. on the Archbishop, and 250 a piece upon Lamb, and Duck, and pressed it
with such cruel Rigor, that they forced him to sell his Plate to make Payment
of it, the Fine being set on Monday 21 of December, and Ordered to be paid on
Wednesday after. Let any sincere Christian in any Part of the World that has
ever heard this Story be Judge, whether this most Reverend Prelate were not
Persecuted for Righteousness sake. Most certainly the Wrath of God shall Burn
throughout all Generations against the Posterity of his Persecutors, if they
Approve the MURDER, which their Forefathers Committed, and against all
others, who shall ever undertake to Vindicate that Diabolical false Pretense of
Justice. I pray God that all the Enemies of Truth, and Goodness, particularly
the Anti-Trinitarians, may know and feel the Power and Efficacy of these sacred
words, Matthew. 21. 44. Whosoever shall fall on this STONE shall be broken, but
on whomsoever it shall fall it will Grind him to Powder.

A VINDICATION OF VINCENTIUS LIRINENSIS, etc.
I Am so sensible of the Orthodoxy of Vincentius Lirinensis, in Matters of the
greatest Importance to all Mankind, that I think it my Duty to Exhort all Young
Students in Divinity, to the diligent Perusal of that Excellent Book Entitled,
Vincentii Lirinensis Commonitorium: And to declare to all the World my
Abhorrency of the unjust Reproach that an Anonymous Writer has endeavored to
fix upon this most Zealous Assertor of the Doctrine of the H. B. and Glorious
Trinity, even in these Days, in which we have Heard even from those Men, who
would retain the Name of Christians, such horrid Blasphemies, and open
Detestations of The Only True God, in whose NAME we are Baptized, The Father,
The Son, and The Holy Ghost.

Animadversions, etc. page 61. Mr. Hill makes a strange use of the Maxim of
Vincentius Lirinensis, Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ad omnibus, etc. That
Priest was a Semipilagian, that is, he thought that a Man could Believe by his
own strength, and that afterward God gave him Grace to execute his Good and
Pious Resolutions, He introduced this Maxim merely in opposition to St.
Augustine, etc.

Answ. Vincentius Lirinensis was so far from being tainted with the Pelagian
Heresy, that he Condemned Pelagius, as a most detestable Heretic, or Wrester
of the Holy Scriptures, as he did Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius, etc. He shows
us the best way that can ever be to preserve our Souls, by the Grace of God,
from the Contagion of any Heresy whatsoever. Sive ego, says he, sive quis alius
vellet exurgentium Haereticorum frauds deprehendere, laqueosque vitare, and in
Fide sana sanus atque integer permanere, duplici modo munire Fidem suam, Domino
adjuvante deberet. Primo scilicet Divinae Legis Auctoritate; tum deinde
Ecclesiae Catholicae Traditione. Hic forsitan requirat aliquis: Cum sit
Perfectus Scripturarum Canon, sibique ad omnia satis superque sufficiat, quid
opus est ut ei Ecclesiasticae Intelligentiae jungatur Auctoritas? Quia scilicet
Scripturam Sacram pro ipsa sua altitudine non uno eodemque sensu universi
accipiunt; sed ejusdem eloquia aliter, atque aliter alius atque alius
interpretatur, etc. It Is Evident that by Divina Lex he understands the Holy
Scriptures. By making the Tradition of the Church, subordinate to the Holy
Scriptures he plainly Declares, that ever since the New Testament was Written,
it has been the Duty of all Ministers of the Gospel to Confirm, or Prove the
Truth of their Oral Discourses, by showing their Conformity to the Writings of
the holy Apostles. It Is Evident that by the Tradition of the Church we are to
understand a Summary, or Breviary of the Fundamental Points, or Articles of the
Christian Religion, which the Holy APOSTLES, and Their SUCCESSORS throughout
all Ages have Delivered to the World by word of Mouth in their Preaching, and
Catechizing, Injoyning all Christians in all Parts of the Earth to ponder them
in their Hearts, and to be always mindful of them: This Summary, or Breviary of
the Prime Articles of the Christian Religion is contained in that Form of sound
Words, which we call the Apostles Creed: And this is that TRADITION, or FAITH,
( once DELIVERED to the Saints) which St. Irenaeus speaks so much of, which I
doubt not but all Learned Men will acknowledge, when they shall duly consider
those words of that Blessed Saint, which I shall here recite, D. Irenaei
adversus Haereses, Lib. 1.

Cap. 2. Ecclesia, quanquam per universum orbem terrarum usque ad fines terrae
dispersa, ab Apostolis, and eorum Discipulis Fidem accepit, quae est in unum
Deum Omnipotentem, qui fecit coelum, and terram, and maria, and omnia quae in
eis sunt: Et in unum Christum Jesum, Filium Dei, incarnatum pro nostra salute:
Et in Spiritum Sanctum, qui per Prophetas Praedicavit Dispensationis mysteria,
and adventus, and ex Virgin nativitatem, and passionem, and resurrectionem ex
mortuis, and in Carne ad coelos assumptionem dilecti Christi Jesu Domini
nostri, and ipsius ex coelis in gloria Patris adventum ad instauranda omnia,
and excitandam omnem totius humani generis carnem: cui Christo Jesu Domino
nostro, and Deo, and Salvatori, and Regi, juxta voluntatem Patris invisibilis,
omne genu flectatur coelestium, and terrestrium, and infernorum; and omnis
lingua confiteatur ipsi, and judicium justum in omnibus faciat: and spiritualia
quidem nequitiei, and impios, ac injustos; and iniquos ac blasphemos homines in
ignem aeternum mittat: justis vero, and sanctis, and qui mandata ipsius
servarunt, and in dilectione ipsius permanserunt, partim ab initio, partim ex
paenitentia vitam largitus incorruptibilitatem donet, and gloriam aeternam
tribuat. Cap. 3. Hanc praedicationem, and hanc Fidem Ecclesia, velut dixi,
adepta, quanquam per totum mundum dispersa, diligenter conservat, quasi unam
Domum inhabitans: and similiter his Credit, velut unam animam, and idem cor
habens, and consone haec praedicat, and docet, ac TRADIT, velut uno ore
praedita. Nam Linguae in mundo dissimiles sunt, verum Virtus Traditionis una
and eadem est. Et neque in Germaniis fundatae and Ecclesiae aliter CREDUNT, aut
aliter TRADUNT, neque in Hispaniis, neque in Celtis, neque in Orient, neque in
Aegypto, neque in Lybia, neque hae, quae in medio mundo constitutae sunt. Sed
quemadmodum Sol creatura Dei in toto mundo unus, and idem est: sic etiam
Praedicatio Veritatis ubique lucet, and illuminat omnes homines ad cognitionem
veritatis venire volentes. Et neque qui valde potens est in dicendo ex
Ecclesiae Praefectis, alia ab his dicet. Nemo enim est super Magistrum: neque
debilis in dicendo hanc Traditionem imminuet. Quum enim una and eadem FIDES
sit, neque is qui multum de ipsa dicere potest, plus quam oportet dicit: neque
qui parum, ipsam imminuit. This is the Tradition of the Church, or the
Catholic Faith, which Vincentius Lirinensis Directs us unto in these words: In
ipsa Catholica Ecclesia magnopere Curandum est, ut id Teneamus, quod Ubique,
quod Semper, quod ad omnibus Creditum est. And now I appeal to any Man of
common Ingenuity to Judge what Censure this Anonymus's Assertion Deserves, That
Vincentius Lirinensis introduced this Maxim, Quod ubique, etc. merely in
Opposition to Saint Augustine.

I pray God to incline the Heart of this Man, and of all others that please
themselves with their extraordinary Fluency of plausible Expressions, to
consider that they shall Give account in the Day of Judgment of every IDLE WORD.

(...).
A LETTER To a Friend,
Concerning the Publication of the short Letter to J. H. a Nonconformist
Preacher in EXETER.
SIR,
I Give you many Thanks for acquainting me, that some Ingenious Persons are
dissatisfied, that I should put so high a Value upon those few Lines which I
wrote to J. H. as to Publish them in my Scripta Polemica. I confess I did it
rather out of a Fullness of Thought, that this is a most important Truth, than
any probable Grounds that it would be considered by many Readers, viz. That J.
H. in refusing to Answer such a Serious and Equitable Request has plainly
Discovered his HYPOCRISY, and consequently rendered himself less capable of
Deceiving those People, who shall ever make any just Reflection on it. I did
most earnestly Entreat Him, even by the Profession he makes (in common with all
those that pretend to be Ministers of the Gospel) of Desiring the Propagation
of the Belief of all Sanctifying Truth, that if he thought there was any Error
in the Printed Paper I sent Him, he would Endeavor to Convince me of it. In
that Paper (Entitled, "Animadversions upon some Passages in a Book Entitled,
The true Nature of a Gospel Church, and its Government) are these words: It is
most Evident, that those Men are Guilty of most Abominable Iniquity, who
endeavor to Seduce any People from the Communion of the Church of England, in
which the Fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion are so clearly, and
fully Expressed, and those most important Expressions so frequently Repeated,
that Persons of the Lowest Intellectuals, who do not Rebel against the Light,
in frequenting our Religious Assemblies may more easily attain to the Knowledge
of All things that are Necessary to their Salvation, than by Hearing, or
Reading the best Sermons, that have been, or shall be Preached by any of the
Non-Conformists to the end of the World: Which Assertation is as Evident, as it
is, That any Illiterate Persons may more easily Meditate on Truths plainly
Expressed, and frequently Suggested to their Remembrance, than Collect the same
Truths out of diverse large Discourses, if they were therein Implied: So that it
can hardly be imagined, how any Man can be in any thing more Serviceable to the
Destroyer of Souls, than by Teaching People to Despise our CATECHISM, and
COMMON PRAYER. It is now Manifest, and shall be so to all Posterity, that the
Multitude of these Despisers have Encouraged the Professed Enemies of the
Godhead of our Blessed Savior, to Publish their BLASPHEMIES.

Arise, O God, Plead thine own Cause: Remember how the foolish man Blasphemeth
thee daily.

Dear Sir, I doubt not but you will Join with Me in this my Daily Prayer, that
by the Inspiration of the Spirit of Truth the Hearts of all Learned Men, that
are assured of the Divine Right of EPISCOPACY, may be effectually Inclined to
Endeavor to the utmost of their several Capacities to Convince all Persons
that believe their Souls to be Immortal, of the Truth of this strange
Assertion, That the Want of a due Regard to the Authority of BISHOPS has been
one of the greatest Causes of all the prodigious Disorders and Calamities in
the Christian World. Oremus invicem ut Salvemur.

Your Affectionate Friend, and Servant, E. E.

POSTSCRIPT.
The Paper I mention was Published by Richard Baldwin at the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane, 1690. Mr. Wood takes notice of these Animadversions, etc. in his
Athenae Oxonienses, Vol. 2. p. 563.


