A Seasonable DISSWASIVE FROM PERSECUTION, HUMBLY And Modestly, yet with
Christian Freedom and Plainness of Speech, offered to the Consideration of all
concerned therein; on behalf generally, of all that suffer for Conscience sake,
particularly of the People called QUAKERS.

By (one of them) THOMAS ELLWOOD.

I will punish all that oppress them, Jer. 30. 20. I will contend with him that
contendeth with thee, and I will save thy Children. And I will feed them that
oppress thee with their own Flesh, and they shall be drunken with their own
Blood, as with sweet Wine: And all Flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy
Savior and thy Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob, Isa. 49. 25, 26. And now I
say unto you, refrain from these Men, and let them alone -- least happily ye be
found even to fight against God, Acts 5. 38, 39. LONDON, Printed, for William
Skeate, and are to be Sold in George-yard in Lombard Street, 1683.

King Charles I. IN HIS (...).
THOU see, O God, how much Cruelty among Christians is acted under the color
of Religion; as if we could not be Christians, unless we crucify one another.
Sect. 12. It Is thought by many wise men, that the preposterous Rigor, and
unreasonable Severity, which some men carried before them in England, was not
the least incentive that kindled, and blew up into those horrid Flames the
Sparks of Discontent, which wanted not predisposed fuel of Rebellion in
Ireland; -- They saw themselves apparently threatened by the covetous Zeal, and
uncharitable Fury of some men, who think it a great argument of the truth of
their Religion, to endure no other but their own. Ibid.

They confess their known weakness, as to Truth and Justice, who choose rather
to contend by Arms than by Argument. Sect. 9.

It argues rather those men to be conscious of their defects of Reason, and
convincing Arguments, who call in assistance of mere force to carry on the
weakness of their Counsels and Proposals. Sect. 6.

A DISSWASIVE FROM Persecution, etc,
PERSECUTION is a Word of so harsh a sound, and so generally distasteful to
English Ears, that scarce any of those who are most forward and active in that
Work, are willing to have their actions called by that Name. That none
therefore, who have set an hand to that Work, or whose minds are any whit
inclining thereunto, may, from the dislike they have to the Word [Persecution]
reject this Diswasive as a thing wherein they are not concerned: I think it
needful here to declare what it is I mean by Persecution. By Persecution, then
I intend a forcing or compelling any by pains or penalties, Bodily or
Pecuniary, to relinquish or forsake that Exercise of Religion, or way of
Worship, which they believe to be the right Way of Worship, and the true and
acceptable Exercise of Religion, which God has required of them: And to
receive, embrace, conform to and perform some other exercise of Religion, and
way of Worship, which they, who are so compelled, are either firmly persuaded
is not the Right, or at least have no belief that it is the Right. This (in
short) is that which I call Persecution: And this is that I diswade from,
whatever other Name the Actors of it may please themselves in calling it by.

I.
To begin now with the first of these, viz. the forcing or compelling any to
forsake and leave that exercise of Religion, or way of Worship, which they
believe to be the right way of Worship, and the true exercise of Religion,
which God requires of them: The Reasons by which I shall endeavor to diswade
all men from such an undertaking, are these.

1. You may, for ought you know, be found Fighters against God: You are not,
you cannot be, upon your own principles, infallibly sure, that that way of
Worship, which you thus endeavor to force us from, is not the true Worship of
God. We know it is so? you do not know it is not so. If in the end it prove to
be so, how sad will your condition be, who have thus bent your force to hinder
the true Worship of God, and set your selves to restrain us from performing
that, which God has required of us! I pray consider, Saul was as confident, as
you can be; and had as good ground for his confidence, as you can have: and
thereupon he went smartly on for a while (as some of you have done) making
Havoc of the Church, entering into every House, and haling Men and Women,
committed them to Prison, Acts 8. 3. I Persecuted, says he this way unto the
Death, binding and delivering into Prisons, both Men and Women, Chap. 22. 4.
Many of the Saints did he shut up in Prison, and when they were put to Death,
he gave his voice against them, Chap. 26. 10. He punished them often in every
Synagogue, and compelled them to Blaspheme: And being exceedingly mad against
them, he Persecuted them even unto strange Cities, verse. 11. And this he verily
thought with himself that he ought to do, verse. 9. Yet all this while he was
out of his Thoughts; for in all this he was wrong, and they were right whom he
thus Persecuted. And may it not be so with you? why then will you run so great
an hazard.

2. By endeavoring to force us from that way of worship, which we believe the
Lord has led us into and requires of us, you endeavor to force us to make
Shipwreck of Faith. We have solemnly and sincerly declared unto you, that we
firmly believe, and are fully persuaded and satisfied in our Consciences, that
God has led us into this way of Worship wherein we serve him, and that he
requires our perseverance therein. This is our Faith in this particular. Now
so far as you endeavor by Threats, by Terrors, by Penalties and Cruelties to
force any of us from this way of Worship: so far you endeavor to force us to
make Shipwreck of Faith, and of good Conscience too: which if through your
means any should do, the Guilt thereof will lie heavy upon you.

3. In endeavoring by force and cruelty to restrain us from worshipping God,
according as (we are fully persuaded) he has taught us and does require us,
you go out of the Path of the Righteous, and tread in the steps of the Wicked
and Ungodly. It was the Egyptians that dealt thus with the Israelites; not the
Israelites that dealt so with the Egyptians; as you may read from the 7th.
Chap. of Exodus to the 15. It was the Heathen (who knew not God) that dealt
thus with Daniel; not Daniel that dealt so with them, Dan. 6. It was the hard
hearted, unbelieving Jews and unconverted Gentiles, that dealt thus with the
Apostles and Primitive Christians; not the Christians that dealt so with them,
Acts. 4. 17, 18. and 5. 28. and 14. 2. and 17. 5. It was the Blood-thirsty
Papists that dealt thus with the Protestants in Queen Mary's Days. And can you
bring a greater Odium upon your selves, than, by imitating these, to make Folks
think you approve what they have done?

4. That Exercise of Religion which you would force us from, is not simply and
of it self condemned or disallowed by that Law, by the severity of which you
would force us from it. It is not simply and positively, every Assembly or
Meeting for the exercise of Religion in other manner than according to the
Liturgy, etc. that is forbidden and made punishable, by that Act of the 22th.
of Charles the second against Conventicles; but such only as has at it above
four persons besides the Family. Any Family then, (how numerous soever) and
four persons over and above, may meet, under the favor of that Act, for the
exercise of Religion, though in other manner than according to the Liturgy,
etc. which plainly shows that the Lawmakers did not look upon such exercise of
Religion to be evil simply in it self; (for then they would have utterly
condemned and forbidden it to all, even the least numbers) but that they
presupposed a danger from the numbers resorting to such Assemblies; and
therefore did not absolutely forbid the exercise, but laid a limitation upon
the number of persons that might resort thereunto. Now the permitting this
Exercise to any, is an admitting of it to be good: and the offense lies not in
the Exercise it self, but in the numbers resorting to it; and that only so far
as they may be thought dangerous to the public Peace. Since therefore the
Exercise of Religion which ye would drive us from, is so far from being in it
self evil or unlawful, that it receives some kind of Countenance even from that
very Law by which ye pretend to act. Since also the experience ye have had of
our peaceable deportment in our Meetings, and of our quiet, and cheerful
subjection to the Government we have lived under, has sufficiently secured you
from all danger from our Meetings, how numerous soever: Why will you afflict,
molest, trouble, imprison, impoverish and ruin your Countrymen, your
Neighbors, your Acquaintance, your Fellow-citizens and Townsmen, your
Correspondents, your Relations, your Friends and Fellow-Protestants, for that
which is not Evil nor unlawful in it self, nor hurtful to you nor to any!

5. In thus eagerly pursuing us, and disturbing our peaceable Meetings, you
give your selves, as well as us, a great deal of needless trouble. For, as that
learned Doctor in the Jewish Law did well observe, in the Apostles Case, If
this Counsel or this work be of Men, it will come to naught. But if it be of
God, ye cannot overthrow it, Acts 5. 38, 39. So say I to you in our Case (And I
wish some one of your own, that were had, like him, in reputation among all the
People, would have done this for me) If this People and their Meetings be not
of God, you need not thus bestir you, you may spare your pains; they will come to
naught; But if they be of God, ye cannot overthrow them. So that whether we be
of God, or be not of God, your labor against us is in vain. Either we shall
fall without it, or stand for all it. Be entreated therefore, for your own
sakes, as well as for ours, to take Gamaliel's Counsel, Refrain from these men
and let them alone.

6. And lastly, Be pleased to consider what sort of Agents and Instruments you
are fain to make use of (and not seldom are your selves made use of by) to
carry on this work. Are not the vilest wretches, the most profligate of
mankind, for the most part, the first movers in it? Where is there an Informer
upon this Statute, who has not first been either some notorious Criminal (whom
a little Rote-reading, and a favorable Ordinary, have saved from the Gallows)
or some riotous Spendthrift, whose Debaucheries have brought him to a condition
worse than that of Beggary, viz. A rapacious desire of repairing his own
Self-ruined Fortunes, by the unrighteous ruining of others? And, to say
nothing, in this place, of the Generosity of a true English nature, which hates
to be rid and commanded by such base and infamous Fellows (as not only
Constables, and other inferior Officers, but even Justices, Aldermen, yea, and
Mayors too, have sometimes been) can you think it consistent with Christianity,
with Humanity, with the Honor and Interest of the Nation, and of your Selves,
that so many thousand Families of your sober, honest, conscientious,
industrious, and peaceable Neighbors (against whom, even Envy her self can
find no occasion, except as against Daniel of old, Dan. 6. 5. concerning the
Law of their God) should be sacrificed to the brutish and insatiable Lust of
such a dissolute and shameless Crew, and that by you? Can you think it will
embalm your Memories, and sweeten your Names to after Ages, to have it recorded
to Posterity, that you were the men that rifled your Neighbors Houses; that
made spoil and havoc of their Goods, that stripped them of their Estates, that
imprisoned their Persons, that ruined their Families; and all this for no other
cause, but only and alone for worshipping and serving God, in a quiet and
peaceable manner, according as they believed he required them to do? O never
give cause for this Epitaph to be written upon your Tomb, Here lies a
Persecutor of the People of God.

II.
Now for the other Branch, which I mentioned, of Persecution, viz. The Forcing
or compelling of any by Pains or Penalties, bodily or pecuniary, to receive,
embrace, conform to and perform some Exercise of Religion, and way of worship,
which they, who are so compelled, are either firmly persuaded is not the right,
or at least have no belief that it is the right. The Reasons by which I shall
endeavor to diswade all men from such an undertaking, are these.

1. In thus imposing your way of Worship upon others, you act quite contrary to
Christ and his Apostles. The Author of the Christian Religion, though he had
all power in Heaven and in Earth, given unto him, yet did not make use of that
power, as you do of your Power, by outward severities and rigor to force
People to receive, and profess the Religion which he taught. But his usual
saving was, He that has Ears to hear let him hear. And when two of his
Disciples, in their young state, and in an overwarm zeal against some that did
not receive him, did once ask him leave to command Fire to come down from
Heaven and consume them; he sharply rebuked them with a [Ye know not that
manner of spirit ye are of:] and instructing them better, told them, The Son of
Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. and instead of
thrusting himself upon those Samaritans, that were not willing to receive him,
he passed them by, and went to another Village, Luke 9. 53. to 57. The
Apostles, when the Jews rejected their Message, did not attempt to impose it on
them; but said, seeing you put from you, -- lo, we turn to the Gentiles, Asts
13. 46. You read that Christ whipped some out of the Temple, John 2. 15. but ye
never read that he whipped any in. Why then will you steer a Course so directly
contrary to Christ and his Apostles?

2. In this imposing your way of Worship upon others, you follow the worst of
Patterns. Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, a Blasphemous, Cruel and Heathenish
Prince, whom God in an extraordinary manner did punish; whose Heart was changed
from Man's, and a Beasts Heart given unto him, Dan. 4. The Beast which John saw
coming up out of the Earth, that spoke as a Dragon, Rev. 13. 11. Both these
imposed their Worship upon others, and that under the severest Penalties. But
can you think it either honorable or safe for you to imitate such Brutish
Examples!

3. Enforcing People to your way of Worship, who have no belief that it is the
Right you cause them to sin: for whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, Romans 14 23.
And therefore as the Apostles there argues, He that doubts, is damned, (that
is condemned) if he eat. And is not the Argument as forcible in this Case, as
in that of Eating? May it not with like reason be said, he that doubts that
your way of Worship is not right, is damned if he conform to it, because his
Conformity is not of Faith; for whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. And the
Wages of Sin ye know is Death, Romans 6. 23. Now if they that conform in such a
doubting mind do therein sin, and thereby bring Damnation (that is
Condemnation) upon themselves; what may you expect, who by Threatenings, by
Imprisonments, by Fines, or other outward Penalties, do drive them thereunto!

4. Enforcing People to your way of Worship, who have a firm persuasion and
belief that it is not the right; you make Men Hypocrites and Timeservers: For
such as have not fortitude enough to bear the storm of Persecution, and to
undergo with patience the various Cruelties inflicted on them; such, through
fear, may fall into temptation, and perhaps, for Self-security, may comply with
that, which they certainly believe is not right. And herein they sin against
their knowledge, and you are the Cause of this Sin of theirs, by drving them
unto it; and at your hands will it be required.

5. By obtruding and forcing your Religion upon others, you greatly disparage
and undervalue it, and give Men the more ground to suspect and dislike it: for
Men are naturally apt to question the goodness of that Commodity, which is put
upon them whether they will or not. Those Wares that are true and good need no
such ways to put them off. The Christian Religion, in its purest and best
Estate, was never thrust upon any; nor need it. To be without it is punishment
suficient; and greater than any you can inflict: They who in the Parble were
invited to the great Supper, Luke, 14. and made their Excses and did not come,
were not fetched in with a Capias, nor Fined and Imprisoned till they would
come; but were utterly shut out and debarred from coming: [I say unto you, that
none of those men that were bidden shall taste of my, Supper ver. 24.] That was
their punishment, and a grievous one too. The Apostles of our Lord (as one of
them declares, 2 Cor. 4. 2.) having received the Minestry of the Gospel, and
renounced the hidden things of Dishonesty, did not walk in Craftiness (and I am
sure I may safely add, They did not walk in Cruelty) nor handled the Word of
God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the Truth commended themselves to
every Man's Conscience in the sight of God. Now I pray consider; if you are
preswaded, that that Exercise of Religion which you perform is the right, That
that way of Worship which you profess is the true, were it not fairer and more
becoming those pretenses, for you, as many of you as are Preachers, by
Preaching, as many as are Hearers by a pious Life and Godly Conversation, to
commend your selves (as did the Apostles) by manifestation of the Truth to
every Man's Conscience in the sight of God; than to manifest your Indignation
and Envy toward those that are not of your Persuasion, by committing them to
Goal, rifling their Houses, tearing away their Goods, ruining their Estates,
and beggering their Children?

6. You break that great Command, which Christ says is the Law and the
Prophets, viz. All things whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye
even so to them, Mat. 7. 12. This Command ye transgress, in endeavoring to
force others to your way of Worship: for ye would not be so dealt with your
selves. Consider this well I entreat you. If you were to be compelled by
Imprisonment, Banishment, Fines, Confiscations, or any other extreme and
rigorous Proceedings, to conform your selves to that way of Worship, and
Exercise of Religion which we profess, or any others whom ye now present: Would
you not think it extreme hard, and very unjust? no doubt ye would, and so ye
justly might. But then withal consider, that your imposing thus on others, is
no less hard to them, no less unjust in you.

Ye have known us long, ye have had large experience of us; ye have tried us
many ways, and proved us after diverse manners. And what evil can ye convict us
of to this Day? Have we not always been a quiet, peaceable, harmless People?
when being reviled did we revile? or when being persecuted did we not patiently
suffer it? Ah what do you propose to your selves? Do ye think to root us out
and destroy God's Heritage? It is impossible: The Root of Iesse bears us, and
upon the immovable Rock are we immoveably built. O dash not your selves
against it! But if ye could destroy or ruin Persons, yet is it possible that
there can lodge in English Breasts such more-than Barbarous Inhumanity, to
destroy so many thousand Families! The Rome-Rid French and Irish have gone far
that way; but English Hands were never so defiled: God grant they never may. Do
ye think by rigorous and cruel usage to fright us out of our Religion, and
force us to desert our Principles? How can ye hope to accomplish such a thing,
who have seen our unmoved Constancy, and steadfast Perseverance therein, under
all the Sufferings that have hitherto been inflicted on us? Have not many of us
been already stripped of all their outward Substance? not a Bed being left them
to lie on, not a Stool to sit on, not a Dish to eat in. Is there a Prison in
the Nation, or a Dungeon in a Prison, which has not been a Witness of our
Groanings? Have we not been tried by Banishment, and proved by Death it self?
Death in New England, by the Hand of the Hangman. Death in Old England, by the
rough hands of rude and boisterous Officers and Soldiers, who have given diverse
of our Friends those Blows, which in few Days have brought them to their
Graves. I might add to these, burning in the Forehead, cutting off Ears,
unmerciful Beatings, Whippings, and cruel Scourgings. But did any, or all, of
these deter us from the Worship of our God? Nay, has not our cheerful
undergoing all these Hardships, sufficiently evidenced to the World, that our
Religion and Consciences are dearer to us; than our Estates, our Liberties, our
Limbs or our Lives? Why then will you repeat severities upon us, which have so
often been tried before in vain? Can you take pleasure in putting others to
pain, and delight your selves in afflicting others? O suffer not your Natures
so far too degenerate from the Gentleness and Tenderness of true and generous
Englishmen!

And think not the worse of us for our Faithfulness to our God! He that is true
to God, will be true to Men also; But he that is false and treacherous to God,
how is it likely he should be true to Men? Endeavor not therefore to draw us
into Unfaithfulness to our God: for that, to be sure, would be hurtful to us,
and no way advantageous to you. Neither be ye exasperated against us, from the
difficulty you find in breaking our Meetings, or because that when you have
dragged us out of our Meetings, and Fined or Imprisoned us for being there, you
find us there again: But rather take it for an Argument, that we sincerely love
and believe our Religion; and that we find our Meetings worth suffering for.
For indeed, in our Meettings we do meet with the Lord our God, in whose
Presence is fullness of Joy, Psalm. 16. 11: The Law of whose Mouth is better unto
us than thousands of Gold and of Silver, Psalm. 119. 72. Yea, his Loving
Kindness is better than Life, Psalm. 63. 3. The God of Israel, is He that gives
Strength and Power to his People; Blessed be God, Psalm. 68. 35. Therefore
harden not your selves against us, I beseech you, by miscalling our Constancy,
Obstinacy; our Stedfastness, Stubbornness; our Zeal, Self-will; our
Faithfulness to God, Contempt of Authority: But look back upon the Apostles of
our Lord, and see if they did not just as we do. They were taken at a Meeting
in Solomon's Porch, Acts. 3. 11. and sent to Prison for Preaching, Chap. 4. 2.
3. Next Day they were brought forth and Examined before the Council, ver. 5, 7.
And having made their Defense, they were straightly, threatened, and commanded
not to speak at all, nor teach in the Name Jesus, ver 17. 18. what Answer did
they make? Whether it be right (said they) in the sight of God, to hearken unto
you more than unto God, judge ye, ver. 19. and presently after we read, They
spoke the Word of God with Boldness, ver. 31. Well, they were quickly clapped up
again, Chap. 5. 17. 18. But when the Council came together, and sent for them
to be brought before them, and they were not to be found in the Prison, ver.
21. 22. (God having by his Angel delivered them in the Night, ver. 19.) one
came and told the Council, Behold, The Men whom ye put in Prison, are standing
in the Temple and Teaching the People, ver 25. And when they had sent Officers,
and fetched them again before the Council, and asked them, saying, Did we not
straightly command you, that you should not teach in this Name? And behold ye
have filled Jerusalem with your Doctrine, etc. ver. 28. Their Answer was, We
ought to obey God rather than Men, ver. 29. Do you think the Council did not
take this for a disrespectful and provoking Answer? Do ye think the Jews did
not count the Apostles a stubborn, obstinate, self-willed People, that did this
in despite of Authority? yet you, in words, condemn the Jews and their
Council, and justify the Apostles in their thus acting; and therein you do
well. O let not your Actions condemn what your Words justify, nor justify
what your Words condemn! For if you persecute us for the same things. which the
Apostles both did, and were persecuted for doing; ye therein at once both
condemn the Apostles, and justify those that persecuted them. And as they
brought the Guilt of Innocent Blood, and thereby the Wrath of God, upon
themselves: even so will ye also upon your selves, if ye persist in the same
Course. Which that ye may not do, is (for your own sakes as well as for ours)
my earnest Desire, and the End of this Diswasive.

THE END.

