A VINDICATION OF The DOCTRINE Concerning the Light Within, Against the
OBJECTIONS OF George Keith.

In his Book, Entitled, The Deism of W. PENN, and his Brethren Exposed.

By EDMUND ELYS.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court, in Gracious-Street,
and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street, 1699.

A VINDICATION OF THE DOCTRINE Concerning the Light Within, etc.
I Desire that G. Keith, for his own Souls sake, would give me some Public
Satisfaction, for the Public Injury he has done me, in endeavoring to make
the World believe, that I am one of that sort of Men, who call themselves
Deists. It is my Resolution by the Grace of GOD, to show All Meekness to G. K.
and to All Men. But I would have it observed, that it is not inconsistent with
Christian Meekness, to express our selves with the greatest Severity in our
Authoritative Reflections on any thing most grossly and notoriously Impious. I
shall say no more to induce the Candid Reader to such Respects toward Me, as
are requisite for a due Reception of what I shall here deliver in Defense of
that most important Truth, which G. K. p. 3. plainly declares that he has
Renounced, viz. that The Inward Evidence of the Spirit, as touching the great
Matters of the Christian Faith, is the PRINCIPAL Rule of Faith, and Life.

By the Inward Evidence of the Spirit I understand, that TRUTH, which the
Spirit of TRUTH has Written in the Hearts of All Men, together with all the
Influences of the Spirit upon the Hearts of Men, Exciting them to a due
Reflection on the Law of GOD Written in their Hearts: Thou shall Love the Lord
thy GOD with All thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and thy Neighbor as thy
Self. The Inward Evidence of the Spirit in this Sense I Aver to be the
PRINCIPAL Rule of Faith and Life: All External Revelations, Teachings, and
Instructions, are to be Received in a way of Subordination thereunto. This is
the Rule, or Measure, which we Ought Chiefly and Principally to Follow; or be
Led by, in all our Inquiries what we Ought to believe for our Soul's Health,
for the Improvement of our Sanctification: The Cause that any Man Refuses to
yield his Assent to any Sanctifying Truth, is, that he Acts Contrary to this
Rule. G. K. discovers his gross Ignorance of the Truth I here Assert, in that
he affirms in his Narrative, that the Jews and the Pagan Philosophers, who
Blasphemed against the Man Jesus of Nazareth, did own, and confess to the Light
Within: To which in my Published Reflections on that Narrative, I gave this
Answer: The Jews, and Pagans would most certainly have Believed the Gospel
Preached unto them, if they had Owned the Light within, that is to say, if they
had been Ready to yield their Assent to any Doctrine Preached unto them, to
which they could have no Reason to Deny their Assent.

These words of W. Penn, which G. Keith Recites, p. 9, and 12. I highly
Approve. By General Rule, we understand that constant Measure, by which Men in
all Ages have been enabled to judge of the Truth and Error of Doctrines, and
the Good, or Evil, of Thoughts, Words, or Actions.

By Faith, we understand an Assent of the Mind, in such manner to the
Discoveries made of God thereto, as to resign up to God, and have dependence
upon him, as the great Creator, and Savior of his People.

But says G. K. p. 10. This General Rule did not extend, nor does, to be the
Rule, or a Rule of the Faith of Remission of Sin, by the Blood of the promised
Seed of the Woman, the Lamb of God that was to be Slain, and should take away
the Sin of the World. To this I Answer, That whosoever Observes this Rule, does
Virtually or Implicitly Believe all the Truth Delivered in the Holy Scriptures,
in that he is in a Readiness to Receive it, whenever it shall be Proposed unto
him in Terms which he clearly understands.

P. 25. Seeing the Light Within, says G. K. gives them not this Faith (the
Faith of Christ the great Sacrifice) nor teaches it them, it evidently follows
that the Light Within every Man is not the Rule of the Christian Faith. To this
I Answer, That the Light Within every Man gives to every Man, that does not
Rebel against it, the Faith of Christ the great Sacrifice; so that when any
thing Relating to our Savior shall be duly Proposed to him, as the Object of
his Faith, he will most certainly embrace it, or yield a sincere Assent unto it.

P. 48. Nothing can be a Rule of Christian Faith, as in respect of the peculiar
Doctrines of the Christian Religion, but that Doctrine, which sets before our
Minds certain Propositions of Truth, to which the Mind can, and ought to
Assent, from sufficient Motives of Credibility.

Answ. We ought not to Assent to any Affirmations Externally Proposed, as
Objects of the Christian Faith, unless we can Apprehend in them a Suitableness,
or Correspondence with That which the Spirit of TRUTH has Written in the Hearts
of All Men. The Quakers Acknowledge that upon this Account they are Obliged to
Believe all the Doctrine Contained in that Form of sound Words, which we call
The NICENE CREED. B. C. one of W. Penn's Brethren, in his Book Entitled, The
Quakers cleared from being Apostates, has these Words, "The Quakers Believe
"the Substance of the Nicene Creed. I earnestly Request all Persons, who
Profess themselves to be True Members of the Church of England, to observe
these words in the same Book, p. 57. I say, He would have as truly represented
the Presbyterians, as he has done the Quakers: If he had said of them, that
they held Universal Grace, and that there was never any such Thing in the
World, as the Solemn League and Covenant, and no such Man as the Bishop of St.
Andrews Murdered, or that King Charles the First cut off his own Head, or that
they never Hanged Men only for being Quakers, or that their Brethren in
SCOTLAND were for Univresal Liberty, notwithstanding their Barbarity to the
EPISCOPAL Clergy, and their Design to Excommunicate all Persons that should
Buy, or Sell with, or Entertain a Quaker, which had took effect, had not the
Clemency of the King Interposed, to break their Mischievous Designs.

P. 59. G. K. exclaims against W. Penn for calling The Spirit, The Rule of
Faith, The Spirit being the Principal Efficient of Faith, and not the
Instrumental Cause of it. To this I Answer: That it is Evident when W. Penn
calls The Spirit the Rule, he understands our Participations of the Divine
Spirit, the Impressions of Truth, that The Spirit of TRUTH has made upon our
Hearts. That this is W. Penn's Meaning appears most evidently, in that he
allowed his Son (who was a Wonderful Ingenious Young Man) to Publish a short
Treatise of mine, Entitled, " Vindiciae Quorundam R. Barclaij Noematum, etc.
with His own Translation, in which are these words: If we by the Holy Ghost
understand GOD, viz. the Third Person of the Holy Trinity, I confess we ought
not to call Him the Rule i. e. in a Strict Logical way of Speaking.
of Faith, and Manners; since the Rule of Faith is that Instrument by which we
rightly Examine what is the Object of the Christian Faith, or what that is,
that Christ has laid down for us to Believe: But we may also understand by the
Holy Ghost [I should have Translated it, The Divine Spirit] our Partaking (my
word is Participatio) of the Divine Spirit, with which Every Rational Soul is
endu'd by an Idea of the most Great and most Good GOD, Ingrafted in its Nature:
In which sense we by right ought to say, The Spirit is the Principal, or Chief
Rule of our Faith, to which the Scriptures themselves are Subordinate. For we
only Perceive they carry a Divine Sense, as far as we feel their Congruity with
the Idea, or Impression of the Divine Being, which God himself has fixed in
our Hearts.

R. BARCLAY's Protestation, of which his Learned Adversary speaks, p. 226.
pleases me much. That he, with those of his Religion, are willing their
Doctrines and Practices should be Tried by the Holy Scriptures, and to admit as
a positive, and certain Maxim, that whatsoever any do, pretending to be led by
the Spirit, which is contrary to the Holy Scriptures, should be reputed a
Delusion of the Devil.

P. 66. Excepting the common Principles of Justice and Temperance, all other
things relating either to Faith, or Life, with respect to the peculiar
Doctrines, and Precepts of the Christian Religion, are not to be found at all
in the Light Within every Man, abstractly, and by it self considered.

Answ. It implies the grossest Contradiction, that The Light Within should be
considered abstractly from CHRIST, since by that Light we understand Christ
himself, and all that Comes "from Him, Tending to the Conviction, and
Conversion of "Sinners. In Jesus Christ, The Light Within, The True Light that
Enlighteneth Every Man, are Hid All the Treasures of Wisdom, and Knowledge: So
that whosoever does not Rebel against The Light Shining in some Measure in his
own Heart, does Virtually Believe all the Truth, the Belief whereof is
necessary for his SALVATION.

P. 135. Whether the Spirit of Christ (whose Judgment and Determination is all
one with that of Christ, and the Father) does give his Judgment to the Church,
and the Members of it, by any other Law, or Rule, Measure, or Standard, than
what is already to be found in the Holy Scriptures, whether relating to
Articles of Faith, or positive Precepts of Revealed, and Instituted Religion,
by Christ, and his Apostles in the New Testament?

To this I Answer, That in Matters that Concern the Whole Church, or any
Particular Congregation, or any Single Person, in that it is his Duty to
Demonstrate to another, that this, or that, is his Duty; in these, and the like
Cases, the Spirit of Christ gives his Judgment by no other Law or Rule, Measure
or Standard, than what is already to be found in the Holy Scriptures: But as to
Particular Matters, that Concern my own Soul, in reference to the Fundamental
Divine Law, "Thou shall Love the "Lord thy God with all thy Heart, etc. where I
have no Obligation to Demonstrate to others that I should Sin, if I should not
Do this, or that, the Spirit of Christ will give his Judgment by the Particular
Illuminations I receive from Him, which imply such Notices of Persons, and
Things, and of my own Particular Abilities, and Inabilities, together with the
Remembrances of such and such Reflections upon my own Experiences of the Divine
Justice, and Mercy, etc. from which, through the Influence of the Spirit of
Truth and Love, there arises a Lively Sense of an Obligation to such
Performances, which it may be no Person upon Earth can clearly Perceive by any
Text of Scripture, that it is my Duty to undertake. No Man living can say, It
was my Duty to Do what I have Done in Defense of the Doctrine concerning the
Light Within: But yet it is so Evident to Me that it was My Duty, that I
Rejoice, and am Exceeding Glad, whenever I Hear My self Reproached (as I have
been by Many, particularly by G. Keith) for this Conscientious Undertaking: And
I would rather lay down my Life, than Promise, or Engage my self Not to Publish
this present Writing, being thereunto Called by HIM, who Searches the Heart,
and Tries the Reins: And will bring Every Work into Judgment, with Every
Secret thing, whether it be Good, or whether it be Evil.

COME LORD JESUS. FINIS.

