A Further DISCOVERY Of that Spirit of Contention and Division Which has
appeared of late in George Keith, etc.

Being a REPLY to Two Late Printed Pieces of his, the one Entitled, A Loving
Epistle, etc. the other, A Seasonable Information, etc. Wherein his Cavils are
Answered, his Falsehood is laid open, and the Guilt and Blame of the Breach and
Separation in America; and of the Reproach he has brought upon Truth and
Friends, by his late Printed Books, are fixed faster on him.

Written by way of Epistle, and Recommended as a further Warning to all Friends.

By THOMAS ELLWOOD

Prove. 22. 10. Cast out the Scorner, and Contention shall go out; yea, Strife
and Reproach shall cease.

London, Printed by T. Soul at the Crooked-Billet in Holywell-lane,
Shoreditch, and near the Meeting House in White-hart Court in
Grace Church Street. 1694.

A Further DISCOVERY Of that Spirit of Contention and Division Which has
appeared of late in G. Keith, etc.
Dear Friends,
WHO have received the Truth in the love of it, and have kept your Habitation
therein; unto whom the Truth is exceeding precious, and who desire the
Prosperity thereof, above all things: Unto you is the Salutation of my endeared
love, in this blessed Truth, in which the Fellowship of the Faithful stands. In
this it is I desire to know you, to be known by you, and to have Fellowship
with you; earnestly breathing to the God of Truth, the Father of Spirits, that
he will be pleased to pour forth more abundantly of his good Spirit into all
our Hearts, and fill us with the blessed Fruits thereof* that there may be no
room for the Enemy to enter, to break this holy Fellowship: But that all, who
profess to believe in the Light, may so walk therein, that a clear sight they
may have thereby, and a true discerning between things that diffe^ and may be
able to make a right Judgment, what is of God, and what is not; that so the
Design of that Spirit (by whatsoever Instrumen^ it works) which would break, or
disturb the Churches Peace, and cast Reproach up^ the Heritage of God, may be
so discovered and laid open, that all may see and shun it. As this is the
Exercise and Travel of my Spirit; so it is the Service I have been of late, and
am at present engaged in. For Friends, It is not many Months, since I saluted
you with an Epistle, wherein my Spirit was drawn fort^ ^fly to Commemorate the
gracious Dealings of the Lord with his People; and, as in a general way, to
remind you of the many Attempts the Enemy has made, by Force and Fraud, to
hinder the Work of God from going on: So more particularly, to Warn you to
beware of that Spirit of Contention and Division, which has appeared of late
in George Keith, and some few others that join with him, who have made a Breach
and Separation from Friends, in some parts of America. In writing that Epistle,
I did not consult Flesh and Blood, neither had I an Eye to my own ease and
quiet, as outwardly, (for I had no reason to expect rest from so restless a
Man, nor fair Treatment from one, who in his late Writings and personal
Debates, has so notoriously let loose his Pen and Tongue, to an unbridled
liberty of Railing and Reviling.) But I cleared my Conscience, in discharging
my Duty to God, and to his Church, and therein have that Peace, which all his
Abuses cannot disturb.

After that Epistle of mine had been sometime abroad, G. K. published a Sheet
of Paper, which he called, A loving Epistle to all the moderate, judicious and
impartial among the People called Quakers, etc. In that Sheet he charged me
with Fifty Perversions, Forgeries, and false Accusations, which he said he had
noted in my Book; but left his Proofs behind, to come after in another Book,
which he then threatened should be published, if my Book was not called in and
disowned. Some Weeks after the publishing of that Sheet, he has now sent forth
his threatened Book, pretended to be an Answer to that Epistle of mine, and
containing his Proofs, (such as they are) of the Charge he had made public so
long before. As soon as I had notice of the coming forth of his last (which he
calls, A Seasonable Information, etc.) I gave direction for the stopping what I
had before written and sent to London (in Answer to his other Sheet) choosing
rather to make but one work of it, than to multiply Books, as he does; who
(notwithstanding his alleging, that the Scripture says, Of making many Books
there is no end) seems to have an Itch to writing, and a Pride in Printing.

He begins his Epistle with a double or two fold Boast. One of his Labors and
Services in the Truth; to which perhaps I may say* something hereafter. The
other, of the considerable Number of those that (he says) he has Experience are
in true Unity with him. To which, at present, I shall only say, If that were
true, the more were the pity. But as I am far from believing it to be true: So
I wish (for his own sake, as well as others) he may be as much misstaken,
concerning the number of his Favorers, as those few that do favor him are,
concerning his Sincerity.

His second page, and part of his third, is in a manner wholly filled with
Railing at me. He says, I labor to take from him his Innocence, and Christian
Reputation and Testimony. Of all which, I think he brought but little (if any)
into England. What stock of each he carried with him into America, he has (I
fear) made Shipwreck of there. He charges me with a sordid way of Sophist^l
Wrangling, Perversions, Forgeries, and false Accusations, to the number of
Fifty, and upwards. This Charge he sent abroad in his Printed Epistle, in
general Terms, without instancing the Particulars; which he kept in reserve, to
furnish out another Book. But was not this a sordid way of Sophistical
Wrangling in him, thus to Charge, without making Proof? How often and highly
does he complain, in several of his former Treatises, of being charged in
generals, without producing particular Proofs? In his Plea of the Innocent, p.
8. He, with others of his Party, say, Seeing their Accusations against G. K.
lie much in bare generals, we see no cause further to take notice of them, --
but to show, that for want of particular matter against him, they thus labor
to defame him in bare generals; a way (says he) common to all Sophisters and
false Acc^ers. Did he not then take the way which he says is common to all
Sophisters and false Accusers, when he accused me in bare generals, without
producing the Particulars? Did he not take the most deceitful way he could,
when he accused me in bare generals, seeing himself says, (p. 17. of his Plea)
Nothing is more deceitful than bare generals? It will not excuse him, that he
has now at length, in another Treatise, set forth the Particulars of his
Charge; that being but (to use his own Phrase) like Mustard after Meat. If he
had intended to deal fairly, he should either have brought his Proofs with his
Charge, or kept his Charge, till he could find his Proofs. But so far was he
from that, that he expected his Reader should give Judgment against me, upon
his general Accusation, without proof (for Generals, he says, prove nothing;
Causless Ground of Surmises, p. 2.) Hear how he bespeaks it. I appeal, says he,
to all moderate, judicious and impartial Persons, called Quakers, Whether T. E.
has not showed himself as a Man hurried and carried away as with a Tempest and
impetuous Current of prejudice against me, not only to heap so many
Perversions; Misrepresentations, Forgeries and false Accusations against me;
but, etc. This is in his Loving Epistle, before he had brought forth the
Instances to prove his Charge by. So that the moderate, judicious and impartial
Persons he appealed to* wore to take it for granted, upon his bare and general
Accusation, that I had heaped so many Perversions, Forgeries, etc. against him:
How else could they answer his Appeal? By this, Friends, ye may see what he
meant by moderate, judicious and impartial Persons, viz. Such as would give
Judgment upon his Accusation, in bare generals, then, and take his word for
proof, till his other Book should come forth. But no such Persons will he ever
find, I hope, among the Quakers. Yet that this was his expectation and desire,
that other passage, in the close of his Epistle, proves beyond doubting. Where
threatening to publish his Answer to mine (in which he said he had noted Fifty
of my Perversions, etc.) he does it with this Reserve and Proviso, If nothing
be done forthwith by that Party that has approved and promoted his Book, to
call it in and disown it. This plainly shows, he expected Friends should have
called in and disowned my Book, upon his bare and general Accusation, without
seeing the Fifty Perversions, etc. he talked of, or hearing what they were. For
the calling in, and disowning my Book, was proposed by him as an Expedient, to
prevent his publishing the Proofs of that Accusation, upon which he would have
had it called in and disowned: But did he herein like a Christian? Like a Wise
Man? Like a Scholar? Or at all like a Man? Surely, more discretion, at least,
if not Justice, was expected from George Keith: And the truly moderate,
judicious and impartial will easily see, that he has used those Epithets but
artificially, and to deceive.

He is in great Confusion, in this part of his Work. For he calls his Book a
just and necessary Defense of the Truth, as well as of himself; and yet he is
fain to entreat and request, over and over, his moderate, judicious and
impartial Persons, and that ^nestly too, to excuse him, and not be offended
with him for it. Surely, if he believed, what he writ was a just and necessary
defense of the Truth, he might have trusted it boldly with the moderate,
judicious and impartial, without begging their Excuse, or fearing to offend
them.

He goes on thus against me, p. 3. But when he cannot heap up so many
Perversions, etc.) as he would, he goes about by an Art of wrangling and
sophistry of Words, to prove me guilty, when his Evidence in matter of Fact
does utterly fail him; (of this he gives no Instance neither, but says I do it)
even as a Man would go before an Assize to prove one guilty of Theft or Felony,
by false Syllogisms, when his Evidence is short in matter of Fast, thus arguing
against an innocent Person; some Man is a Thief, but A B, is some Man,
therefore A. B. is a Thief. Upon this he enters a new Appeal (not so restrained
as before, to the moderate, judicious and impartial; but more at large) I
appeal, says he, to all that know the Truth (of which, he knows, there are,
besides himself, too many that do not walk in it) whether this sort of
Sophistical Arguing, does Agree to that Simplicity of Truth, and plainness both
of Doctrine and Practice, that we generally have professed. This shows he is
well versed in the Fallacies of Logic, and is ready at making false
Syllogisms: and it also shows his unfair dealing. For, Friends, I appeal to
you, who not only know the Truth, but dwell and walk in it, whether I have used
such sort of Arguing against him, as he has here charged me with? He says, I
go about, by an Art of wrangling, and sophistry of words, to prove him guilty,
when my Evidence in matter of Fact does utterly fail me: And he says, I do
this, even as a Man would go before an Assize to prove one guilty of Felony, by
false Syllogisms, when his Evidence is short in matter of Fact, thus arguing
against an innocent Person, some Man is a Thief, but A. B. is some Man,
therefore A. B. is a Thief, Friends, my Book, out of which he pretends to make
this Charge against me, is in your hands; pray search and examine it thoroughly:
see if you can find any such false syllogism in it, or any such manner of
Arguing as he has here taxed me with. If ye cannot (as I am sure ye cannot)
then pray reflect your thoughts upon G. Keith, and consider seriously what a
sort of Man he must be, to deal thus Injuriously with both you and me. Has not
he himself acted like a Man that should go before an Assize, to accuse an
innocentPerson of some heinous Crime, and though he brough no evidence to
convict him by, should yet press to have ^im condemned, on pretense that he has
Evidences at home, and will bring them sometime (...)? Sure I am, such Dealing
is very far from the Simplicity, plainness and justice of Truth* which we
profess: Yet so, ye may see, he has dealt by me in that Epistle of his. He
^aks of some, in his Third page, who, he says, have plucked out their Eyes, and
given them away to such as would deceive them. How he should know that some
have done so, unless they have brought their Eyes to him to keep for them, I
who have kept my Eyes to my self, don't see. But questionless, if he knows any
such, that have pluct out their Eyes, and given them away to such as would
deceive them, it must be to them he made his Appeal before he brought his
Prooss: for none, he might be sure, that had Eyes in their heads, and knew how
to use them, would give Judgment upon his Appeal before they had seen his
Proofs.

His mentioning how much Friends have been warned to beware lest any spoil them
through Philosophy and vain Deceit, and impose upon them by the Wisdom of
words, gives me occasion to say, If he had been wary, and not suffered himself
to be spoiled through deceit and vain Philosophy, he would not have so far
shamed himself, by imposing upon others, as he too often does, by words without
Wisdom.

In his Third p. he has a fling at the second days morning Meeting in London,
which, ye know, consists mostly of Ministering Friends, with whom he is seldom
pleased. At this time his quarrel with that Meeting is for authorizing or
allowing my Book to come out. Yet that he may keep steady to his Intention of
Dividing, he deals with that Meeting, as he did before with the Yearly Meeting,
representing this also to be what he would have it, divided into Parties. He
says of my Book, that it came out Authorized or allowed, either by the second
days Meeting at London, or at least by a Leading or Prevailing Party of them. I
mention this, Friends, not that I think there needs any Refutation of it (the
Falsness thereof being so well known:) but that all may see his Splitting
Design, and none may give way thereto. In the same page he casts a wicked Scoff
at that Meeting, thus. And must all this, says he, be fathered upon the Spirit
of God? It being their constant pretension to have the Spirit of God Directing
and assisting them in all their Chambers Affairs and Meetings. This needs no
Comment neither, Friends, it is enough but to repeat it, ye cannot but savor
what Spirit it came from.

The rest of his Third page, and so on, almost to the end of his Sheet, he
spends in quibbling on a Passage in my Book, p. 49. where to show the emptiness
of his great Boast, That notwithstanding the Objections, and severe
Accusations, that some have made against his late Books, and a strict
Examination of them by some that had so complained, there is not any Line or
Sentence in any of them, that they have made to appear to contain any Untruth
or Falsehood in them, either in matter of Doctrine or Fact; I said This has
nothing of Note in it: For (supposing it were true in Fact, that no Untruth or
Falsehood in matter of Fact had been discovered in his Books) it was not the
proper business of the Yearly Meeting (which here, as elsewhere, he strikes at)
to judge of the matters of Fact contained in his Books, which were alleged to
have been done in America, by Persons not here to answer to, or give account of
them. From the former part of these words (contained in the first Parenthesis)
he would fain strain such a Concession, as might justify all the Matters
contained in his Books. He says, p. 4. I have been so liberal to him, to grant,
by way of supposition, all those particulars which he there enumerates
(comprehending, I think, the substance of his Scandalous Books written in
America) and his Books to contain nothing, yet discovered, of Untruth or
Falsehood. This he calls my liberal Concession, and is so fond of the word, that
he repeats it no less than seven times in his fifth page. He knew, I perceive,
the need he had of a Concession, and a liberal one too; but he should not have
been so liberal to himself, in making Concessions from my words, to his own
advantage, against the plain sense of my words, and of my mind: For, I assure
him, if I had made him such a Concession as he pretends to, it would have been
as far from my intention, as from his Desert. But let us see, whether there be
such a Concession, or no, in those words of mine. A Concession is a Grant, and
differs much from a Supposition, whence arises that usual Form of Speech,
Supposing, but not Granting (which is implied even where it is not expressed.)
Now, Friends, if ye observe my words in the place before quoted (p. 49. of my
former Epistle) ye will find, I do not say Granting it to be true in Fact, but
supposing it were true in Fact. I was so far from Granting it to be true in
Fact, that I did not so much as suppose it to be the in Fact, but said,
supposing it were true in Fact, which implies it was not true in Fact, and
plainly proves I did not grant it to be true in Fact, no not so much as by
supposition. And in the very next Sentence, I affirmed that there is Untruth or
Falsehood in his Books, in matter of Fact, and that it was made appear, and
wherein. This was far from a Concession, Grant, or Allowance, that all the
Matters of Fact mentioned in his Books are true. Nay, to prevent any such
Misapprehension, I added this Caution, p. 50. Therefore let none think that
because the Yearly Meeting did not declare the Matters of Fact in his Books to
be false, therefore they are all true. They remain to be proved by him that has
affirmed them, and to be answered by them who are charged therein. Ye see now
Friends, how far I was from granting the Matters of Fact in his Books to be
true, and what little ground he had for his great glorying in that which he
calls my liberal Concession. By which if he gain any thing with the Ignorant,
he will lose more with the Judicious, who by this will see him to be a mere
Sophister, and conclude his Cause to be bad indeed, that has driven so able a
Man (in his own Opinion, as well as in the Opinion of some others) to make use
of so mean a shift, which a true Scholar would have been ashamed of.

He charges me also with contradicting the Yearly Meeting, in saying, It was
not the proper business of that Meeting to judge of the Matters of Fact,
contained in his Books, etc. And he would hence infer, that the Yearly Meeting
both meddled and judged in that which was not their proper business. But in this
he deals unfairly and weak ly, as well as in the former. For ye may see,
Friends, in the fore-quoted place of my Epistle, p. 49, 50. the Matters of Fact
I there say, it was not the proper business of the Yearly Meeting to judge,
were such as were alleged to have been done in America, by Persons not here to
answer to, or give account of them. For which reason that Meeting did forbear
to give Judgment in those Matters, though they could not forbear to hear them,
being complicated with others, and related or read together. But it does not
thence follow, that that Meeting had not power to judge of those Matters, which
were of themselves, or by his Books, apparent to the Meeting, and which did not
depend upon the Proofs or Defenses of absent Persons. Such as are the Breach
and Division he has made in America, the separate Meetings he has set up, or
caused to be set up there, (of which his own Books give Proofs sufficient) the
scandalous Books he has written there, and which have been published both
there, here and else where, to the great dishonor of God, defamation of our
holy Profession, and reproach and grief of Friends.

He would also squeeze some advantage to himself out of that saying of mine in
my former Epistle, p. 72. That the way to recover the Deceived, is to discover,
lay open, and witness against the Deceivers. From hence he would fain justify
himself for publishing his abusive and scandalous Books. But this will not
yield him any defense, unless he could prove them Deceivers, whom in those
Books he has written against. Which he no otherwise here attempts to do, than
by begging it from that which he calls my liberal Concession: For thus he says,
p. 7. By his liberal Concession, supposing it to be true in matter of Fact that
I have charged upon some Preachers in America, as abovementioned, they are
Deceivers. But he should have remembered the Rule, supposition proves nothing;
and not have built upon a supposed Concession, which has no Foundation, but in
his own Imagination. However, though that Assertion of mine, [That the way to
recover the Deceived, is to discover, lay open, and witness against the
Deceivers] will not stand him in stead: Yet it is true, and will stand the
Truth in stead against him, and all that turn against it. And by it all (that
have not plucked out their Eyes, and given them to him) may see, that what he
suggests of the Yearly Meeting and me, that we would have vile and gross
Errors, etc. Covered and Cloaked, is a vile and gross Slander and Calumny of
his.

Thus, Friends, I have gone through his Epistle, and touched, I think, the most
material parts of it. In which, if I would have imitated his Example, I might
probably have picks up as many real Perversions, Forgeries and false
Accusations, out of that one Sheet; as he has feigned ones out of my Epistle
of near Five Sheets. But I will not imitate his Trifling. I come now to his
other Book, called, A Seasonable Information, etc: wherein he pretends to set
forth Fifty Perversions, etc. which in his former Sheet he said he had noted in
my Book, most of which are so idle and silly, that he has rendered himself not
ably ridiculous in noting them. But before he comes at them, he suggests, in
his Introduction, that I printed that Book in great disunity, and against the
mind of many Friends, although approved and promoted by a Party equally
prejudiced (he says) against him for his faithful Christian Testimony to the
Truth of Christ. Now Friends, although his Falsehood in this is sufficiently
known to many Friends in London; yet because his Books are usually spread (by
the help of other Separatists) into diverse parts of this Kingdom, as well as
beyond the Seas, I think fit, for the information of all Friends every where,
to let you know how I proceeded therein. After I had written that Book, called,
An Epistle to Friends, I went up to London with it, and presented it to the
Second Days Morning Meeting, where such Writings of Friends, as are intended
for the Press, are to be read and considered. I read it throughout in that
Meeting: And, to the best of my remembrance, there was not one Friend there,
(though the Meeting was pretty full) that showed any disunity therewith, or
made any exception against it; but the Meeting left me to my freedom, for the
publishing thereof, which ye may be sure they would not have done, had they had
disunity therewith. So that I took, (as I conceive) the right way and method,
in publishing that Epistle, and proceeded in the same course, that all Friends
do, who stand in unity with the Body of Friends, when they have any thing to
Print. And though one Friend (who did not hear it read, nor uses to be at that
Meeting) meeting me casually in the Street, after it was in the Press, would
have dissuaded me from printing it at that time; and, as I have heard, one or
two other Friends (who do not use to go to that Meeting neither) when it was
well nigh finished, finding what a heat and fret the report of it had put G. K.
into, did move to have the publication thereof deferred for a while, to see if
they could bring G. K. to a better mind: Yet no Friend, either then, or since,
to this day, has signified to me any disunity with the Book, or with me for
publishing it. But if ^had gone out of the way of unity, in the publishing that
Book, was G. K. of all Men, fit to charge me with it, who himself has not set
one foot therein, in the publishing any of the Pamphlets he has written, since
he came into England, to say nothing here of his other Scandalous Books written
in America? Has he offered any of his late Books to the Judgment of that
Meeting, to which I brought mine, and other Friends bring theirs, and he (I
suppose) formerly, while he stood in Unity with Friends, used to bring his?
Nay, did he not publish his Book, called, The Causless Ground of Surmises, etc.
not only not with, but against the Unity, and against the Judgment even of
those Friends, whom he himself made choice of privately to show it to? But why
give I instances here of his disunion with Friends, of whose Unity with Friends
no instance can be given? I proceed to his Fifty Perversions, etc.

The First is, That I falsely (he says) accuse him (in my Title Page) of a
Spirit of Contention and Division, that (I say) has lately appeared in him,
and some few others that join with him, who have made a Breach and Separation
from Friends in America. That a Spirit of Contention and Division has of late
appeared in him, and some few others that join with him, is a thing so
apparently seen, and known to them that converse with him, or read his late
Contentious Books, that he might, with like modesty, deny the shining of the
Sun at Noon in the clearest Day. And that he and they have made a Breach and
Separation from Friends in America, is so fully proved upon him in my last,
that I am well content to leave it to the Readers Judgment. And whereas he
says, Those, I call some few, are about sixteen Meetings: I say, If that be
true (which I question) his Guilt is the greater, in having misled so many.

His Second Charge he takes out of my ninth Page, where he says, I falsely
accuse him, that he blames Friends, that they were gone too much from the
Outward to the Inward. This he says, is a downright Forgery, and that he never
blamed any for going too much to the inward. But in this he has perverted my
words. For I did not say he blamed Friends for going too much to the Inward,
but for going too much from the Outward to the Inward. The words [too much]
there related to their going from the Outward; which in the following words, I
showed, saying, For G. K 's Complaint and Charge is, That Friends do not preach
the Outward Appearance and Manifestation of Christ in the Flesh enough, or often
enough. I did not say his Complaint was, that they preached the Inward
Appearance of Christ too much; but that they did not preach his Outward
Appearance enough, or often enough. And that he did so, he himself proves in p.
10. of his last Book, where he says, I have blamed some Persons for not rightly
and fully preaching Christ Without, etc. His saying in the same place, that
from my manner of charging him, it plainly appears, as well as from the words
of some others, that it was our sense, To preach Christ without, and Faith in
him, it draws from the inward, etc. is a gross Perversion and false Accusation
in him, as appears from my following words in that ninth page of my former
Epistle, where I say to Friends, Ye know this Charge of his to be false, and
that the Testimony of Truth has always been acknowledged and born by Friends
from the beginning, as occasion has offered, to the Outward Manifestation and
Appearance of Christ, as well as to the Inward.

His Third Charge is, That I falsely and unjustly charge him with Robert Hannay
's Book, as if it were his, both for Matter and Style, and that I cast it upon
him. For this he cunningly quotes my 15th. page, where I say least of it; (for
there I only said, Considering the manner of that Pamphlet's coming forth, the
Matter and Style thereof, and his refusing to disown it, I shall leave it (my
Friends) to your impartial Judgment, whether the Reflections contained in that
Pamphlet against the Yearly Meeting, are not justly to be charged upon him.)
But in my 11th. and 12th. pages, speaking of it, I said, How far G. K. had an
hand, or was concerned, in the Writing of that Book, I will not here say. But I
may say, the matter of the Queries in that Book, is so much the same with the
matter of the other Book published soon after with G. K's Name to it, and the
Style thereof so agreeable to his Style, in that and his other Writings, that
whoever shall take him for the Author of it, will, I think, be very excusable,
though he should prove in part mistaken. And a little after, But in as much as
they are both of a Party, and R. Hannay is at G. K's right Hand in his Work of
Contention and Division, and G. K. (though often put upon it) has not
publicly disowned that Pamphlet, which R. H's Name is to, I do not think I
shall wrong G. K. (as indeed I would not) in supposing him to have at least a
share therein, etc. This was uot directly charging him with it, nor casting it
upon him. Yet I declare, I am more strongly now persuaded that he had the
greatest hand in it, than I was before. For mark but what he now says, p. 10.
As I had no hand in the Printing it, but was against it; so diverse things in
it, that seemed to some most offensive, I was not concerned in. He does not say
he had no hand in the Writing it; but he had no hand in the Printing it (that
is, he did not actually work at the Press;) but was against it, he says; That
proves he was privy to the Printing, how else could he be against it? Next he
says, he was not concerned in diverse things in it; does not that imply he was
concerned in the main? And lastly, the diverse things he says he was not
concerned in, were those that seemed most offensive to some, he does not say
they seemed most offensive to him. See now, whether he has any whit mended the
matter, in clearing himself of being a Party (at least) to that Book, and
consequently guilty of that Insincerity, which in my last I charged upon him.

His Fourth Charge is, That I not only falsely accuse him, but am guilty of an
absolute Forgery and Fiction in matter of Fact, That he refused to go out at
the Yearly Meeting in Philadelphia, held in the Seventh Month, 1691, and that
his refusal to go out was the occasion of their delay to give Judgment against
W. Stockdale, for which, as a proof, I cite his Book, called, Some Reasons and
Causes, etc. p. 14. In this I acknowledge a mistake on my part; not in saying,
he refused to go out at the Yearly Meeting in Philadelphia, (for that I
understand he did:) But my mistake was, in referring to a place in his Book for
Proof of this, when as that place, it seems, related not to that Yearly
Meeting, but to a Quarterly Meeting. In which mistake, I think I am the more
excusable, being led into it by his obscure way of Writing. For neither in that
14th. page of his said Book, called, Some Reasons, etc. (formerly quoted by
me,) Nor in the 18th. page of the same (now quoted by himself) is there any
Day, Month, or Year set, wherein either the Quarterly or Yearly Meeting was
held. And whereas he quotes his 18th. page to prove he did go out as the Yearly
Meeting; there is a Fallacy in that: ^r there being (as he notes) Six Meetings
in (...) time of the Yearly Meeting, he did go out at ^me or one of them, but
refused to go out at the ^st. But he is too eager, in calling this a Forgery an
absolute Forgery and Fiction, a gross Forgery, (so he endeavors to aggravate
it) and that too in matter of Fact. For the matter of Fact is, that he did
refuse to go out of the Meeting, wherein his Charge and Proofs against W.
Stockdale were to be considered of, though he was by the Meeting desired to
withdraw. Whether that Meeting was Yearly, or Quarterly, and on what Day, or in
what Month it was held, or where, are but Circumstances of Time and Place. The
matter of Fact, viz. That he did refuse to go out, at the Meeting's desire, is
true, and proved by his own Confession, not only in the place before quoted by
me (though misapplied there as to the particular Meeting) but even in this last
Book also, p. 11. where he acknowledges his refusal to go out, and gives the
same reason for it, as he gave before in his former. But to make him amends for
my former mistake, I will now put him in mind, that not at that Quarterly
Meeting only, but at another Meeting also, where, it seems, his Complaint was
depending, he refused to go forth, though desired by the Meeting, and that by
his own Confession, in his Book called, Some Reasons, etc. p. 18. to which he
has now referred me, and thereby helped me to this additional Proof against
him. There he brings it in with a Note thus; Note, That whereas it has been
said by some, That they would have dealt with these men, who have been guilty
of those Errors, but that G. K. would not go forth, being desired to withdraw
at the Meeting at R. E's, and at the Quarterly Meeting. To which his Answer is,
That G. K. had good reason not to withdraw at Both these times. This, I hope,
proves the matter of Fact, in both points, both that he refused to withdraw,
though desired, and that at two several Meetings, while his Charge and Proofs
were to have been considered of; and that his so refusing did delay or hinder
the Meeting from dealing (as they otherwise would have done) with those he had
accused. And thus his Charge of Forgery, absolute Forgery, gross Forgery,
double Forgery, with which he has made such a vaunting Flourish, falls to the
Ground. And I might, (if I had his Forehead) recharge him with Forgery, in
saying, I charged him with refusing to go out at the Yearly Meeting in
Philadelphia, held in the Seventh Month 1691. which last words, relating to the
time of it, are not in my Book. But I need no such little Tricks, though he
does.

His Fifth Charge he takes out of p. 22. of mine, where I inferred from the
Judgment given by the Yearly Meeting against W. S. That that Meeting was not at
a stand (as G. K. abusively represents them) to determine whether the Doctrine
was true or false: But, if they were at a stand at all, it was to determine
whether the Charge exhibited by G. K. against W. S. was true or false; W. S.
both then (and to his dying day) denying that he spoke those words, which G. K.
charged him with. This he says, I falsely allege, and that he has fully proved
the contrary, urging for his Proof, that in the Judgment that Meeting gave,
they grant, That Proof was made by Two Witnesses, that the Charge exhibited was
true; and if they had been at a stand on that Point, it is not like that they
would have given any Judgment against him at all. This is ^o Proof at all, that
they were not at a stand and did demur whether the Charge exhibited were true
or no. For though they might have great reason to doubt the Truth of the
Evidence of those two witnesses, who were both known to be strong in Party with
G. K. and great adversaries to W. S. and might thence have just cause to
suspend their Judgment for a while, and take the longer time to examine, sift
and try the matter to the utmost: Yet unless W. S. could have disproved that
Evidence, the Meeting could not well do other than give Judgment according to
the Evidence, though they might not have complete satisfaction of the Veracity
of the Witnesses. For even in worldly Courts (where Justice is to be exceeded
by the Disciples of Christ) Judgment is to be given (Secundum Allegata and
Probata) according to what is alleged and proved; and often is so, where yet
the truth of the Evidence is much doubted, and sometimes wholly disbelived by
the Court that gives it. Here then his hold fails him.

Ye may remember, Friends, that in my former Epistle, p. 20, etc. to manifest
that G. K. quarrelled with that Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia, and published
his Anathema's against them without just cause, I showed from his own Books,
That that Meeting, did not only receive his Charge against W. S. but did give a
determination therein, a Judgment against W. S. Under this I perceive G. K.
lies very uneasy, and would fain cast it off, that he might have some
colorable pretense for his disorderly casting off that Meeting. First, he
cavils at them for not publishing their Judgment till nine Months after. How to
understand that, I cannot well tell: for if, as he says, that Yearly Meeting
was held in the Seventh Month, 1691. it was not 9. Months to the adjourned
monthly Meeting in the Twelth Month 1691. nor full Six neither: And yet it
should seem to have been published before that, because in the Judgment of that
Meeting, this Judgment of the Yearly Meeting was in part recited. Next he finds
fault with the Excuse he says they make for not publishing it sooner, which was
that they were prevented by reason of his unruly Behavior, and extreme
Passion. This he calls a most deceitful pretense. What other Causes of delay
they might have in publishing their Judgment, I know not; but that this was
one, I am the more easily induced to believe, from what I my self observed of
his Unruly behavior, and extreme Passion in our late Yearly Meeting at London,
of which, Friends, many of you were grieved Witnesses, as well as I. He asks,
in the next place, why they contradicted the sound Judgment of a Monthly
Meeting at Philadelphia, passing due Censure upon W. S. Six Months thereafter?
Methinks this does not sound, as if it came from a sound Judgment. Is it proper
to say, that he or they that give a Judgment now, do contradict that Judgment
that shall or may be given by others Six Months hence. If they gave their
Judgment at that Yearly Meeting, near Six Months before the other Judgment (if
that was another) was given, how then can the first be said to contradict the
latter, when the latter was not in being when the First was given. One would
think if there be Contradiction in the two Judgments, the latter should rather
contradict the former. But to speak plain my sense of them, according to what I
have seen of them both, in his Books, I do not find that either of them
contradicts the other; but that the latter Judgment (to wit that of the
adjourned Meeting) reciting, at least in part, the former Judgment of the
Yearly Meeting, does (for ought I see) approve it, and carry it on further. Yet
he says, of that Judgment of the Yearly Meeting, it is Sufficiently apparent
from this (viz. its contradicting, I think he means, the Judgment of the
adjourned Meeting, which had no being till about Six Months after) it was no
cordial, nor Sincere Judgment. But let me ask him, if this was not a sincere
Judgment, but, as he also calls it, Hypocritical, how came it to pass that his
adjourned Meeting, which he celebrates for giving sound Judgment, and says they
gave it Sincerely, not only recited part of this Judgment, but built theirs
upon it? For thus in his Reasons of the Separation p. 11. he has delivered
their Judgment to us. Whereas W. -- having formerly accused G. K. with
preaching two Christ's, and the Charge and matter having been fully debated at
the last Yearly Meeting, before public Friends, and others, who did deliver it
as their Sense and Judgment, that the said W. -- had abused G. K. thereby, and
that G. K's. Doctrine was right and true in his preaching Faith in Christ
within, and Faith in Christ without, etc. See here the Basis upon which they
build their Judgment. Would they build their Judgment upon an insincere,
hypocritical Judgment, methinks it should not become G. K. to fasten such a
foul Blemish upon his adjourned Meeting, which he Praises so highly for giving
sound Judgment, and that sincerely. Another Objection he makes against that
Yearly Meeting, that they did not all that time intervening, bring W. S. to any
Conviction, but mightily supported him as an innocent Person. Can any one
believe this, viz. that they mightily supported him as an innocent Person, who
at the same time shall read in G. K's own Books, that they delivered it as
their Sense and Judgment, that he had abused G. K. and that he was reproveable
and blameworthy, etc? But as for G. K's. saying, They did not bring W. S. to
any Conviction (which he very often repeats) I know not well what to make of
it. I know he understands Words well enough, when he is cool: Which makes me
question whether his Heat has not transported him beyond his understanding. If
he means that they did not bring him to an inward Sense, and Conviction in
himself, that he had done or said Evil, they cannot be justly blamed for that,
since that is not in the power of Man to do, and if W. S. knew himself innocent
(as, it seems, to the last, he affirmed he was) it was not possible they could
bring him to such a Conviction; nor do I find, the sound Judgment, as G. K.
calls it, of the adjourned Meeting (how sincerely soever given) wrought that
Effect on him, any more than the Judgment of the Yearly Meeting had done. But
if he means by Conviction, (according to the usual acceptance of the Word,
especially in Judicial Proceedings,) a proving him guilty by the Evidence of
Witnesses, it is to be hoped, they brought him to some sort of Conviction that
way, before they gave Sentence of Condemnation upon him; nay, it appears by G.
K's own Book they did. Yet G. K. says, they did not bring him to any
Conviction. G. K. will needs have it, that the determination given by the
Yearly Meeting against W. S. was not sincere: Yet because he cannot make it
out, he first begs the Question, and then offers a precarious Proof. Thus he
does it, in answer to my saying, A Determination then, it seems, was given, by
his own acknowledgment. I answer, says he, seeing it was not sincere, but
hypocritical (there he begs the Question:) as appears, says he, by their
contradicting the Judgment of the Monthly Meeting that gave it sincerely and
duly. (There Is his precarious Proof.) But first, how does it appear that the
Yearly Meeting, (about Six Months before the Monthly Meeting, as he calls it,
gave any Judgment at all) contradicted the Judgment which that Meeting gave
near Six Months after? Secondly, how does it appear that his Monthly Meeting
gave their Judgment sincerely and duly? Why, Ipse Tixit, he has affirmed it;
and they that will believe it may: But the best on it is, they that will not
believe it, upon his bare word, may choose, and I know not how he will help
himself. But is it not strange, that so strong a Man should argue so weakly? He
repeats also, the Yearly Meeting's publishing their Judgment Nine Months after,
and he thereupon calls it an Abortive, out of due time. But I doubt the Women,
that read that, will smile at him, for calling a Birth of Nine Months, an
Abortive. He objects also, p. 12. that when they published it, they did not own
the words spoken to be any offense against God, or Christ, but to sound and
tender Friends. But if this was so great an offense in the Yearly Meeting, what
will he say for his Adjourned Meeting, who in their Judgment, as he has given
it, do not own (to use his own word, I should else have said declare) the words
spoken by W. S. to be any offense against God, or Christ, or to sound or tender
Friends either. So that they went not so far in expressing the offense, as the
Yearly Meeting did, and yet he calls theirs a sound Judgment, and given
sincerely. But where is the soundness of his Judgment, and his sincerity the
mean while?

His Sixth Charge against me is thus worded. He falsely and most fictitiously
alleges, That Tho. Fitzwater sufficiently proved his Charge against me, for
which he refers to my own Books; but this is a great Forgery, for his Charge
was, That I denied the sufficiency of the Light, and this his Four Credible
Witnesses did not prove against me, but it was quite another thing that the
Monthly Meeting of the other side alleges, they proved against me, viz. That
I did not believe the Light was sufficient without something else. Where Is the
great Forgery here? If there be any, it will lie at his Door, for reporting me
to have alleged that T. Fitzwater sufficiently proved his Charge, etc. whereas
my words are, It seems T. F. sufficiently proved the words he charged G. K.
with speaking, and so I think it will seem to any one that considers the words
charged, and the words proved. The words charged were, That he denied the
sufficiency of the Light: The words proved were, that he did not believe the
Light was sufficient without something else: And these last words, he says, is
quite another thing than the former; so that according to him, not sufficient
without something else, is quite another thing than, not sufficient. But I
think it will be hard for him to make that sufficiently out. Nor does the
asserting the sufficiency of the Light, exclude (as he would fallaciously
infer) the Man Christ without us: For the Man Christ without us, in his
glorified state, in which he is united with the Godhead, is Light. And though
G. K. to compass his Design, does cunningly slide in the word within; yet he
knows it was not in the words charged, nor in the words proved: The Charge was,
That he denied the sufficiency of the Light. The Proof was, that he did not
believe the Light was sufficient without something else. Here was the Light
mentioned indefinitely; not a word of within: And therefore he does not fairly,
nor like a Disputant, to thrust it in afterward. His charging me with
excluding the Man Christ without us, is an abuse; and his telling me of Ieffery
Bullock, an idle Bugbear. He has cleared me himself, beyond what he is able to
asperse me with, by Citing those Passages out of a former Book of mine, called,
The Foundation of Tithes shaken, p. 238. where, in answer to my Opponent, a
Priest, that had in Print affirmed, That some Quakers (slighting the Merit and
Necessity of Christ's Death) ascribe Salvation to the following the Light
within; I rejected his Charge, and in the Name of the Quakers denied it;
putting him to Name those Quakers, and solemnly declaring I knew no such. Then
added, Nor do the Quakers ascribe Salvation to the following the Light within,
but they ascribe Salvation to Christ Jesus, to whom the Light within does lead
those that truly follow it. And in p. 240. I said, If any one expects Remission
of Sins by any other way than the Death of Christ, he renders the Death of
Christ useless. These Passages G. K. has now Cited, in his Seasonable
Information, p. 12. and that with approbation, (save only that he would have
the word Only added to the Light within; which, to gratify him, I am content
to do, thereby expressing what was before implied:) And as this was my Judgment
and Testimony then; so it is now: Which sufficiently clears me from his
slanderous Suggestion, that I exclude the Man Christ without us, from having
any part or concern in our Salvation. And truly, Friends, by his thus dealing
with me, I have a great guess at his way of dealing with Friends in America,
and after what manner he has gathered up the gross and vile Errors, and
Damnable Heresies, and Doctrines of Devils he so liberally charges them with;
and so I hope will ye too, upon the reading of this.

I hope, Friends, I have cleared this Point to your Satisfa^on, and made it
appear, by what the Yea^y Meeting did in hearing G. K's. Complaint and Charge
against W. S. and in giving Ju^gment, according to Evidence, in the Case both
of W. S. and T. F. George Keith had no just Cause or ^und to Anathematize that
Meeting, and Write and Print against it, in that reproachful manner he has
done, to the dishonor of Truth, and sc^al of his Profession, the Guilt of w^ch
ly^s upon him, and will lie on him till he repent thereof.

In his Seventh Charge he says, I falsely allege, that ^e (...) the ^eginning
of the Separation at Ph^delphia, from somes going away at the Monthly Meeti^,
the Day before the Adjourned Meeting; and upon the Foundation of Forgery (so he
calls it) I build, he says, a false super-structure; for though (says he) some
going a^ay from that Monthly Meeting, was (...) preparation to the Separation,
yet I did not recko^ ^t the beginning of it, but their going away at the
Adjourned Meeting the next Day following; where (he says) three great Instances
of their beginning ^he Separation, appeared. First, Their disow^ing the
Meeti^g. Secondly, Upon that Foundation, their going away. Thirdly, Their
denying the Judgment of that Me^ting to be a true Meeti^g, and ref^sing to
suffer it to be recorded. In this he has dealt unfairly with me. For he charges
me with saying, That he accounts the beginning of the Separation at
Philadelphia, from fomes going away at the Monthly Meeting, the Day before the
Adjourned Meeting; and there he stops (as if I had made him to account that
only, the beginning of the Sepa^tion)* and then (...) this a Foundation of
Forgery. When I joi^ that, and the Quarterly M^ting's denying the ^djourned
Meeting to be a (...) Monthly Meeti^g, ^gether, saying thu^, (as (...)* ^ay se^
i^* (...)* 23. (not 25. as he quote^ it) of my (...)*) I remember indeed, he
a^ged (in (...) Yearly Meeting at, London) Tha^ at a Monthly M^eting in
Philadelphia, T. Lloyd ^nt a^* and took away a Ski^t, or Wi^g (a^ h^ (...) it)
of the Meeting with him; and that tha^ ^eeting afterward Adjourning it self to
another Time and Pl^ce, wa^ denied by the ^terly Meeting to be a right (...)*
(...); and this (said I there) he (...) have taken f^ ^e beginning of the
Separation. The; ^t only so^ going away from the* Monthl^ ^eeting before the
Adjourn^t, but the denying the Adjourned Meeting to be a right Monthly M^eting:
And he himself gives that now (as he did the other also, in his r^lation of it
at t^ ^rly Meeting, though he now disowns it) among his three great Instances
of their beginni^ the Separation, viz. Their disowning the ^eeting* their
denying the Judgment of that M^ting, and (...) to suffer it to be Re^orded.
(For as for his saying, Their denying the Judgment of that Meeting to be a true
Meeting, I have not Judgment enongh to make common sen^ of it: For I under^and
not how the Judgment of a Meeting can be said to be a Meeting.) He ^ys, But,
that the Meeting could not Adjourn, because the Book and the Clark was gone, is
so ridiculous, that it is not worth mentioning; though that is the chief, or
rather the only Reason given by T. E. Shall I call this a Forgery, or a
Pe^sion* I am sure it is a foul one, which soever it be. For I no where said,
The Meeting could not ad^ourn, because the Book and the Clark was g^ne. I no
where gave that as the only, or as any Reason, why the Meeting could not
adjourn. But I ^ged the Clark's being gone with the M^ing Book, before the
adjournment was made* (...) that not in an abrupt manner, or by way (...)
^reach or Disunion, which I argued from his not being reproved, or blamed for
it afterwar^ by the M^eting) as an Argument that the Meeting was really ended
before that Adjournment ^as made, and that consequently that Adjornment ^s
irregul^r, and without Authority. F^ds, this is a main point: For upon that
Adjournment depends much of the open Breach that followed. Therefore this had
need be well heeded. In my former Epistle, I handled this Point pretty largely,
because I knew there lay much weight upon it. G. K. in his Answer has well ^igh
waved it all, at least the most pressing parts of it: Which shows his Weakness.
I shall therefore r^n over agaiu here, some part of what I said on this Subject
before, that it may appear how short his Answer is, and that his strength lies
more in a sort of Sophistical Arguing, and quibbling on words, than in
substantial and solid Reasoning.

I urged in my former Epistle, p. 26. the Clark's going away with the Meeting
Book, (as well as some others of the Meeting) as an Argument that the Me^ting
was regularly ended before the Adjournment was made. To this he gives no
Answer. But fallaciously slips from this to another thing; crying out, It is
ridiculous to say that the Meeting could not adjourn because the Book and the
Clark was gone, and that this is the chief, or rather only Reason given by me.
I have showed this to be false. But what is this to the purpose? The Question is
not whether the Meeting could adjourn while it was a Meeting: But whether it
was a Meeting, when the Adjournment was made? Or whether it was not ended and
broken up before. I observed that G. K. himself spoke of it doubtfully and with
reserve. He did not say the Meeting was not broke up before the Adjournment:
but that it was not understood to be broke up before the Adjournment. He says
nothing to clear this. Part of the Meeting he says was gone. What made them go,
before the Meeting was ended? The Reason he gave is, its being col^ Weather,
and growing dark. But among thos^ that went away the Clark of the Meeting it
seem^ was one, and he took the Meeting's Book wit^ him. If some few would take
the liberty to ris^ and go away before the Meeting was ended, be^cause it was
cold and grew dark, is it reasona^ble to think that that would have induced the
Clark of the Meeting to have gone away to^ and carried the Meeting's Book away
with hi^ in which the Proceedings of the Meeting should be recorded, before the
Meeting was ended* Or have excused him if he had? Would a^ Meeting suffer that
in a Clark, without (...) Believe it that can. And let G. K. clear hi^ self
fairly of this, if he can. Till then, I sha^ take it for certain, that that
Monthly Meeti^ was ended and broken up, part of the Friends gone away, the
Clark gone, the Book in which the Proceedings of the Meeting should be recorded
gone, before the Adjournment was made, and consequently that Adjournment not
good, but invalid. And if so, then neither those Friends that denied the
Meeting, held next day at the School-house upon that Adjournment, to be a right
Monthly Meeting; nor the Quarterly Meeting, which afterward refused to record
in their book the Acts of that Meeting, held on that Adjournment, did thereby
begin the Separation, or give the others any just cause to separate. Diverse
other Passages in the 26, and 27. pages of my former Epistle, tending to prove,
that not Friends, but G. K. and his Party begun the Separation, he takes no
notice of; but carps at a word, to wind himself off by, that he might get clear
of this matter. I had said before, Truly the time, manner and Circumstances of
that Adjournment considered, it seems to me that this was an irregular Meeting,
surreptitiously obtained, to serve a private end. This he makes his Eight
Charge, thus.

He falsely alleges that, the Meeting Adjourned, was surrepti^ously obtained,
which he grounds on a Forgery or Fiction of his own devising, as if Twenty Nine
of them might be loose or raw Persons. Is it a Forgery or Fiction to say they
might be loose or raw Persons? I did not say they were; and I gave the Reasons
that induced me to think they might be such, which I had from himself. For when
I had said, It seems to me, this was an irregular Meeting, surreptitiously
^btained, to serve a private end; I added, and the rather for that I observe,
when he sets forth (to grace it) the Number of them that met upon that
Adjournment, consisting of (he says) at least Sixty Persons, he adds (which as
much disgraces it) Most of which us^ to keep Monthly Meetings. So that Twenty
Nine of those Sixty might be raw or loose Persons, brought in to do a Job, or
serve a Turn: And that they were so, I am the more induced to think, from his
giving the Names of some of them, but not of them all. This makes it plain,
that I did not ground my saying, on a Forgery or Fiction of my own d^sing; but
upon the Account himself ^ad given of the Persons, viz. That being in (...) of
Sixty, most of them used to keep Monthly Meetings, which might be true, though
Twenty Nine of the Sixty were raw or loose Persons. But since that Adjourned
Meeting was designed for such an extraordinary service, as to give forth three
Judgments (which it seems they did) why should some be brought to help make up
that Meeting, who did not use to keep Monthly Meetings before; unless it were
to serve a T^? And why should he undertake to give a List of the Names of some
of them, and not of them all, but that he too well kn^w there were too many raw
or loose Persons among them?

But from my ^ng the Words, Surreptitiously obtained, he takes occasion to slip
aside again from the matter, and says, I may much more justly say, his
scandalous Book is surreptitiously come out in print, being contrary to the
mind of many Friends, and to Gospel Order, professed by himself, and all
professed Friends, viz. That none expose another in print, or print against
another, till he be disowned by the Meeting to whom he belongs, after a fair
Trial had. Whether my Book came out surreptitiously. I leave to you, Friends,
to judge, from the Account I have herein given before, of the manner of its
coming forth. And as to his complaint of want of Gospel Order, I desire you to
consider, that before my Book was written, he had refused to hear the Church,
not only in America, (where he was openly and judicially denied) but here also,
in not following the advice and counsel thereof. And truly I think, the Church
would be in but an ill condition, if one, under ^tence and protection of
Membership, might be imboldned to throw dirt upon her, and another of her
Members might not have the liberty to endeavor at least to wipe it off. But
since he urges that Order. That none expose another in print, or print against
another, till he be disowned by the Meeting to whom he belongs, etc. let me ask
him; Why he has exposed me in print, or printed against me, who am not disowned
by the Meeting to which I belong? And what Gospel Order has he given to either
the Yearly Meeting, or the Second Day's Morning Meeting, before he exposed them
in Print? He says, It has not been in the least intimated to him, that any
Meeting in London, where he now lives, has denied him. By this it seems as if
he expected to be as often denied as he removes his seat. What if a Meeting in
London had denied him, and he should thereupon remove to Bristol, and from
thence to York? Would not his having been denied in London serve his Turn,
unless he were in like manner denied again in each of the other Places also?
But what need was there that any Meeting in London should intimate to him their
denial of him, who has cut off himself from friends, by open Separation, and
denied both the Yearly and Second Day's Morning Meeting in London? Besides he
has set up his Standard, Proclaimed War, begun it in America, transferred it
hither, and, is eagerly carrying it on here; And he knows the saying, Inter
arma silent leges. Can he reasonably expect the exactne^ of Proceeding by
Gospel Order against him, when he has m^e open War against Friends without
^spel Order? He says, But I printed nothing ^nst any in America, till Gospel
Order was given t^r, and was rejected by them. I do not believe this to be
true: He has exposed in Print a great number of Friends by name in America: Yet
I don't remember to have read in his Book, that any of them were complained of
to the Meetings to which they belonged, but W. S. and T. F. Therefore I have
reason to think they were not. Let him show what Gospel Order all ^hey
severally had, whose names he has exposed in Print.

His Ninth Charge is not only ^meer Cavil, but I take it to be done with
design, as well as the former, thereby to disjoynt the Account of the
Separation, which I had connected, that he may confound his Reader. He grounds
this Cavil upon an hi^t I gave (and that but in a Parenthesis) that speaking of
a Monthly Meeting in the First Month last, he set no Year either when that was,
or when his Book was Printed, as there is scarce to any of his late Printed
things, which re^ders him and his works more obscure. This he says, I falsely
allege, and that the contrary is to be seen, in his Book, quoting p. 19. (of
his Reasons and Causes, etc.) But the mention he made of the Monthly Meeting in
the First Month last, was not in p. 19. but in p. 15. of that Book. So that I
must have hunted from p. 15. to 19. if I would have sought it; And yet I should
not have found it there neither: For indeed it is not there, nor any where else
in his Book, that I can find. He says, He shows in that Nin^nth page, that the
Monthly Meeting that gave ^gment against W. S. and T. F. was the Twenty Seventh
of the Twelfth Month. 1691. And in that he ^ys true. He adds; And it plainly
appears from my Book, that the Monthly Meeting in the First Month last (there
mentioned) was in the next Month following, in the Year 1692. And in that he
says False; no such thing appearing plainly, or at all. Now he refers from p.
19. to p. 27. where; he says, that very Year is mentioned. And so indeed it is,
but not as relating to the Meeting in the First Month last, but as the ^are of
a Letter, Written the 15th. of the Third Month, 1692. without any mention of
the Meeting in the First Month last. That First Month last must be the First
Month next before the Book, in which it is mentioned, was Printed. For the date
of the Book therefore I searched, both in the Title page, and at the End: But
it does not appear by the Book it self, either in what Year, at what Place, or
by whom it was Printed. I gave but a transient hint before, of his obscure way
of Writing, not intending to insist on it. But since he takes that light
Correction so impatiently, it is fit, I think he should have more, since more is
due to him. Therefore, I now add, That his Book called, The Plea of the (...),
etc. His Book called, Truth and Innocence defended, etc. His Book called, A
Testim^ against that false and absurd Opinion, etc. His loving Epistle, (as it
came out at (...), distinct from his Seasonable Information, to which it is now
stitched) none of these have the Year when, the Place where, or the name of the
Printer by whom they were Printed, as other Men's Books usually have. By this it
appears, that it was not without (...) I gave him that gentle R^ before, (which
he had better have ^orn, than have given O^ (...) ^ser R^ to follow,) but that
he had no ca^ to charge me with dealing f^lsly by him in it. Why he should
choose (for, in so many Instances, it look^ more like Choice, than Chance,) to
conceal the dates of his Book^, I cannot tell; (...) it were, that from the
Incertainty that arises from such an obscure way of Writing, he might ha^ly
catch his Answerer upon some mist^ in point of time, (as he did me about the
Yearly Meeting) and thence both take the adva^ to insult over him, and withal
avoid his Argument.

In his Tenth C^ge, He Vaunts: himself over my Ignorance, saying, I most ^ersly
and Ignorantly allege (by a sort of Argument that is so silly and weak, that
scarce an Ordinary Schoolboy wo^d use it, suppose him to mean One of his own
instructing) That if that Act of T. L's. (viz. says G. K. his withdrawing from
the Monthly Meeting adjourned where I begin it: But say I, his withdrawing from
the Monthly Meeting before that adj^rnment, where G. K. did formerly begin it)
was the Cause of the Sep^ration, ^en it would not be the Separation it self:
But the Separation must come after this, ^s this Effect follows ^he ^use. This
(that the Effect follows the Cause) he (...) ridiculously weak: And thereupon
reminds me of the advice he gave me in the Yearly Meeting, to beware of falling
into the (...) of that called Philosophy. If that called Philosophy be a Ditch,
I confess, I have no mind to fall into it. For if it be a Ditch, I doubt it is a
(...) one, because he who has walked so long in si^, drops so much Di^ from his
Pen.

And si^, F^ ^st vel (...) host doc^ri (it is L^ful (...) l^rn even of an
Enemy) I am content to learn by another's harm to beware, and not venture* too
far into his Ditch, left he bring an Action of Intrusion against me, for,
ent^ing, against his mind, upon his Possession, the! Ditch of that called
Philosophy. Yet let him give me leave to put him in mind (for I doubt not but
he knows it already) that Omnis Caus^ est prior suo effect^ (every Cause is
before it is Effect) and Effectus non est. Causa (the Effect is not the Cause)
are true Rules in that Philosophy, which is not a Ditch. But, Friends,
(whatever his Logicians or Schoolmen, as he says, teach; who are not always in
the right, as he is often in the wrong) when I argued, that if that Act of T.
Lloyd's going out of the Monthly Meeting, and taking away a Wing or Skirt of
the Meeting with him (which G. K. said he did) was the Cause of the Separation,
then it could not be the Separation it self: But the Separation must come after
this, as the Effect follows the Cause: I suppose I spoke to your Understanding,
and that ye will not be easily per^ded by his Logicians, or Schoolmen, or
himself either to put the Cart before the House, or the Effect before (...)
Cause. But however Ignorant I was, what Forgery, Perversion, or false
Accusation was there in this?

His Eleventh Charge, is, That I falsely allege, that the Change of the Meeting
in Philadelphia, from the Bank to the Cent^, was in Course. This, says, he, I
prove to be false and a Fiction, because, at the time of the Course of* (...)
was not yet (...), nor did come either so soon before or after, so T^l. put it
to a vote, by giving a sign, whether it should he ^ved or not, etc. This Proof
of his consists in two things. First; That the ti^ ^f the Course of it (that is
of its being removed in Course) was not yet come.

This Objection I remember he made in the Yearly Meeting at London, and it was
there Answered, and I took notice of both the Objection and Answer in my former
Epistle, p. 31. thus, I remember indeed (which I would here note) G. K. did
object, That the Meeting was removed that Year somewhat earlier, than it had
been some other Year's. But to that it was replied, by the Friends of
Pensilvania then present, that there was no certain day prefixed and settled
for the removing thereof; but it was either earlier or later in the Year,
according as the Seasons of the Year proved fair or foul for weather. This
plain and full Answer to his Objection G. K. takes no notice of; but urges
afresh, that the time of the Course of changing the Meeting was not yet come,
as a Proof that my saying it was changed in Course is False and a Fiction. But
this stands still in his way, and he must remove this, before he can get
forward. He must prove that there was a prefixed day for the removing of the
Meeting, and that Friends removed it before that fixed day was come, e're his
Proof will stand him in any stead. However, Friends, I hope ye will take
notice, that by his saying, The time of the Course of it was not yet come, nor
did come either so soon before or after, he grants the Meeting had a Course of
Removing, and that both before and after. See now how unfair he was, to charge
Friends there with assuming a Power to change the Meetings, when the Meetings
were, by his own acknowledgment, to be changed in Course. And judge whether the
Friends removing the Meeting from one House to the other, as it used in Course
to be, either was an Act of Separation in them, or could be a just ground to G.
K. and his Party, to separate from them. The other part of his Proof, that my
saying the Meeting was changed in Course is False, and a Fiction, is, that T.
L. put it to the vote, by giving a sign, whether it should be removed or not.
But this is so far from being a Proof, that it self wants a Proof, and may be
false and a Fiction, for ought appears: For he gives it but upon the credit of
his own word.

In my 32, and 33, pages, I showed, that not the Friends, in removing the
Meeting of Course; but he and his, in keeping a Meeting at the Bank out of
Course, when the Meeting was in Course removed, made and begun the Separation.
It had concerned him to have Answered this, and cleared himself of it (and so
no doubt he would if he could) but he takes no ^ice of it* but slips away to
where I mentioned, Thomas Wilson's Evidence, and charges me with perverting T.
W's. words.

This is his Twelfth Charge. Now T. W's. Evidence was, that, having asked G. K.
What end he thought the Friends had in removing that Meeting, G. K. said, he
believed they did to force h^ to Meet with them. This says G. K. proves the
they that used that force toward me, were guilty of the Separation. But how
proves he that any did use sorce, or intended to use force toward him? The
Friends did not say so; T. Wilson did not say so: 'Twas only he himself said he
believed they did it to force him to Meet with them. But his believing so (if
he did really believe so) does not prove it was so. But if he did believe so,
he was (as I observed in my former) the more to be blamed, in urging the
removing of that Meeting as an Instance, or Proof, that the Friends began the
Separation: For to separate themselves from him, and to force him to Meet with
them, are contrary enough. But where is his Proof that I have perverted Tho.
Wilson's Words, which he himself takes as I laid them down, without
contradicting them; yea and argues from them, though perversely and falsely?

His Thirteenth Charge he calls, My Perversion, in Charging him for having a
Private Family Meeting at his House, etc. Upon this he runs out, as far as to
the Act of Parliament that allows five besides the Family to meet. And infers,
that by my Sentiment, Men must not instruct their Families, nor pray in their
Families, without authority and appointment of the Men's Meeting, or if they do,
they must let none other be present. All this is but empty noise raised
artificially to amuse his Reader. He gave the occasion for my taking notice of
his Family Meeting, by ^ing proposed the quite laying aside the After^s
Meeting, that Friends had allways held, and setting up private Family Meetings
in the room of it. And because that Proposition did not take, (the Friends
would not loose their Meeting so) he thereupon, when the Meeting was removed
from the Bank to the Center, set up an Evening Meeting in his Family, which
being done in a Spirit of contention, opposition and division, was the same in
nature and ground with his other open separate Meetings. This he seemed to be
sensible of himself, and therefore to obviate the Objection that he saw might
be made, he said in his Reasons of the Separation, p. 15. That could be counted
no Separate Meeting for that day. This led me to say, As he gives no Account by
whose appointment, or what Authority that Meeting was held: So he offers no
reason why it could not be accounted a Separate Meeting; nor do I think,
indeed, that he can give any. For though M^n may instruct their Families, and
pray in their Families (being rightly moved thereunto) yet a private Meeting in
a Family, set up in Opposition to public Meetings, and in Disunion to Friends,
is as really a Separate Meeting, as the openly Separate Meetings are.

He says, My Clamor about their Meeting at the Barbados- House, is idle and
impertinent. So he is willing to turn off any thing that he cannot answer. But
it is so pertinent, that it fastens the Separation upon him and his Party so
close, that he cannot shake it off. He says, We met not there till they had
separated themselves from us, and denied the Monthly Meeting. This is but a
b^gging of the Question, in both parts of it; which (...) were not hard beset,
such a Man a^ he would not have done. That the Friends, in removing the Meeting
from the Bank to the Center, did separate themselves from him and his Party, is
denied. That the Meeting which the Friends denied, and whose Acts the Quarterly
Meeting refused to Record, was a rightly constituted Monthly Meeting, is
denied. These are main Points, which he ought to have proved: But not being
able to do that, he begs them; too meanly for him. But what can a Man do,
though his Abilities be great, when his Cause is not good? He adds, Besides
that, they not only threatened to keep (...) out at the Bank Meeting, but most
rudely abused us when we met in it, always, interrupting any of us that spoke,
though we never interrupted them, I perceive by this he cannot say they were
kept out at the Bank Meeting: The highest he goes, is, that they were threatened
to be kept out; and for the Truth of that, we have but his word. But it is a
known Truth (which I suppose himself is not ignorant of) that Friends in
England have been actually kept out of their Meetinghouses by those
Separatists, whom he is now fallen in with. As for what he says of being rudely
abused, they must be rudely abusive indeed, that could exceed him that way. He
adds, And at last sending some, by their Magistratical Authority, with Saws and
Axes to knock down our Gallery, (...) they were prevented by some that knocked
down both the one and the other, which (says he) I had to hand in, directly nor
indirectly, (could he not have said, but only looked on, and laughed for Joy?)
Here he mentions Our Gallery; so that it seems, while he met in the same Room
with Friends, he had a sort of separate Meeting even there, and a separate
Gallery for himself and some of his Party, in opposition to the Gallery the
Ministering Friends used to sit in. He should have done well to have told how
that Gallery of his came to be set up, and when. This brings to mind something
I have read at the Yearly Meeting, concerning this Gallery-work; and to the
best of my remembrance it was to this Purpose, That after G. K. had broken out
into open Opposition in Friends Meetings, and a little before he went quite off
from them, being uneasy in sitting in the same Gallery with Friends, his
Followers set up a new Gallery for him, on the other side the Room, over
against the old Gallery; and this was done privately and suddenly. But when it
was known, and known to be done without the Consent of the Meeting, or of those
particular Friends who were the Trustees for the Meeting House, two of the
Trustees went in a peaceable manner, to take it down again: W^ that they might
proceed therein by Joint-co^sent, called Robert Turner, (who also was one (...)
the Trustees) to go with them. But when (...) came into the Meeting House, R.
Turner, i^ of taking down the New Gallery, striking (...) a transient stroke
upon, that, went to the (...) Gallery of Friends, and fell with that fury up^
that, that having gotten suitable assistance, the cut and tore down the Posts,
Rails, Seat, (...) and Bottom of i^, laying it level with the (...) of the
Meeting House G. K. looking (...), (...) showing h^ great satisfaction and Joy,
b^ (...) ing at it. This is that R. Turner, who was (...) man in Signing the
Judgment given at the ^rate. Meeting in. (...) on behalf of (...) But that the
Trustees, who went to take (...) that Now Gallery, were sent (as G. K. (...))
by Magistratical Authority, does ^ot appear.

That which he calls my Fourteenth Perversion, is, That (...) assumed, a Power
to alter, c^, change, and set up Meetings (...) be pleased. This he calls both
a Perversion and ^orgery (for he is very liberal of those. Terms) and he says,
The Foundation of it is, by my own Confession, (...) he declared his sense, by
way of Proposition. That it were good to have but one public Meeting on First
Days, and the remaining part to be used in private Families. (He should have
said for private Meetings in Families: For so he said before; and that was it
he would have been at.) Now, Reader, (says he) judge what Ground he had from
(...) simple Christian Proposition, to invent this Forg^y. Nay, stay Reader,
and before thou judge, let me show thee, if thou have not already read it,
what Grounds I had, and gave in my former Epistle, for charging him that he and
his (...) would have assumed a Power to alter, (...), change, a^pomt, pull
down, set up Meetings as they pleased. First, I showed, p. 35: T^ would have
pulled down the public Afternoons ^ing, and ^d it quite aside; next, That they
(...) have set up private Meetings in Families, ins^ thereof. Thirdly, Their
setting up a new Aft^ Meeting of their own heads. And whereas (...) his
declaring his sense, that it were good to (...) out one public Meeting on
First Days, etc. was by ^ay of Proposition; and, to pa^iate the matter, (...)
his simple Christian Proposition. I say it went (...) a Proposition. He
declared not only his Sense, but his Int^n. Some of us (says he, (...). (...).
(...) his Reason of the Separation) did declare ou^ sincere In^ion and Sense;
as much as to ^ay. It is our Sense, that it were good to have but one public
Meeting on First Days, and me ^ntend to have but one. It is our Sense that the
remaining part of the Day should be used for private Meetings in Familles; and
we intend to do so. This is confirmed by their Practice, which was pursuant to
this their Intention. For as it was their declared Intention and Sense, (for I
think their Intention went before their Sense) that it were good to have but
one public Meeting on First Days: So, when they found that Friends would not
let fall their Afternoons Meeting, he and his Party stuck to their own
Intention, and withdrew from it, keeping but one public Meeting on that Day.
As they had declared their Intention and Sense, that the remaining part of the
Day should be used for private Meetings in Families: So when Friends would not
change their public for his private Family-meetings, he and his Party stuck to
their own Intention, and held a private Family-meeting in his House. (Some of
us met, says he, as a private Family-meeting in the Evening, at the House of G.
K. p. 15.) And after all this, when he saw that private Family-meetings would
not do; he with his Party, assumed a Power to set up, and did set up, a new
public Afternoons Meeting. (Their ^eeping up, says he, their public
Afternoons Meeting, has given us just occasion at present to have a public
Afternoons Meeting, as well as they, p. 16.) Now Reader, judge and (...) not,
whether I had not good Ground to say he and his Party would have assumed a
Power, to alter, chop, change, appo, pull down, set up Meetings, as they
pleased; and whether, he had any just Cause from thence, to charge me with
Perversion and Forgery.

His Fifteenth Instance of my perverting his Words, that because he said, It
was good to have but one public Meeting on First Days, I (he says) thereby
inferred that it was not good, according to his Sense, but evil, to have two
public Meetings on First Days, and that therefore to keep two was against his
Conscience. I did not say against his Conscience, but against his declared
Intention and Sense. What that was I know: But what his Conscience is I don't
know. But be it what it will, I think I made appear that in his setting up his
Afternoons Meeting, in opposition to the Ancient Meeting of Friends, and
contrary to his beforedeclared Intention and Sense, he went not upon a sincere,
godly, conscientious Ground, respecting the Honor of God, the Propagation of
Truth, the Edification and Benefit of the Church: But a Political, Popular,
worldly Ground, respecting his own Reputation and Honor, that he, and they
with him, might not be thought less Zealous, than the Friends they had
separated from, etc. which was fairly deduced from the reason he gave for his
setting up that Meeting, viz. Their keeping up their public Afternoons
Meeting, has given us just occasion at present to have a public Afternoons
Meeting as well as they, for we hope they shall not have cause to say against
us, that we are short of them in our Zeal for good Meetings This, in the 37th.
page of my Epistle, I quoted out of his Reasons of the Separation, p. 16. and
argued largely on it; which he has not answered: As indeed he seldom does any
thing that is Argumentative; but catches at words, and quibbles on them. Thus
what I offered in p. 38. to show, from his saying, That the Separation was well
warranted both by Scripture-Testimony and Command of Christ, etc. That he took
the Separation upon himself, because it would be (as I there argued) an
apparent Self-condemnation in him to say, the Friends had separated from him,
and that their so separating was well-warranted by Scripture and Command of
Christ. This, I say, he skips lightly over; and catches at another Quotation I
gave out of him, wherein he charges me with Perversion and Forgery, but without
cause.

This he assigns for my Sixteenth Perversion, saying, That in laboring to cast
the Separation on him, by writing some of his words, I leave out a material
Clause in the Sentence that clears him; the whole Sentence being this, Now
the Scriptures that warrant us in this Separation, (although, as is said, first
made by them) are these following, etc. The words [altho', as is said, first
made by them] which (he says) clear him fully, that he did not take the
Separation on him, he says, I fraudulently leave out. But in this he deals
fraudulently with me, and with his Reader. For the Inference I made from those
words of his, viz. [the Scriptures that warrant us in this Separation] was not
so much designed to prove he began the Separation, as that he is in it. I had
proved just before, from his saying, [This Separation was well-warranted, etc.]
that he began it, or took it upon himself. And by his after words, I showed
that he was in it. The Scriptures that warrant us (says he) in this Separation.
There I stopped with an etc. to show that was not all the Sentence. Then making
my Inference thus, This is a sufficient Warrant sure to lay the Separation at
his Door; for here is a plain acknowledgment that he is in it, I added (to have
prevented this Cavil) though he Idly pretends that others began it. And this, I
think will show that he idly charges this as a Perversion and Forgery on me.

In his Seventeenth, he quibbles on the words Separate and Separation, only to
amuze and puzzle his Reader. I had quoted another passage of his, to show he
had taken (though perhaps, unwittingly) the Separation upon him. It was this;
We are convinced and persuaded in our Consciences, that God calls us to
separate from such unbelievers, (so he branded Friends there.) Hereupon I said,
This sure is a full proof, not only that they are in the Separation, but that
they began it: For if the Friends (whom he calls unbelievers) had first
separated from them, then how could he say God called them to separate from the
unbelievers, when the unbelievers (in his sense) had separated from them
before. And carrying on my Argument, I said, A Separation from a Thing or
Person, implies a being joined to that Thing or Person before, and till such
separation be made. G. K: Passing by my Arguments, catches hold on the word
Separate; and plays upon it, and putting some cavilling Questions about it (not
very difficult, but very impertinent, to be answered) cries out I have showed
my great Ignorance (which is a sort of art he uses, to huff his Opponent, and
damp him, if he can) and at last, his great Knowledge brings the matter to this
Issue, that the Word Separate has several significations. What then? Has it
not the signification I used it in, (viz. an Implication that the things or
Persons separated were first joined) Will he deny that the Word Separation
implies a being joined before? Nay: He grants it in the present Case; saying,
It being granted that we were formerly joined, with them, this does not prove,
etc. So that what has all his quibbling upon the word Separate, come to, but to
show a Disposition to Cavilling, and thereby to evade an Argument.

He says, It being granted that we were formerly joined with them, this does
not prove that we begun the Separation. No sure! for this is sufficiently
proved by other mediums. But what Trifling is it in him so to argue? But after
it was made by them, says he, we were warranted and justified by the Scripture,
etc. to remain separate from them. This is pitiful shuffling, by which he would
wind himself off, from having taken the Sepation upon himself, when he said,
This Separation is well warranted, etc. The Scriptures that warrant us in it,
etc. We are convinced and persuaded in our Consciences, that God calls us to
separate, etc. But it will not help him. For to separate (in that sense
especially, which is proper to this Subject) is to withdraw from. So a
Separatist, in the common acceptance of the word, is one that has withdrawn
himself from the Society, Communion, or Fellowship of Others, whom he was
joined with before. But G. K. has found out a new way of Separation, and a new
notion of the Word, whereby he would make them the Separatists that are
withdrawn from, not them that withdrew. Had I argued thus, he would have paid
me off, with his fine Terms of gross Ignorance, ridiculous Folly, and the like,
which he liberally bestows. But it is evident he is forwarder to Cavil and
Rail, than to Answer an Argument: For after all his noise about the Word
[Separate,] he leaves my Arguments unanswered, p. 39. and 40. whereby I proved
from his own Words, that he began the Separation. And seeing he would overlook
them before, Ple set them before him again. From his having said (in his
Reasons of the Separation, p. 22.) We are convinced and persuaded in our
Consciences, that God calls us to separate from such Unbeilevers.

I argue thus. If the Friends (whom he calls Unbelievers) had first Separated
from them, then how could he say God had called them to Separate from the
Unbelievers, when the Unbelievers (in his Sense) had Separated from them
before. A Separation (said I, and I say it again) from a thing or Person,
implies a being joined to that thing or Person before, and till such Separation
be made. But if the Friends there, had begun the Separation before, then they
had thereby disjoined themselves from G. K. and his Party; and G. K. and his
Party could not have afterward Separated from them; because they were not,
then joined to them; consequently it could not be, that God should call them to
Separate from the others, if the others had Separated themselves from them
before. If therefore they are convinced and persuaded in their Consciences (as
G. K. says they are) that God called them to Separate from these whom he calls
unbeleivers, and that they answered that Call, they must then acknowledge that
they began the Separation. And that they did so, his following words show, p.
23. Where he says, We have great clearnes^ and peace in the Lord, to retire and
Separate from such disorderly Walkers and talkers, as we have formerly done
from other Professions. Here (said I) is appears the Friends kept their
standing, stood their Ground; and G. K. and his Party retired, drew back, or
withdrew, and Separated themselves; and that purposely with design to to
Separate: For he adds (alittle after) Yet we design not any Separation from our
faithful Brethren here, or elsewhere. A Separation then, it seems, they did
design, though not from such as they account their faithful Brethren, (...).
Thus in my former. And can he be s^ shall^, to think he answers all this by
saying. After the Separation was made by them, we were warrated and justified
by the Scripture without, and the Spirit of Truth within, to romain Separate
from them? Does this answer his own terms, wherein he expressed himself before,
when he said, We are convinced and persuaded in our Consciences, that God
calls us to separate (an Active Voice) from such unbelivers; when he said, We
have great clearness and peace in the Lord (what to do? to rema^? No.) to
retire and Separate from such, etc. And how? As we have formerly done from
other Professions. How was that?) Did other Professions first Separate from
them, and they remain in their old Meeting Places, which those other
Professions had left, forsaken, retired, withdrawn from? Or did they Separate
from other Professions, and leave, forsake, retire, withdraw from their
Society, Fellowship and Meeting Places. Mark this well, Friends; If G. K. and
his Party did really Separate from other Professions, then he and they did
really Separate from Friends in America, whom he calls unbelievers, and
disorderly Walkers and Talkers: For he says, We have great clearness and peace
in the Lord, to retire and Separate from such disorderly Walkers and Talkers,
as we have for^cly done from other Prafessions. This is not Triffling, but
Solid Reasoning. Therefore let him not shuffle and dodge, after such an Unmanly
manner; but dispute fairly, and acquit himself, if he can.

His Eighteenth Charge against me is, that I deny it has been proved that his
Oppos^rs in Pensilvania, are guilty of vile Errors; and that I allege, He pict
the words he Charges them with, from their own discourses, etc. This he calls a
Forgery, for want of an harder Term. But he perverts my Words, which were
these; In the tracing this matter (the Separation) through G. (...)'s. Book, I
observe he makes a great Noise and Outcry of gross and vile Errors held by
some, and them upheld by others, which he gives for one Reason or Cause of the
Separation. But in as much as this is only his Charge without due proof, and
the Persons, by him Charged with those vile Errors, are not here present, to
make Answer to his Charge, and defend themselves, or to show the Occasions that
led to, and Circumstances that attended those Discourses, from which he picked
the words he charges them with, and to explain their meanings therein, I have
not thought it fit, or becoming me, on no better ground, to meddle with those
matters, being alike unwilling to justify them, if in any thing they have done
or said amiss, as to condemn them unheard, upon the report of another, and him
their professed Adversary. Here I joined together his twofold Outcry, that
gross and vile Errors were held by some, and that they that held them were
upheld by others, (which was the third and main Reason he assigned for the
Separation; and I said that this was without due Proof. This he says, is a
Forgery, and that it is apparent from the Testimonies of those whom I pretend
greatly to credit. The First he offers is, That Judgment (which he says was)
given out from the Meeting of Ministering Friends, as it is called, the fourth of
the fourth Month: (in some Year: or other, I suppose; but he tells us not here
in what:) That Judgment (he says) does declare, that Proof was made by two
Witnesses, that W. S. should say, That George Keith 's. Preaching Christ
without, and Christ within, was Preaching two Christ's.

To this I say, This is no due Proof, that W. S. was guilty of holding that
vile Error G. K. charges him with, That to Preach Faith in Christ without, and
Faith in Christ within, is to Preach two Christ's. For the Terms are different.
And although to Preach Faith in Christ without, and Faith in Christ within, is
not to Preach two Christ's: Yet G. K. might so Preach Christ without, and Christ
within, that it might seem like a Preaching of two Christ's, for ought appears
to the Contrary. And indeed, although G. K. brought two Witnesses to attest
that W. S. did say (as G. K. here reports it) that G. K's. Preaching Christ
without, and Christ within, was Preaching two Christ's; yet the credit of their
Testimony is justly questionable, both as they were chief Men in G. K's. Party,
and as G. K. himself does vary in his Charge against W. S. from their
Testimony. For their Evidence (as he reports it from the Judgment of the
Meeting) was expressly, That W. S. should say, That G. K 's. Preaching Christ
without, and Christ within, was Preaching two Christ's. But G. K. himself
charges him with saying, Christ within and Christ without are two Christ's, p.
3. And afterward, in the same page, he alters the Charge again, alleging he
said, To Preach Faith in Christ within, and Faith in Christ without, was to
Preach two Christ's, Plea of Innocent, Page 3. so again he reports it in Page
22. And in Page 23. he asks, Why do not the words of their Judgment run thus,
That W. S. did say, To Preach Faith in Christ without, and in Christ within,
was to Preach two Christ's? So that he would have had the words of their
Judgment, to have run otherwise than the Words of his Witnesses Evidence did
run; by which they that run may read how little regard he himself had to his
own Witnesses Evidence. And although that Meeting, proceeding upon that
Evidence (such as it was) did blame W. S. for uttering those words, which those
Witnesses did witness against him: Yet it is plain that W. S. was not guilty of
holding that Error G. K. charges him with, That to Preach Christ without, and
Christ within, was to Preach two Christ's, seeing he always denied that he spoke
those words; whereas if he had been guilty of such an Error in his Judgment, it
may reasonably be supposed he would have owned the words charged upon him, and
have labored to maintain and defend his Error, that being the Common way of
the Erroneous. But, if W. S. had been really guilty of holding such an Error,
yet certainly that Man must be made up of Errors that can believe, the Judgment
of that Meeting which condemned him for speaking (as the Witnesses attested)
those words which are charged upon him as his Error, to be a due proof that
that Meeting upheld him in that Error. And therefore hitherto it is no Forgery,
nor fault, in me to say, G. K's. great Outcry of gross and vile Errors, held by
some, and then upheld by others, has not been duly proved. His Second Instance,
that he has proved his Charge (viz. That some are guilty of holding gross and
vile Errors, etc. And others of upholding them therein) is, That he stands
Recorded (as he says,) on the Monthly Meeting Book at Philadelphia, by the
Monthly Meetings Judgment given out against him, and clearing T. Fitzwater, the
Twenty sixth of the third Month, (in what Year?) For accusing him that he
denied the sufficiency of the Light; and the Evidence against him was, that he
said he did not believe the Light was sufficient without something else;
whereby (says he) it is evident, they exclude Christ's manhood, Death and
Sufferings, Blood and Intercession for them in Heaven; from having any part in
our Salvation. This is far from being a Proof, either that that T. F. did
exclude Christ's Manhood, Death and Sufferings, Blood and Intercession for us
in Heaven, from having any part in our Salvation, or that the Meeting there
upheld him in it. For it is but G. K's. own Inference, and that unfairly drawn.
T. F. it seems, charged G. K. with denying the sufficiency of the Light. G. K.
put him to prove it. He proved by four Credible Witnesses, that G. K. said, He
did not believe the Light was sufficient, without something else. What G. K.
meant by that something else, I do not find was then explained or discoursed.
Afterward, it seems, G. K. alleged, that by that something else, he meant
Christ's Manhood, Sufferings, Death, Blood, Resurection, Ascension,
Intercession, etc. Did the Meeting condemn G. K. for this? I find no such
thing. But because they did not at his Instigation, condemn T. F. for accusing
G. K. falsely, in saying he denied the sufficiency of the Light (which he proved
against him by four Witnesses,) therefore he flies out against both T. F. and
the Meeting, charging them with excluding the Man Christ Jesus, his Sufferings,
Death, etc. from having any part in our Salvation; which was no Doctrine nor
Tenet of theirs, but a false Inference of his own, and is as forcible against
himself, as it can be against them. For in his Reasons of the Separation, p. 8.
he says, diverse were present at the place and time where and when W -- alleged
he heard G. K. deny the sufficiency of the Light, etc. that cleared him, that
they heard him both then and at all occasions, that he delivered his mind on
that subject, always bear Testimony to the Sufficiency of the Light to
Salvation. Here ye see, he makes his own Witnesses speak as fully and expressly
of his Testimony to the sufficiency of the Light to Salvation, as T. F. or any
other could do, and that without any express reserve for something else. So
that if T. F's. charging him with denying the sufficiency of the Light, simply
and without Explication, does exclude the Man Christ Jesus, his Sufferings,
Death, etc. from having any part in our Salvation: G. K's. asserting the
sufficiency of the Light to Salvation, simply and without explication, (as in
the place before quoted he does) does the same. And therefore G. K. is the more
to be blamed, for casting so foul a slander upon others, which from his own
words might with (...) Reason be cast upon himself. But, Friends, ye know we
never did nor do, oppose the Inward Appearance of Christ in Man, to that
Outward Appearance of him in that prepared Body, wherein he obtained Redemption
for Man; nor by asserting the sufficiency of the Light, do we exclude, or
intend to exclude the Man Christ Jesus, his Sufferings, Death, Bloodshedding,
Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, nor any thing that he wrought on Earth
for us, or now, by his Mediation with his Father, works for us in Heaven,
from having a part our Salvation; And G. K. has not yet proved that any in our
society has so done. His third Instance he gives to prove that he has proved
his Charge (viz. That some are guilty of holding gross and vile Errors, etc.
and others of upholding them therein) is, The Paper, called, A true Account of
the Proceedings, etc. at the Yearly Meeting at Land. the second Month, 1694.
which, he says, does plainly declare, that some were guilty of Erroneous
Doctrines, or unsound Expressions, their words being these following; And
although it appears that some few Persons have given Offense, either through
Erroneous Doctrines, unsound Expressions, or Weakness, Forwardness, want of
Wisdom, and right Understanding, etc. This does not declare what he says it
does plainly declare, Namely, that some were guilty of Erroneous or Unsound
Expressions: For it appears some few Persons have given offense, either through
Erroneous Doctrine, unsound Expressions, or Weakness, Forwardness, want of
Wisdom, and right Understanding. So that, what Offense was given, might as well
be through Weakness, forwardness, want of Wisdom, and right Understanding, as
through Erroneous Doctrines or unfound Expressions. Nay, if it were through
unsound Expressions (though they are not to be excused, yet) that does not
prove a Man guilty of holding gross and vile Errors, etc. For a Man that is
sound in Judgment, and Doctrine, may chance to drop an unsound Expression,
through weakness, as some perhaps in America, through G. K's. catching
Questions, may have been drawn to do, whose weakness for him to expose in
Print, in that aggravating manner as he has done, to the reproach of the whole
Profession, is very great Wickedness in him, and for which his Condemnation
from God slumbers not. His last Instance is, that He produced above six
Manuscripts, (What means he by above six? Does he mean six and a half? For if
they had been Seven or Eight, he might as well have said so, as above six;)
signed with the Persons own hands, that were read at the Yearly Meeting, that
proved them sufficiently guilty of vile Errors, etc. He being a Party is not a
competent Judge, what is sufficient Proof in this Case. That some Manuscripts
were read in the Yearly Meeting by him, or on his Part, I remember; how many
they were, or whether signed by the Persons own hands, I know not. But,
supposing (not granting) those Manuscripts to be either Autographs, or
Authentic Copies, I believe he himself would think much, to be concluded and
condemned from Inferences, or Constructions made upon Manuscripts (especially
if they be private Letters, as I think some of those he had read, were) without
his being present, and having the liberty to open and explain his sense and
meaning in any Passage, Word, or sentence in them. Having gone through his
Proofs, (which, I think, I have showed amount to no Proof) he threatens, if I
or any others persist to charge him, that he has wrongfully charged them in
Pensilvania, these Manuscripts then read, with some others, may be made public
for his further clearing. For my part, I am of Opinion, that his publishing
those Manuscripts, he threatens us with, will be so far from clearing him, that
it will make his guilt appear the more clearly; and I am persuaded that is the
chief (if not only) Reason, why he has not published them all this while.

His Nineteenth taxes me with Fallacy and Deceit, in covering W. Southbe, by
concealing those Words in his Letter, where he confesses, that he called it
doubtful Questions, whether the Patriarchs have received the Resurrection? This
is a very Idle Cavil; yet serves to show what sort of Questions he used to put,
to draw some simple plain Friends to drop such Expressions as he might pick
some advantage out of against them: And this may be one, of many Instances that
might be given, of his picking words from their Discourses, to Charge them
with; which, in his last Head, he Charged me with Forgery, for but mentioning.
But if W. Southbe, did account that a doubtful Question, is that any more than
he himself does? What means he, when (enumerating many Doctrines, which he says
we hold in common with other Professions, Causeless Ground, p. 4.) he says, The
deceased Saints have not yet (generally) received the Resurrection of the Body,
etc. Why generally, if he did not either think some had, or doubt whether they
had or no? Must W. Southbe be Unchristianed, rendered guilty of holding gross
and vile Errors, Damnable Heresies and Doctrines of Devils; for only calling it
a doubtful Question, whether the Patriarchs have received the Resurrection; and
that by him, who seems himself to doubt it, either of them, or some other
deceased Saints? For his saying, the deceased Saints have not yet (generally)
received the Resurrection, implies, he thinks some have. But that W. Southbe
does believe a general Day of Judgment, and the Resurrection of the Dead at
that Day, I showed before from his own Letter, where having set forth G. K's
Charge against him, that he denied any general Day of Judgment, and the
Resurrection of the Dead; but only what every one Witnesses within here, he
Solemnly denies the Charge, calls that Doctrine Damnable and Athiestical,
declares that he believes the Resurrection according to the Scriptures, and the
Ancient Doctrine of Friends concerning it; which was enough, one would think,
to satisfy a wise Man (one especially that pretended to be of the same
Communion:) and Paul himself could not satisfy the Fool about the Resurrection.
G. K. says, T. E.'s Fallacy is the more manifest, that in W. Southbe's
Confession of Faith, recited by him, there is not one word concerning the
resurrection of the Dead, nor of Christ's coming without us, to Judge the Quick
and the Dead, etc. As to the Resurrection he had spoken largely of it, in the
same Letter, before, which I suppose to be the reason, why he did not repeat it
expressly by that Name after: Yet in that Declaration of his Faith, having
mentioned Christ's Ascension into Heaven, and his Sitting at the Right hand of
the Majesty on High, he adds, And that every one must appear before his
Iudgment-Seat, to receive their Reward, according to their Deeds done in this
Mortal Body, even at that great and dreadful Day of a general Account, etc. G.
K. quarrels further with W. Southbe for saying he does not own the day of
Judgment now, in or after the same manner, as he did when he was a Papist; for
then he owned it very Carnally and outward, viz. That the great Judgment should
be in an outward valley called the valley of Iehosaphat, in the Land of Israel,
and and that we should see with these outward Eyes; But (says he) I believe now
it will be more Spiritual. This does not please G. K. who catching hold of his
words, that when a Papist, he owned it very carnally and outward, he would
slily suggest from thence, as if his Belief of it was worse now, than when he
was a Papist. Perhaps indeed, his Belief of it when a Papist might best fit G.
K's. notion of it, who (I have heard) did jump in with the Papists, in pitching
upon the Valley of Jehosaphat for the Place, till a Traveller telling him that
Place was too Straight, he took wing from the Valley into the Air. But I see no
cause G. K. has to condemn W. Southbe, for beliveing it will be more Spiritual
than the Papist hold; nor to infer from thence, that it will not be outward,
since doubtless it may be more Spiritual than the Papists hold, and yet be
outward also. But I had best have a care how I meddle too far in this matter,
lest G. K. put me into Inquisition also, and bring me upon Examination again,
which if he should, I am like enough to answer him, that I believe in this, as
in other Divine things, according to the holy Scriptures; and that I doubt
would anger him afresh.

For he makes it the Ground of his Twentieth Perversion, that I clear T. L. A.
C. S. I. and I. D. by Printing part of a Paper, Subscribed by them, on behalf
of themselves, and many others, and directed to him and others, wherein they
say, As to Unity in Doctrine, so much seemingly professed by you, to the amusing
of many unwary People, we hereby sincerely Declare, that we are herein one with
our Ancient and Faithful Brethren, firmly believing what is upon Record in the
Holy Scriptures, concerning God, concerning our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
both with Respect to his appearance in the Flesh, and to his appearance in the
Spirit, concerning the Holy Ghost, the Resurrection-State, and Eternal
Judgment, which, though offered unto you, to the same purpose, and that several
times; yet was rejected, as insufficient by you. And so, it seems, it is now
too. For he objects against it, First, that it is two short, as being but about
Eleven Lines: So that it seems, a multitude of words would have pleased him
better. But I thought, in things of this Nature Especially, he would have
regarded weight, rather than Number of words. And as few Lines as this is
contained in, I know not whether that called The Apostles Creed be much longer.
He thinks much to be put off with Eleven Lines of a Confession of Faith: And I
do not think Eleven Volumes would satisfy him, unless they were of his own
writing. But he that shall heedfully read these Eleven Lines, shall find they
comprehend the Principal Doctrines, about which he pretended to be
dissatisfied. But it is not the Brevity only that troubles him. He is offended
that they say, they Firmly believe what is upon Record in the Holy Scriptures.
At this he huffs, saying, so will every Papist say, every Socinian say, and
every Mugletonian; for it is a common Fallacy, that the Vilest of Heretics
use, whereby to deceive People, to tell them they Firmly believe all that is
Recorded in the Holy Scriptures concerning God, Christ, etc. I know not whether
Tertullus, who accused Paul to Felix (Acts 24.) were a greater Orator than G.
K. but I am persuaded he was not so great a Sophister, nor so void of common
Charity. Neither would the Apostle have gone off as he did, had G. K. been then,
and in Tertullus his place, when Paul said He believed all things that were
written in the Law and the Prophets, ver. 14. G. K. asks, why have the People
called Quakers, Separated from the several Professions of Christianity, upon
the account of Errors in Doctrine, which they did charge them with, seeing all
these Professions in general terms say as much as we, that they Firmly believe
what is upon Record in the Holy Scriptures? I answer, First, That the People
called Quakers did Separate from other Professions, not only because of the
Errors in Doctrine which they charged them with, but also because those
Professions in general, were departed from the Power and Life of Godliness, and
withstood and denied the Inward Appearance of Christ in his People. And
Secondly, As far as they did separate on the Account of Doctrines, it was
because they found those Doctrines, even as those Professions themselves had
stated them, to be not according, but contrary to what was upon record in the
Holy Scriptures.

He says, We have often told T. L. etc. Let them condemn those gross and vile
Errors, which we have proved some of them guilty of, and others cloak and
excuse them, etc. and that shall satisfy us in this point. But have not T. L.
and Friends, often, if not as often, told him, that he has not proved them
guilty of those gross and vile Eerrors he talks of, nor others of cloaking and
excusing them? And yet he will not be satisfied; of which more in his next
Perversion.

He says, Many hold, to my certain knowledge, That the Resurrection is the New
Birth, and nothing else: Others say, Immediately after Death we get the
Resurrection fully. If by many that hold thus, he means many of the People
called Quakers, I neither own nor know any that hold such Doctrines.

So also his other saying, viz. This gross and vile Error, That Christ is not
to come without us, in his glorified Body to judge all mankind, I find too many
in England guilty of; I esteem as a vile slander; if, by many, he intend many
of the People called Quakers. And his suggesting, that too probably they have
drunk it in from some unsound Expressions in some of the printed Books too
generally owned by them, discovers in him an unsound and evil mind: And speaks
his inclination to quarrel with Friends in England, as well as he has already
done in America.

His Twenty First Charge against me is, Of Perversion and Fallacy, in covering
these Men, because of their saying in their Papers, If any of us, or any
countenanced by us have given you any Offense, either by any unsound
Expressions, or by any ungospellike Conversation, and the same be made to
appear by credible Testimonies, We promise unto you, that if the Parties
concerned do not condemn the same, they shall be disowned therein. To this fair
offer he says, What more credible VVitnesses could be desired, than the several
Manuscripts signed with their own hands, whom they have owned, etc? But I ask
him, Did he upon this Offer, complain to those Friends who made it, of any of
them, or countenanced by them, that had used unsound Expressions? Did he
produce the Manuscripts he mentions, as Witnesses against those that Writ them?
Did the Monthly Meeting to which the Parties belonged refuse to hear his
Complaint? Did they reject his Manuscript Evidences? If he did, upon this
offer, make such Complaint, if he did produce his Manuscripts in Evidence, let
him make appear when, where, at what Monthly Meeting he did this. But if he did
not this, what he says now of it is but Fallacy and Deceit. Nor do I think it
proper to take notice of what he now mentions out of his Manuscripts, because I
do not think it safe to take it upon his Report.

His Twenty Second, He calls my Perversion of his words, which were That (after
the Separation was actually begun, and he and his Party met apart from Friends)
he went to the Friends Meeting, and did there declare, that He and his Friends
had Unity with the most there as to the main. From whence I inferred, If there
had been such gross, vile and unchristian Errors, against the Fundamental
Doctrines of the Christian Faith, such damnable Heresies, and Doctrines of
Devlls, held amongst them, as he suggests, and cloaked, or covered, and
tolerated by them, How could he say that he and his Friends had Unity with the
most there, as to the Main? This he would shift off, by alleging, That more
than two thirds of that Meeting were Country Friends, who were come to that
Meeting upon notice that J. Dickinson was to be there, and that there had not
been any Breach between those Country Friends and him at that time.

But this is a mere Fallacy. For it was not with respect to those Country
Friends, that he said he had Unity with the most there; but with respect to the
Friends of that Meeting: For he says, he also signified his desire to be United
to that Meeting; not to the Friends of other Meetings in the Country (for with
them, he says, he had had no Breach) but to that Meeting.

And his connecting his Desire to be united to that Meeting, with his
Declaration, that he and his Friends had Unity with the most there, restrains
his declared Unity to the Friends of that Meeting; and that Unity being
declared to be as to the main, (that is in the main and fundamental Doctrines
of Christianity,) his separating from that whole Society, or Meeting of
Friends, with the most of whom he declared he had Unity in the Main, even after
he had separated from them, is a Fault he can never justify, nor excuse, by
all the Fallacies he can invent.

23. What I said in the 45, and 46. pages of my Epistle, concerning the sending
over his scandalous Books from America, to one in London, who is not a Quaker,
for him to expose to Sale as he would; and G. K's. blaming them that reprinted
his Books here, not for reprinting them, but only for altering their Titles, he
passes over in silence, and Cavils at my showing his Deceit in the use of the
word many (in his Causeless Ground, p. ^2.) where he said, It is my charitable
sincere Persuasion, that the worthy name of Christian does truly belong to very
many of that People, as well as unto me.

From hence I inferred, He will not allow it (it seems) to the People called
Quakers, or to the Body of Friends, as a People, no not so much as from a
charitable Persuasion. And how insincere he was, in pretending to allow it to
very many of that People, I showed by his following words, which were, Having
an experimental Proof, through intimate Conversation, and frequent verbal
Communication with many of them, that they are sincere in the Christian Faith,
etc.

From whence I showed, To what a narrow scantling he had reduced his
application of the name Christian among the Quakers, and how few he meant by
very many; even just so many as he has an experimental Proof of, through
intimate Conversation, and frequent verbal Communication with them, which how
many they may be, judge ye (said I) considering how short a time he had then
been in England, and in that time scarce or little out of London, nor very
conversant with Friends there.

This he calls (as he does most things) a gross Forgery and Perversion; and
says, I did really mean not them only, but all them, whom I have at any time
formerly had Experience of their Christianity, by intimate Conversation, and
verbal Communication, either in England, or any other part of the World, that
have given me no Occasion to think otherwise of them. This Fallacy will not
help him. For as his Charitable Persuasion is grounded on his Experimental
Proof, and that Proof drawn from intimate Conversation, and frequent verbal
Communication: So that intimate Conversation, and frequent verbal Communication
is restrained, by his own Words, to the time since he came last into England.
For it is all in the Present Tense, none in the Preterit; Having (not having
had, but now having) an Experimental Proof through intimate Conversation, and
frequent verbal Communication, with many of them, that they are (not that they
have been formerly, many Years ago, when I was in England before; but that they
now are) sincere in the Christian Faith, and whose Life and Conversation does
seal (not has sealed) unto the sincerity of their Christian Profession.

By this, Friends, ye may see that I neither forged, nor Perverted his Words:
But that he has now put a false meaning upon his Words, which they will not
bear. And that by very many, he meant those only that cleave to, or favor him,
may be gathered from the boast he makes at the Entrance of his Loving Epistle
(as he calls it) of the considerable Number he has Experience are in Unity
with him.

24. He calls it a Perversion of his words, that when (in contradiction to the
Advice of the Yearly Meeting, that he should call in his Books, or at least
publish something innocently and effectually, to clear the Body of the People
called Quakers, and their Ministers, from those gross Errors charged on some
few in America) he denied that he had charged the People called Quakers, either
in general, or in the plurality; I said, I had not found in his last Book, that
he had cleared, or attempted to clear, the People called Quakers, there in
general, or in the plurality; and that he was scarce willing to allow the Name
Christian to any more of them, than he had had experimental proof of, through
intimate Conversation and frequent verbal Communication, etc. In this he says I
pervert his words, and yet labors to justify himself, for not allowing the
Name Christian to the People called Quakers, from an Epistle of G. W's. to
Friends. How (says he) can he, or I either, be positive to say, the People
called Quakers are good Christians, either in general, or in the plurality,
when G. W. has told us in his printed Epistle -- That few sincerely seek the
Lord? etc. So that he quarrels with me, for saying how unwilling he was to
allow the Name Christian to the People called Quakers; and yet urges G. W's.
Epistle to justify himself for not allowing the Name Christian to the People
called Quakers, either in general, or in the plurality.

And reciting diverse passages from that Epistle, (tending in a general way, to
show that many fall short of that watchful, diligent, close walking with the
Lord, and inward Exercise of Mind toward him, that they should have: And too
many are taken up with fading Objects, or cumbred with the Cares of this Life)
he endeavors from thence to justify himself, for having exposed in Print to
the scorn and contempt of the World, and in the most reproachful terms and
manner, both many particular Persons by Name, and whole Meetings of Friends.
For, says he, Nothing can be said against my printed Books, in reference to my
public witnessing against the Errors in Principles, whereof some are guilty in
Pensylvania, and elsewhere, but what may be as much said against G. W. his
reproving those great Vices and Immoralities among many called Friends, etc.
That the falsness of this Comparison, which he makes between G. W.'s. Epistle
and his own Books, may the better appear, let it be considered, that his Books
contain the blackest Charges, with respect to Errors in Principles, that Man
can be guilty of, viz. gross and vile Errors, contrary to the Fundamentals of
Christianity, Da^ Heresies, and Doctrines of Devils, held by some, and covered
or cloaked, and tolerated by others. But did G. W. in that Epistle charge any
with the grossest Deaucheries, Uncleanness, profaneness, Dishonesty, etc. that
Mankind is o^ can be guilty of? Or do his ^ords import any more than a
romisness, slackress, or falling short of only Exercising Spiritual (...), and
being too much taken up with the things of this World? And did he say, that
such as were faulty in those things, were cloaked, or covered and tolerated
therein by Friends? No such matter. Therefore G. K. says falsely, in saying (as
before) nothing can be said against his Printed Book, etc. But what may be as
much said against G. W's, ande. And it is observable, that no public Reproach
was cast, by Truth's Adversaries, upon Friends and Truth, from that Epistle of
G. W's: whereas G. K's filthy and scandalous Books have brought very great
Reproach upon Truth and Friends, from the Adversaries thereof. So that G. K's
bringing G. VV's Epistle to justify his own infamous Books, shows his own
falness, but will not defend, or excuse him.

Nor can he be excused for the Wrong, and Mischief, he has done, in publishing
those Scandalous Books of his, which he acknowledges he had a foresight and
sense the Enemies of Truth would seek to take advantage from; though he adds
his sense and foresight, that, in the conclusion, they would be disappointed:
As I also believe they will, by seeing, in the conclusion, his Deceit fully
laid open, and Truth and Friends cleared from his false Accusations. Their
disappointment he refers to the Conclusion: But the Advantage he has given
them, by the mischief he has done, is present; and he is industriously
endeavoring to do more. He says, He did not think the simple Relation or
Account of these things, would ^r could be any proper cause of grief to
feithful Friends, etc. Is this fit for a Wise Man to say? A Boy from his
Accidence could have told him that it is Insipientis dicere non putaram; the
property of a Fool (when he has done mischief) to say, I did not think, or I
had not thought.

25. He would seem here to be very Zealous for the Yearly Meeting at London,
and arraigns me for gross Perversion and Reflection on the Yearly Meeting: And
yet before he passes from this Head; he kicks the Yearly Meeting out of Doors,
and disowns it to be a Yearly Meeting, or any duly constituted Meeting at all.
Nor can it be said, (says he, p. 27.) that that called the Yearly Meeting, was
a free Meeting, for it was too private, and limited to too small a number, etc.
and therefore it cannot be owned to be the Yearly Meeting, nor any Meeting duly
and regularly constituted, etc. Ye see now, Friends, whither he is run, and to
what a pass he is come; having outrun, in this, (so far as I remember) all the
Apostates that have gone before him. He disowns it to be a Yearly Meeting, or
any Meeting at all duly constituted; and yet takes upon him to impeach me of
Perversion and Reflection on the Yearly Meeting. Is not this gross Hypocrisy
in him?

The Perversion and Reflection he charges me with, is my saying, (Supposing it
were true in Fact, that no Untruth or Falsehood in matter of Fact, had been
discovered in his Books) it was not the proper business of the Yearly Meeting
to judge of the matters of Fact, contained in his Books, which were alleged to
have been done in America, by Persons not here to answer to, or give account of
them. And that none should think, that because the Yearly Meeting did not
declare the matters of Fact in his Books to be false, therefore they are all
true. They remain, said I, to be proved by him that has affirmed them, and to
be answered by them who are charged therein.

Now, though I suppose I have said enough to this matter, in the former part of
this Book, in Answer to his Loving Epistle (as he calls it) to satisfy any
reasonable Person. Yet because he repeats it here, I will not stick to take
notice of it again. From my last Cited words, he notes, that I grant the Yearly
Meeting did not declare the matter of Fact in his Books to be false; and seeing
(as he says) for matter of Doctrine they did not blame him, and yet he is
blamed, he thinks I cast an unparalleled instance of Injustice on the Yearly
Meeting, to blame him for things in his Book, that are neither matter of
Doctrine, nor matter of Fact. In this he is very fallacious, playing upon the
Words [Matters of Fact.]

His Books contain many particular Matters, alleged by him to have been said
or done, by many particular Persons in America, who were not at the Yearly
Meeting at London, to Answer to, or give an Account of them.

These Matters of Fact, I said, it was not the proper business of the Yearly
Meeting to judge of; (so were my words expressly, Epistle p. 49. viz. It was not
the proper business of the Yearly Meeting, to judge of the Matters of Fact,
contained in his Books, which were alleged to have been done in America, by
Persons not here to answer to, or give account of them.)

And to these Matters of Fact I referred, when I added, p. 50. Therefore let
none think that because the Yearly Meeting did not declare the Matters of Fact
in his Books to be false, therefore they are all true. They remain to be proved
(said I) by him that has affirmed them; and to be answered by them who are
charged therein. Viz. Those particular Persons, who he says have said or done
those particular Words or Deeds, by him charged, in his Books, upon them. What
I there spoke of those particular Matters of Fact, he stretches to Matter of
Fact in general, and thence falsely inferrs, that I deny it was the proper
business of the Yearly Meeting to judge of any Matter of Fact at all contained
in his Books, or that the Meeting did declare any Matters of Fact at all in his
Books to be false, And he argues upon it at a wild rate.

Is not my clearing my self (says he) of the blame of the Sep^ ((...)
despairing to acquit himself of the Act (...) ^eparation, he would now excuse
himself of the blame of it) a Matter of Fact in my Book? This (says he) he
says, the Yearly Meeting has not declared to be false in Matter of Fact,
therefore they have not declared it, that my clearing my self of the
Separation, is false; and consequently, they have not declared the contrary,
but that my clearing my self of the Separation is true; and from hence again he
infers, that I have contradicted the Judgment of that called, The Yearly
Meeting Paper, which lays the Separation at his door.

Now, (besides that his Argument is faulty and naught, the Terms in his
Consequence not answering the Terms in his premises) his way or manner of
arguing here is merely Sophistical, and grounded upon a false Position; That I
say, the Yearly Meeting has not declared [This] to be false, (This, viz. His
clearing himself of the blame of the Separation) whereas I never said so; and
his saying I have said so, is that in him, which he would have called gross
Perversion, if not Forgery in me. But as my not saying so, clears me from his
Charge of contradicting the Yearly Meeting in that; so that Meeting's laying
the Separation at his Door, is at least an implicit Declaring, that what he
has said for the clearing himself of the Separation, or the blame thereof, is
false.

Nor will his other shift stand him in any stead, to acquit him from being the
culpable Cause of the Separation; which he endeavors to draw from those words
in the Yearly Meetings Paper, viz. As to the Separation among Frie^ ^n America,
arising from the unhappy Differences, etc. From whence he infers, that the
Meeting makes the Differences between them in America, to be the Cause of the
Separation.

And from thence argues thus, And seeing the Original ground and Cause of the
Differences, was the unsound and Erroneous Doctrines held by them of the other
side, which that Paper called, A true Account of the Proceedings, etc. does own
them to be guilty of, it plainly appears, they of the other side, were the
culpable Cause of the Separation, etc.

Here again he is guilty of that, which he so often charge me with, Forgery
and Perversion.

He says, The Paper called, A true Account of the Proceedings, etc. does own
them of the other side to be guilty of unsound and Erroneous Doctrines. How
false and unfair he is in this, the words of that Paper shall show, which are
these; And although it appears that some few Persons have given Offense, either
through Erroneous Doctrines, Unsound Expressions, or Weakness, Forwardness,
want of Wisdom and right Understanding; yet, etc.

Here ye see, Friends, that that Paper of the Yearly Meeting is so far from
owning them of the other side as he calls them (that is, the Friends in
America) to be guilty of unsound and Erroneous Doctrines (which G. K. here
expressly says it does) that it does not undertake to determine whether the
Offense (said to be given by some few Persons) was through Erroneous Doctrines,
and Unsound Expressions, or through Weakness, Forwardness, want of Wisdom and
(...) Understanding: And yet this Man has the Confidence, and Falseness to say
positively, That Paper does own them guilty of holding Unsound and Erroneous
Doctrines. By this y^ may see how false he is; and how unfit he is to charge
another with Forgeries and Perversions.

This looks the worse in him, in as much as he, who here says, the Yearly
Meeting owns them of the other side to be guilty of Unsound and Erroneous
Doctrines, does (in his causeless ground of surmises, p. 5.) secretly smite at
that Meeting, for lessening and extennating such gross and vile Errors with the
smooth name of Weakness. So that when his Blow is at the Yearly Meeting, he
supposes them not to own the Friends guilty of Erroneous Doctrines, but of
Weakness only: But when he strikes at the Friends in America, he affirms the
Meeting does own them guilty of Erroneous Doctrines: Thus, Ambodexter-like, he
plays with both hands, as he apprehends it will make for his advantage.

Now this feigned Proof of his, being taken away, his Argument falls; and his
supposing the Original ground and Cause of the Differences, to be the
Unsoundand Erroneous Doctrines held by them of the other side, is but a vain
Begging of the Question. Nor need the Original ground and Cause of those
Differences in America, be sought for farther, or elsewhere, than in his own
Ambitious, Quarrelsome, Restless temper and Spirit, which rather than be quiet,
or let others be so, would create matter for Differences, by laying Trains in
Discours^ (...) trap and draw simple and well-meaning Men, to let fall some
weak Expressions, which by wresting and misconstruction, might be brought to
sound unsoundly.

His mentioning the Differences betwixt Luther and the Church of Rome (the
application whereof he says, is easy to the case in hand) shows his Proud
Conceit of himself, and his vile Thoughts and contempt of Friends,
notwithstanding his Hypocritical pretenses elsewhere, of being in Unity, and
intending to remain in Unity, with all Faithful Friends every where: Which I
wish all Friends every where would well note. For Luther's difference, and
Separation, was with, and from the whole Church of Rome.

I hinted before, G. K's disowning the Yearly Meeting at London, to be the
Yearly Meeting, or any Meeting Duly and Regularly constituted, which he does
more especialy in page 27. and then says, And this may clear me of these unjust
and groundless Occasions, wherewith T. E. does load me, as being guilty of
Insincerity, Hypocrisy, Doubledealing, having not a Conscience etc. for my
saying, in my Introduction to my Treatise, The Causless Ground, etc. I tenderly
entreat and desire that none apply or construe any words contained in these
following Lines, as intended by me in way of Reflection, Blame or Charge,
against either the Body of Friends in general, or any particular Meeting or
Meetings of Friends in particular, or against any Singular faithful Friend or
Friends ^soever. It seems by this, he had this equivocal (...) in his mind,
that not esteeming that (...) to be the Yearly Meeting nor indeed any Meeting
at all, duly and regularly constituted, nor the Friends that made it up to be
faithful Friends; he might throw his Reflections, Blame and Charge, freely
enough upon that Meeting in general, and the Members thereof in particular,
without interfering with his premised desire, that none would apply or construe
any words contained in that Book, as intended by him in way of Reflection,
Blame or Charge, against either the Body of Friends in general, or any
particular Meeting or Meetings of Friends in particular, or against any
Singular faithful Friend or Friends whatsoever. But what a depth of Deceit must
lodge in him the meanwhile?

26. He Charges me with Perversion in saying, The Hurt, Mischief, Dishonor,
Reproach, Grief, that have fallen on the Holy. Name of God, his Truth and
People respectively, by the Printing and publishing his Scandalous Books, are
the proper and direct Effect thereof. And he says, I bring no proof for it, but
that it is apparent. I say there needs no proof for that that is apparent, as
this is. And it is apparent also, that he had a sense and foresight, before he
Printed them, that the printing and publishing those Books of his, would have
that evil Effect, which he himself confessed in the beginning of one (I think
the first of them, Reas. of Sep. p. 2.) where he said, It is too probable the
Enemies of Truth, and of all true Religion, will seek to take advantage
therefrom, and think themselves greatly gratified thereby, so as to rejoice the
more in their Iniquity, and glory over the Sincere Lovers and Professors of Tr^*

What greater hurt or mischief could any do against the Truth, than to give
advantage to the Enemies of Truth, and of all true religion, and thereby so
greatly to gratify them, that they should rejoice the more in their iniquity,
and glory over the sincere Lovers and Professors of Truth? And to do this
knowingly, and against a foresight and sense, that the Enemies of Truth, and
of all true Religion, would seek to take this advantage? Did the Prophets,
John, Christ, the Apostles, any of those he would shelter himself under, ever
do any thing like this? Nay sure. And had he not been heady, high-minded,
selfwilled and regardless of Truth; the foresight and sense he had of that,
which we have since seen come to pass (viz. That the Enemies of Truth, and of
all true Religion, have not only sought, but found, and taken the Advantages he
has given them, and gratified them with, to rejoice the more in their (and his)
Iniquity, and glory over the sincere Lovers and Professors of Truth;) would
have stopped him from publishing those Scandalous Books of his, which have been
the proper and direct Cause of so great hurt and mischief. To excuse himself
from which he again attempts in vain, to frame an Argument from my having said,
The Yearly Meeting did not declrae the matter of Fact in his Books to be false;
and since for matter of Doctrine, they have not (says he) charged me in the
least; how then can a Book, which bath nothing of Untruth or Falsehood in it, be
the proper cause of hurt? In (...) uses a Double fallacy; one in stretching
(...) words of mine, concerning matters of (...) a general sense, which are
expressly restrained in my Books, to particulars. The other, in inferring that
his Book, has nothing of Untruth or Falsehood in it; because the Yearly
Meeting, who were not acquainted with the particular matters of Fact, did not
declare that his Books contain any Untruth or Falsehood in matter of Fact; as
if there could be no Untruth or Falsehood in a Book; unless it were declared to
be in it. What sort of Logic is that? Will he stand by it? That if a Meeting
does not declare a Book to contain any Untruth or Falsehood in it, it thence
follows, that that Book has nothing of Untruth or Falsehood in it? He knows
this is false Reasoning, and he may blush to have offered it. And as he says,
ex veris, nil nisi verum; so I may say to him, ex falsis, nil nisi falsum, and
ex malis, nil nisi malum: From such false and evil arguing as his is, he can
bring forth nothing that is good.

27. His 27th seems to be split off from his 26th, only to increase the
number, that he may not fall short at last of his Tale; for upon my saying, he
has been so far from endeavoring to wipe away the Reproach his Scandalous
Books have cast on Truth and Friends, that in his last (called, The Groundless
Cause of Surmises, etc.) he has sought occasion, by secret flurts, to throw
more on; suggesting as if the Yearly Meeting was guilty of covering or cloaking
thosevile Errors heexclaim'd against, and of lessening them with the smooth
name of Weakness. He replies, How can faithful witnessing against Error, be a
throwing Reproach on Truth, and Friends of it? he may as well say, one contrary
produces another, etc. Ye see ^now Friends, how forward he is advanced in his
Charge of Error, and what ye may expect from him, when ever he shall have a
mind to throw Dirt upon any or all of you. He can instance himself under the
pretense of faithful witnessing again^ Error, and then tell you ye may as well
say Truth produces Error, Light Darkness, Good Evil, as that he does Evil in
throwing Dirt on you.

28. His next Cavil, which he calls Perversion and Fallacy in me, is, that I
seem to own the Doctrine in his Book, and yet altogether wave the chief thing
of Doctrine, wherein the Controversy, he says, lies betwixt them of the other
side and him, and as he judges betwixt him and me, viz. That the faith of
Christ, as he died for our Sins, and rose again; is necessary to our
Christianity and Salvation; that God does justify us, and pardon our Sins for
Christ's sake, who died for us; through our Faith in him, that is always
accompanied with sincere Repentance. In this he has judged wrong; for I have
no Controversy with him about this Doctrine, which I own as well as he. And if
he had not had a wilfully bad memory, he might have remembered that himself has
cited a Passage out of a former Book of mine, (Foundation of Tithes shaken, p.
240.) where I say, If any one expects Remission of Sins by any other way than
the Death of Christ, he renders the Death of Christ us^ss. This Passage which I
then urged against the Priest, on behalf of the Quakers, clears me now from G.
K's. groundless suggestion. His Cavil at me now is, for not reciting the
forementioned Doctrine (of the Faith of Christ, as he died for our Sins, etc.)
when I recited other Doctrines out of his Book; and he takes advantage thence
to call ^is the chief Doctrine in Controversy betwixt him and them of the
other side. By this I perceive I must either quote all, or nothing out of his
Books, if I mean to escape his Censure; for I am persuaded had I recited this,
and omitted any other of the Doctrines he mentioned, that Doctrine should then
have been singled out for the chief Doctrine in Controversy betwixt him and
them, whatever it had been. The truth is, I omitted to recite that, as not
understanding he had reputed that a Doctrine in Controversy between him and
them. And therefore I chose to recite those Doctrines about which I apprehended
he had made the greatest Clamor. He would increase his own, and others
Jealousy concerning me, by noticing, that I join not (as he says) the works of
Sanctification in the Heart, to Christ's outward Appearance, but to his inward
Appearance. This he labors to show, from several Passages in my Epistle, which
mention Christ's inward Appearance, and work of Sanctification in the Heart: To
all which, I give this short and plain Answer; I do not divide Christ, nor set
his inward Appearance in opposition to his outward. And therefore when I speak
of Christ's inward Appearance in the Heart, and the work of Sanctification
wrought there, I do not exclude, nor intend to exclude, his outward Appearance
in the Flesh, and what he did and suffered therein for Man's Redemption, from
being concerned in our Sanctification, through a living Faith in him. But I do
not allow, that the work of Sanctification is wrought in any, by that outward
Appearance of Christ in the Flesh, in whom his inward Appearance, by his Light,
Grace and Spirit in the Heart, is not known, received and subjected unto. And
it is this inward Appearance of Christ, that gives Man a right knowledge of,
and saving faith of the outward Appearance of Christ.

29. His next is no less a Charge against me, than that of gross and bold
Fiction and Forgery, in saying, Whatever Jealousies and Dissatisfactions any of
other Professions had entertained against us on this account before, they had
no ground or occasion given them therefore; whereas now he has given them
occasion, though unjustly, and without cause, to entertain wrong jealousies of
us. This he says is false in both parts: 1. That other Professions had no
ground of Dissatisfaction given them, touching these Doctrines, before his
Books came forth; for they had (he says) but too much ground from too many
unsound Expressions contained in their Books; (In whose Books? he must needs
mean the Books of Friends; and why not in his own Books, as likely as in any
others?) and which, says he, some of that Profession has objected unto me.
That Profession, what Profession? We spoke of other Professions in general, not
of any one Profession in particular. But whatever Profession it was that
objected, or whatever were the Expressions objected against, they were such, he
says, as he could not answer, otherwise than to acknowledge them to be unsound.
If this be true, I am persuaded it was since he himself came to be unsound. And
this Passage of his puts me in mind of that filthy Libel, lately published with
the Letters D. S. to it, in which I thought I trackt the print of his Foot. 2.
He says, it is false that he has now given them occasion to entertain wrong
Iealousies of us. But in this he contradicts Experience, and the several
Pamphlets that some of other Professions, grafting on his Crab-stock, have
either reprinted of his, or printed of their own, grounded on his, against us,
prove what I said to be true. His saying, That it is clear, as the Light of the
Noon Day, that particular Persons among us, are chargeable with erroneous
Doctrines, is without Proof. And if when he says, It is clear, he means by his
Books, it is so far from being clear as the Light of the Noon Day, that it is
not near so clear as Moonshine.

30. He quarrels with me for construing his Words, That the Doctrine of Christ
crucified, etc. was buried in silence, as if he understood it generally and
universally; whereas (he says) his Words have a Restriction and Limitation very
expressly; for (says he, I do not say buried in silence by all or most part, or
opposed by all, or most part; but buried in silence by some, and opposed by
others. So I cited his Words before, and thereupon put the Question, What
saving is here, what Exception made, either of the Quakers in general, or in
the Plurality, or indeed of any at all? Buried by some, and opposed by others,
will hardly pass for a very express Restriction and Limitation. Nay, according
to common manner of speaking, some, and others, may be taken to comprehend all
in this case; especially, when we shall consider, that he represents these
Doctrines as Dead, let fall, extinct; which (as I noted before, though he takes
no notice of it) is implied by his Words [to revive and raise up]. Nor does his
later Invention help him, to wit, that he did chiefly intend this, with respect
to those parts of America where the Controversy began; for his Word [Chiefly]
shows he did intend it elsewhere besides America. And he now says, he finds it
buried with too many hereaway in England, as well as in America: Nay, he can
conclude no other, he says, concerning me. But the best on it is, I am not to be
concluded by his Conclusions.

31. His One and Thirtieth is worded nonsensically: But that which I gather to
be his meaning in it is, that my saying, The Servant is not to frame his
Message himself, but to deliver the Message his Lord gives him to deliver;
(which was said to answer, or rather obviate an Objection, That those Doctrines
relating the Birth; Death, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. of Christ, as to the
outward Body, are not so frequently or constantly declared in our public
Meetings, as those that relate to the inward Appearance and work of Christ in
the heart.) He says, imports, that the Lord does not call his Servants so
frequently to preach the Faith of Christ without, as of Christ within; and
this, he says, proves, that in the Opinion of T. E. the Doctrine and Faith of
Christ without, is not so necessary to Regeneration, as the Faith of Christ
within, or rather not at all absolutely necessary. This is a grosser
Perversion, on his part of my Words, than any he can charge on me; for the
Reason I gave for this, was, not that it was less necessary, but that it was
more known. Therefore I said, p. 55. When it pleased God to raise up, and send
forth a true Gospel Ministry again, etc. it was agreeable to the Divine Wisdom,
to bring to light that which had been hidden, to restore to the Nations that
which had been lost, to turn People to that which they had been turned from, to
instruct them in that which they were most ignorant of, etc. Hence (said I,) I
conceive it has come to pass, that they whom the Lord have sent forth to
preach the everlasting Gospel in this Day, have been led and guided by him, to
teach People that which they knew not, rather than that which they professed to
know before; to open those Doctrines of Life and Salvation, which the People
were ignorant of, and Strangers to, rather than those which they were
acquainted with, and had been all along trained up in. From all which it is
very apparent, that I did not deny the Doctrine and Faith of Christ without, to
be necessary to our Regeneration, as well as that of Christ within; but that
that without was more known already to the People, than that within.

32. He quarrels with me for saying, That though, as the Apostasy from the life
and power of Christianity gained place, etc. the inward Appearance of Christ by
his Spirit in the Heart, was departed from, and the Doctrines thereof generally
lost and forgotten: Yet the Doctrines relating to the outward Appearance of
Christ in the Flesh, and what he therein did, and suffered for Man's
Redemption, were not lost, but retained and preached through all Ages, and by
every sort or sect of professed Christians; insomuch that G. K. now calls those
Doctrines which he pretends to be raised up to revive and raise up, such
Doctrines as are held in common by us with all other Professions. This angers
him so, that I have scarce found him more fretful in any part of his Book than
here: From whence I conclude he finds himself pincht, and would supply his
weakness and want of Argument, with noise and angry words. He calls it Fallacy,
Perversion, Feigning, Threadbare Excuse, Fig-leaf that cannot cover, deceitful
Excuse, frivolous Excuse, etc. His Answer is, The true Doctrine of the Faith of
Christ without, as he came in the Flesh, etc. was as much lost in the time of
the Apostasy, as the true Doctrine of the Faith of Christ within; to wit, not
the bare historical literal faith of Christ, that I confess was not lost; but
the true living Faith, and the Doctrine of it, was as much lost, as that of his
inward Appearance.

Here he varies the Terms from the Doctrines relating to the outward Appearance
of Christ, (which was the subject we were upon,) to the true living Faith, and
the Doctrine of it, (which was not the Subject we were upon.) And to prove his
Charge against me, of Fallacy, Perversion, Feigning, etc. He alleges that the
true living Faith, and the Doctrine of it, was lost in the Apostasy; which it
might be, and yet the Doctrines relating to the outward Appearance of Christ in
the Flesh, etc. might not be lost, as I asserted they were not. This shifting
the Terms, is a Fallacy and Perversion in him, and seems to be done with design
to help himself off from what he was upon. But he cannot so escape, he has
hampered himself too fast to get off: For in his Causeless Ground, p. 3. this
very Doctrine of the Faith of Christ without, viz. That the Faith of Christ, as
he died for our Sins, and rose again, is necessary to our Christianity and
Salvation, and that God does justify us, and pardon our Sins for Christ's sake,
who died for us, through faith in him, that is always accompanied with sincere
Repentance, etc. This I say, (which he now says, was as much lost as the true
Doctrine of the Faith of Christ within,) is there set by G. K. amongst the many
great Doctrines of the Christian Faith, (and the first of them,) which he says
we hold in common with all sorts of other Professions.

But if this Doctrine of the Faith of Christ without was lost, as he says it
was, how comes it that all sorts of other Professions have it, and hold it in
common with him, as he says they do? If he and they hold it in common, they
must hold it as he does. And that he holds they do so, appears by his saying,
Many of all sorts that frequent our Meetings, of other Professions, are well
affected with our Testimony, to the inward Appearance of God in Christ,
together with the Holy Spirit in Men's Hearts, while they find us warm and
zealous in our Testimony to the other great Doctrines of the Christian Faith,
held in common with them. Of which, in the next Line, he gives this Doctrine of
the Faith of Christ without, for the first instance, as I have cited it before.
But if all sorts of other Professions hold it, and hold it as he does, (which
they must, if he hold it in common with them,) how can he say (and say truly,)
that it has been as much lost in the time of the Apostasy, as the true
Doctrine of the Faith of Christ within? Sure he will not say, that the true
Doctrine of the Faith of Christ withn, is held in common by him, with them of
all sorts of other Professions.

Besides, seeing (as G. K. says,) The true Doctrine of the Faith of Christ
without, teaches, The the only true saving Faith of Christ'^ Death, etc. is
wrought in Men's Hearts, by Divine Illumination, Revelation and Inspiration, and
is taught and begot by the Spirit in Men's Hearts: There is the greater reason
that the inward Appearance of Christ by his Light, Grace and Spirit in the
Heart, should be the more frequently preached, and Men directed and turned to
that inward Teaching by the Spirit in their Hearts, that by the Divine
Illumination, Revelation and Inspiration thereof, the true Faith of Christ's
death, etc. may be begot and wrought in their Hearts.

His 33d, 34th, 35th Charges, relate all to one matter, and seem to be divided
and subdivided by him, to make the greater show. The first he calls a
Perversion of his modest Proposition, about correcting some unsound Words in
some Friends Books, as if with purpose he would hunt for, discover and expose,
if he can, the nakedness of such as in comparison of himself, may justly be
reputed and called Fathers in the Truth. This he thinks an uncharitable
construction of his Words, and that no good Christian that loves the Truth more
than Men, would judge the worse of him for correcting them tenderly and
Christianly, not as an Enemy, but as a Friend and Brother. But it may be
guessed how tenderly and Christianly he would deal with the Dead, by his harsh
and unchristian dealing with the Living, whom he has not dealt with us as a
Friend and Brother, but as an Enemy: His comparing his correcting work to Sem's
and Iaphet's going backwards to cover their Father's Nakedness, gave me fit
occasion to tell him he had mistook his point, and taken up Ham's work, instead
of Sem's and Iaphet's. For Sem and Iaphet covered the Nekedness, which
execrable Ham had discovered and exposed, as G. K. would do. In this he says, I
falsely accuse him; but instead of proving I do so, he turns off, and says, I
reflect not only on him, but on the late Christian Teachers and Writers, who
have corrected the Errors and unsound Expressions contained in the Books of
them, called the Greek and Latin Fathers. In comparing the Books of Friends, to
the Books of them called The Greek and Latin Fathers, he has not done as a
Friend and Brother, but as an Enemy; in supposing Friends Books to have been
written by no better guidance, nor clearer sight, than theirs who lived and
writ in those dark times.

He is so idle, as to charge me with perverting the Scripture Words, in saying,
Blessed Sem and Japhet did therefore go backward, that they might not see their
Father's Nakedness. And he makes this one of my 50 Perversions, by which you
may see how hard he was put to it to make his number up. But instead of proving
this a Perversion, he says, As if there were not a further matter and mystery
in it. Perhaps there might be; but if there were, he has not showed it, nor my
Perversion. But he says, If it had been only that they must not see their
Father's nakedness, they might have covered their Face and Eyes, and gone
forward, and not see their Father's Nakedness. But they took a more sure way in
going backward, and that which freed them from all suspicion of seeing, or
being willing to see their Father's Nakedness.

36. He says, I pervert his modest Proposition, (for every Proposition of his
is modest with him; and perhaps none but his.) That every one owned by us to be
a Member of our Christian Society, give some Declaration of their Faith. This
which he calls a modest Proposition, I showed from his own Words, was an
Imposition of a Verbal Confession of Faith, without which none should be
admitted into Church fellowship with him. His Words are, We are convinced and
persuaded in our Consciences, that God calls us to separate from such
Unbelievers, and not to be yoked together in Church Fellowship and Discipline
with any that we have not proof of by Confession of the Mouth, etc. Reas. of
Sep. p. 22.

37. He complains also, and makes it his 37th Charge, that I pervert his Words,
that he makes a verbal Confession, the Door of admittance into our Society;
which, he says, is altogether false. This depends upon the former, and is
proved by those Words of his which I gave for proof of that, viz. We are
convinced (said he) and persuaded in our Consciences, that God calls us to
separate, etc. and not to be yoked together in Church Fellowship and
Discipline, with any that we have not proof of, by Confession of the Mouth,
etc. This is that I call Verbal Confession. If he like not the Word Verbal, let
him take Oral, or Confession of the Mouth, which is all one.

From my observing out of R. Barclay's Book, called the Anarchy, p. 48. (which
G. K. had perversely quoted,) that R. B. does not make a bare Profession, verbal
Confession or Declaration of Principles, etc. to be any Terms at all of
Church Communion, G. K. taking it to himself, charges a Perversion on me, and
says, This is false, I make them not the Terms at all, when the Profession is
but barely verbal. But he has no such guard in the Place before quoted, where
he says, We are convinced, etc. that God calls us to separate, etc. and not
to be yoked in Church fellowship, etc. with any that we have not proof of by
Confession of the Mouth, that they are sound in the Faith. So that he makes a
Verbal Confession, a proof of their being sound in the Faith, and this makes a
Verbal Confession, yea, a bare verbal Confession, sufficient to yoke them, (as
he phrases it) together in Church Fellowship.

His 39th, 40th, and 41st, Relate to his pretended Quotations out of R.
Barclay's Book, before mentioned, and my Observations thereupon, from which he
picks several Quarrels; one, that from his saying (as the express Doctrine of
R. B. though it be not,) That some Principles and Doctrines and Points of Faith
are necessary to be agreed upon, etc. and to be owned, professed and declared
by us, to be as it were the Terms that draw us together, and the Bond by which
we become centred into one Body and Fellowship, etc. He says, I pervert his
Words to a wrong sense; as if his Sense were, That Men were to contrive and cut
out their own Terms, and before they entered into a Society or Fellowship,
should consider, consult and conclude among themselves what Principles,
Doctrines and Practices they would have to be the Terms and Bond of their
Society. Though this was not spoken directly of him, (but with respect to the
Quotation he feigned to give out of R. B.) yet he did well enough to take it to
himself; for I verily think it to be his Sense, and the Terms he propounded it
in, speak the same. And though he says he did not mean by agreeing, a humane,
political Contrivance or Design, but a Divine Agreement; yet I make no question
but he meant an Agreement of his own contriving and cutting out: And I doubt
not that he would call any such thing Divine, that were of his Contriving. He
asks, If I know not that Men may well agree together in one Faith, by the
Spirit's inward working in their Hearts, as well as they may agree together in
one Prayer, by the Spirit, etc? I answer, Yes, I do. But would he have some
certain Form of Prayer agreed upon, and set forth, for all to be obliged to
pray by at all times, because Men may agree together in one Prayer by the
Spirit? That would be Common Prayer indeed. It is one thing to propose certain
Principles, Doctrines and Points of Faith to be necessarily agreed upon, and
being so agreed upon, a Confession thereof to be imposed to be owned, professed
and declared to be, as it were, terms of Communion, and the Bond of Fellowship:
And it is another thing to be drawn together by the inward force and virtue of
Truth, through the Operation of the Divine Spirit in the Heart, into an
Agreement in the Belief of the same Principles, Doctrines and Points of Faith;
and so also to agree substantially in making confession thereof, when and
wheresoever the honor of God requires it of us.

My Discovery that he has falsely quoted R. B. angers him extremely, and he
rails at me for it like himself; but that will not clear him. He says, I most
fraudulently put a false gloss upon his Words, about the Word [agreed on]; and
next, that I deceive and abuse my Reader, as if he (G. K.) did put the same
Gloss upon R. B 's Words. But all this is trifling; both his Book and mine are
in the Reader's Hands, and I dare trust it to the Impartial Reader's Judgment.
He complains that I endeavor to make the Reader believe he wronged R. B. in
citing some Words of his, and that because he cited not so many of his Words,
as I cited after him. This is a foul fallacy; for G. K's Blame lies not in
giving a Quotation out of R. B. too short, but in giving a false Quotation for
a true one; or in forging a Quotation. For neither in the Words he quoted, nor
in that Page, nor in that Book, nor in all the Books of R B. can G. K. find
that which he has pretended to give, as the express Doctrine and Testimony of
R. B. in the 48th Page of R. B's Book, called the Anarchy etc. He struggles to
get loose, but cannot; He says, he cited as many of R. B's Words, as were
sufficient to prove, that it is R. B's Doctrine and Testimony, that Principles
and Doctrines, etc. are as it were the Terms that have drawn us together, etc.
But R. B. does not say so of Principles and Doctrines indefinitely, or of the
Principles and Doctrines in general, that we will agree upon to be such; but of
those Principles, Doctrines and Practices, into the belief of which we are
gathered together, without any Constraint or Worldly respect, by the mere force
of Truth upon our Understandings, and its power and influence upon our Hearts.

Again, G. K. says he did not say R. B. used the Word [Agreed]: See his own
Words, in p. 8. of his Book called The causeless Ground of Surmises, which are
these, That some Principles and Doctrines, and Points of Faith, are necessary
to be agreed upon, etc. is the express Doctrine and Testimony of R. Barclay 's
Book above mentioned, page 48. Judge now how little this Man is to be trusted.

He calls it a gross Perversion in me, for ins^ating, that in his Book (Some
Reasons and Causes, page 16.) He had cited R. B's Words. But it was not (says
he) his Words, but his Doctrine, that I mention in that place, as to the
substance of it, but not as to that particular circumstance of answering to
some plain Questions with Yea; or nay. Had not I discovered his Falsehood in
this, he had gone off snug with his Quotation, as a very fair Quotation taken
out of R. B's Book. But now he is put to his shifts; and to shift it off, he
pretends now that he did not intend to give R. B's Words, but his Doctrine; and
lest that cover should prove too short for him, he falls from the Doctrine, to
the substance of the Doctrine. Now let us repeat again the Quotation he gave,
and then let the Reader Judge of it. It is in p. 16. of his Reason of the
Separation, where he proposes, that we agree together to put Rob. Barclay 's
Doctrine into Practice, which, says he, is (He does not say, the substance of
which is, but which is) to declare our Faith and Persuasion in certain
Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Faith and Religion, that by the same, as
well as by a good Life and Conversation, it may be known who are qualified to
be Members of our Church, and that every one owned to be a Member of our
Church, declare his Faith and Persuasion in every one of these Fundamentals,
which is a Secondary Bond of our Union, the Spirit being the Principal, which
may be easily done by answering to some plain questions, with Yea, or Nay. Let
any one now, that reads these words, Judge whether they were not designed to
persuade the Reader, that not only this was R. B.'s Doctrine, but that these
were the very words in which he had delivered it. Whereas ye see now, G. K. not
only confesses they are not his words, but dares not adventure to say, they are
plainly and directly his Doctrine; but the substance of his Doctrine: And yet
even that I deny. I say they are neither R. B.'s, Words nor Doctrine, nor the
Substance of his Doctrine. And had his Quotation lain in a tolerable compass to
be recited, I would have given it: But he cites for it, Sect. 4, p. 32, 33. and
Sect. 6. p. 48, 49. to which I again refer and recommend every Reader, that has
or can proc^re that Book of R. B.'s called The Anarchy of the Ranters, etc.
That G. K.'s Deceit herein may be more generally known.

He says all my proof, that it is not R. B. 's Doctrine, is, that I assure the
Reader, it is not: But (says he) let the Reader compare my Citations at
length,) in my Reason and Cause of Separation, p. 24, 25. and he shall find it
is his Doctrine. But, besides my assuring the Reader it is not so, and my
Referring him for certainty to the Original Book; I have now too other proofs
to offer, which though not positive and direct, are strong Presumptives against
G. K. One is, that he has not attempted to Prove that this is the Doctrine or
Substance of the Doctrine of R. B. in that Book, by producing now R. B.'s own
words to manifest it. And the other is, that he does not now refer his Reader
to R. B.'s Book for Satisfaction; but to his own Book, and the Quotations
therein, which he pretends to have taken out of R. B.'s Book, which perhaps he
may have falsified, as well as this.

42. His next Cavil is grounded on a Quibble, In his Causless ground of
Surmises, p. 10. he said, I^ it not high time that by the general Consent,
advice and approbation of the most Judicious, Wise and Understanding of Friends
now alive, all the most necessary Principles and Doctrines of our Faith, both
common and peculiar, should be published and made known? etc. I minding more
the Substance of his proposition, than Circumstances, Answered, Is that, as a
new thing, to be done now? adding, What Principle, or Doctrine of our Faith,
either common or peculiar, can he assign, that has not been published and made
known, perhaps before he knew either our Faith or us? He calls this a
Perversion, and says, It is a new thing yet to be done; and he believes I am
not able to show him that Book where it is done by general Consent. So that I
perceive he expects it all in one Book. But what if it be done in several
Books, and that by some that are not now alive, who yet perhaps might be as
Judicious, Wise and Understanding, as any that are now alive? Will not this
serve his turn? I doubt, Not: For he will object perhaps that it has not been^
done by general Consent of the most Judicious, Wise and Understanding Friends?
He says, It is not the consent of a few, or of the Second Days Meeting at
London, who (that he may speak in the words, as well as from the Spirit of
Core) he says take too much upon them, that he means, but the general Consent
of the most Judicious Friends. But how will he do to find out the most
Judicious Friends now alive? Who, does he think (himself excepted) Judicious
enough to Judge, who are the most Judicious, Wise and Understanding Friends now
alive? But before so great and difficult a work be undertaken, it may be fit to
consider what need there is of this. The Apostles of our Lord, and the
Primitive Christians, contented themselves without it. Did they ever get
together the most Judicious, Wise and understanding amongst them, to publish by
their general Consent all the most necessary Principles and Doctrines of their
Faith, both common and peculiar? I believe he is not able to show me that Book
wherein that is done. Yet the necessary Principles and Doctrines, of their
Faith, both common and peculiar, were published and made known by some or other
of them, in their several writings, though not in one Book, or by such general
consent, advice and approbation, as he now proposes. And he has not assigned
any Principle, or Doctrine of our Faith, (which is the same with theirs of old)
that has not been already published and made known.

His 43, 44, 45. Charges relate to his Suggesting that Friends make plain
Language, plain habit, etc. Terms of their Communion; which I refuted so fully
before, that I see no cause to say more to it now, especially since he offers
nothing of moment now against what I then writ.

His 46. he calls Perversion in me, for chargeing him with Spurning
disdainfully at the advice given him, to retract the Bitter Language in his
Books. Whereas, says he, I modestly promise to do it, when they have told me
what hard or bitter words I have given to any, that are not due to them,
withal desiring some to give me their good Example. Is this, says he, any
disdainful Spurning? What is disdainful Spurning of advice? If to recriminate
the Advisers, and charge them higher in the same kind, be not? For to their
Advice, says he, I Answer, some who have so advised me, should give me their
good Example, by retracting their much more bitter Language, and more hard and
severe Names they have given, etc. Is not this disdainful Spurning? And whereas
he pretends, that he modestly promised to retract, when they have told him what
hard or bitter words he has given to any that he cannot prove to be due unto
them; he must remember I put him formerly in mind, that by his own confession
he gave his hard Names and words without proof of their being due to them. For
in his Plea of the Innocent p. 11. he says, As for his giving hard Names and
Words to any, it was but conditional, upon Supposition of their holding such
Errors which they did seem to favor. Was this modestly done? Or like a
Christian, to revile and abuse Persons conditionally, and upon Supposition? Why
did he not clear himself of this? Or confess his fault in it? Was it not
because he could not do the one, and has not honesty enough to do the other.

47. He persists in retracting the acknowledgment he made in the Yearly
Meeting, of his passions, etc. Yet blames me for saying he retracted, and
denies he acknowledged he had justly offended any in words or deeds, relating
to the differences in Pensilvania, or elsewhere. But he answers not what I writ
of that before (in my 64, 65, 66, and 67. pages,) which lies still on him, and
will.

48. So will also what I there said (from James 1. 26. and 3. 11. 12.)
concerning his unbridled Tongue; which he in vain retorts on me, as guilty of
the Perversions, Fictions and Forgeries, etc. he charges: Which being not real
but feigned by him, and charged without proof, is a further proof against him,
that his Fountain is bitter, and his Religion vain.

49. His charging me with Perversion, in affirming that he was not condemned in
Pensilvania without all hearing Conviction and Trial, is a Perversion of his
own. For (though I believe it is true that he was not) yet I did not so affirm;
but taking notice of his frequent Complaining that he had been Condemned in
America, without all hearing Conviction or Trial, I said, in a Parenthesis,
(though that is both denied and disapproved by the Friends there.) So that his
is rather a Perversion, or false Charge upon me.

50. The last of his Fifty Charges, he calls a Complex and Bundle of false
Accusations and Misrepresentations. The parts whereof are;

First, That I say he is not in Unity with faithful Friends. This is not only
too true, but too plain to be doubted.

Secondly, That I accuse him of hardness in his saying, I declare my real
Intention to remain in Unity with all Faithful Friends. What else could it be,
but extreme Hardness, for him to declare his real intention to remain in Unity
with all Faithful Friends every where, after he had (as I there showed) broken
from the Unity, and gone out into an open Separation from Friends?

Thirdly, That his Meeting with Friends, and continuing to exercise his Gift of
Ministry (as he calls it) amongst them, is a very great Exercise and burden to
Friends. I was not positive it is. But I said to Friends, If he continue to
Meet with you in the same Spirit, and mind, in which he went out from Friends,
and made the Breach and Separation elsewhere, his Meeting with you will be but
a Burden to you, and an aggravation of Condemnation to himself.

And with respect to his Preaching in Friends Meetings, I said, While he
continues in that Evil Mind, and Spirit of Contention, Division, and Discord,
wherein he has of late appeared, it must needs be a very great Exercise and
Burden to you.

But I am not dissatisfied with his changing the Words from [Will be] and [must
needs be], to [is]: For I am fully satisfied it is so; and ye, my Friends,
whose suffering Lot it is to hear him, I make no question, find and feel it so.

Fourthly, That he gave such Interruption, and made so great disturbance at the
First Public Meeting he appeared in at London (which was at the Bull and
Mouth,) as the like has scarce been known in any Meeting in that City. Of this
there were so many Witnesses present, that he might with the like Modesty deny
he was at that Meeting, as that he made such a Disturbance there.

He asserts again his being in Unity, thus; As I am at present in Unity with
Faithful Friends, so I still declare my sincere Intention to remain in Unity
with Faithful Friends. But as he is not at present in Unity: So his declared
intention to remain in Unity, is not sincere.

He says, Neither I, nor any of my Abettors, can prove him guilty of making any
Breach, or Violation of true Unity with Faithful Friends. Friends, Ye who have
his Books, and mine, before you, are the proper Judges of that; and to your
Judgment I leave it. But what heed can be given to the Words of a Man, who
speaks not plainly, but with Equivocation? In his Causeless Ground of
Jealousies, he tenderly entreated that none would apply or construe any Words
therein, as intended by him in way of Reflection, blame or Charge against
either the Body of Friends in general, or any particular Meeting, etc. Yet in
that Book reflected on, blamed and charged the Yearly Meeting highly. But he
had an Equivocating Salvo to himself, which was that he did not own that to be
the Yearly Meeting, or any Meeting at all duly and regularly Constituted.

Now he cries he is in Unity with all Faithful Friends. And how (in his
reserved sense) can that be otherwise, since he owns none for Faithful Friends,
but such as are in Unity with him?

He refers to the Innocence of his Life and Conversation, for Proof of the
sincerity of his Spirit and Heart. But he will get little advantage that way.
It is not enough for a Man to be free from gross Immoralities, and the common
Debaucheries of the Age: (For that an Hypocrite will take care to be:) But he
that will recommend the sincerity of his Heart and Spirit, by his Conversation,
must have his Conversation blameless toward God, as well as toward Man: For
there is a Conversation in the Church, as well as in the World; and he that
orders his Conversation aright, will be careful not to give Offense to the
Church of God, as well as not to the World.

What G. K's. Conversation is in the World, I ^ddle not with. But what his
Conversation of ^to Years has been, in the Church, with res^ct to his raising
Contention and Strife, sowing Discord, causing Divisions, and making an open
Rent and Breach, his unruly and turbulent Carriage and Behavior, Railing a
^and Reviling Friends at his pleasure, is too notoriously manifest to need
proof. And therefore, while his Tree brings forth such Evil Fruits, he can have
no Relief, by urging, That the Tree should be judged by its Fruits; by which it
is already judged, and found to be of a corrupt Nature.

He suggests that I, and some others who promote my Book, seek to drive him
forth from the Unity and Fellowship of Friends, and from abiding in the
Inheritance of the Lord; Whereas it is certain and evident, that he was gone
from the Unity and Fellowship of Friends, before my Book was Written, or I had
any thing to do with him. And how little he regards the Inheritance of the
Lord, to abide in it, may be gathered, not only from his joining himself to the
Separate Meeting in Harp-Lane, but his going to the Meetings of other
Professions of almost all sorts.

He would shake off the blame, of having made that disturbance, which was at
the Bull-Meeting in London, presently after he came over, by saying, Many can,
and do bear him witness, that he was not the Cause, nor beginning of it. This I
leave to you, Friends of London, who were then present, to judge of, and to
measure the Truth of what he says in other things, by his falseness in this.

He adds, It ought not to be reckoned a disturbance, when Errors and false
Doctrine is Preached in a public Assembly, in a Zealous Christian Spirit to
reprove it, when things are come to that pass especially, that private Reproof
is not regarded. By this he suggests, that Error, and false Doctrine was
Preached in that public Assembly at the Bull, and that by some whom he had
reproved privately for the same before.

But of this he has given no Proof, nor Instance; both which unless he do, he
is justly to be reputed a false Accuser and Slanderer. But to balance the
Disturbance made at the Bull, he puts me in mind of a Disturbance, which he
says I made at Grace Church Street Meeting, in speaking against a Person, whose
Ministry (he says) was well owned by Hundreds, some of which, he says, cried
out on me; Shame, Shame. To which I say, I remember well both the time and
occasion of that Disturbance; which was not made by me, but by a sort of Unruly
People that joined with that unruly Person.

As for my part, I did not in that Meeting interrupt that Person while he was
speaking, but waited long (under a very great weight and Burden, that his
Preaching brought upon me) until he had done, before I spoke a word. And when I
had cleared my Conscience in a short Testimony to the Meeting, I sat down
peaceably again, and did not enter into any Debate, or Strife with those unruly
People of the Separation, who, by railing at me, on his behalf, made that
Disturbance that was; and whose abusive rudeness toward me, made some cry out
on them; Shame, Shame.

And surely if G. K. thinks (as he seems here to do) that neither I, nor any
other should call it a Disturbance in him to bear a public Testimony against a
Man, that ought not (he says) to be owned to be a Minister of Christ: He ought
not to call it a disturbance in me, to bear a public Testimony against that
Man, that I then testified against, who ought not to be owned to be a Minister
of Christ, not only because he hat divided himself from the Church of Christ,
by going into, and keeping up an open Separation; but for other matters also,
relating to Conversation, which that Man well knows, I know of him, and have
both privately and publicly reproved him for some of them.

But as for G. K.'s saying, that my speaking against that Person, gave offense
to Hundreds, it is not to be regarded; it being his way, and words of course
with him, when he has a mind to magnify his matter by Numbers, to use the word
Hundreds at a venture. So he does here, thrice in one page, -- gave great
Offense to Hundreds; -- whose Ministry was well owned by Hundreds; -- Hundreds
hear Witness, etc. now that these are but words of course with him, and used
only to deceive, may be seen in this last Instance, of his Hundreds of
witnesses, by taking notice what he says they bear witness too, viz that my
Ministry (says he) is both refreshing and edifying to them, and is burdensome to
none, but to the Ignorant and unfaithful, etc. If his Hundreds of witnesses
could have witnessed truly, that his Ministry is refreshing and edifying to
them: Yet if they will take upon them to witness, that it is burdensome to
none, but the Ignorant Unfaithful and prejudiced, it is an Hundred to one, if
one in an hundred believe them. But by this hint, it may be seen what little
weight there is in his talk of Hundreds, both in this and his other Books.

He complains of me, for accusing his innocent true words, as savouring of a
Boasting Spirit, because (says he) I humbly and modestly did mention my Thirty
Years Labor in the work of the Ministry, and God having blessed my Labors with
great Success, in being an Instrument to the bringing many into the blessed
Unity, etc. And he appeals to all that have a true savor, whether these words
savor of a boasting Spirit, he (as he says) only using them by way of
argument, to persuade some that had a wrong jealousy of him, that he intends no
breach among faithful Friends. His modesty and humility is pretty well seen and
known by this time. And had not this boasting Vanity been deeply rooted in his
Nature, the gentle Touch I gave him in my former Epistle p. 70. upon this
passage now recited, of his setting forth his Thirty Years Labor in the work
of the Ministry, and his Great Success therein, etc. might have taught him to
think more modestly and humbly of himself. But he was so far from taking
warning by that, that he begins his Epistle, which he writ since, much after
the same manner, thus. Notwithstanding that I find some (of whom with respect
both to my former Labor of love and Service in the Truth, toward them, and to
my present Service in the Truth, etc. I might have expected better things) so
deeply prejudiced, etc. What else does this bespeak, but a fond Conceit of his
own Doings? Many, I believe, who have deserved more, have less sought
Commendation for their Services. And had he been in the true Humility, and in
that Charity, which va^nteth not it self, and is not puffed up, 1. Cor. 13. 4.
he would have followed the Apostle's Counsel, not to think of himself more
highly than he ought to think, Romans 12. 13. But if it might have becomed him at
any time, to have spoken so highly of his own Services: Yet his doing it now,
is as unseasonable, as if a Cow, that had given a good soop of Milk, should
boast of the goodness or quantity thereof, after she had spilt it, by kicking
down the Pail. I have no inclination to render his former Services Cheap; which
I think he has but too much done himself (though he sees it not) by coupling
them with his present Doings. And I give but a Touch on this, not doubting,
Friends, that ye will observe in those Expressions of his, A Vein of Spiritual
Pride; which he in vain endeavors to cover, by pretending he used them by way
of Argument, to persuade some; that he intended no breach among Faithful
Friends. Which yet, could be but a weak Argument, to them that know and
consider, that Others before him (some of whom had labored long in the Work of
the Ministry, and perhaps as successfully as he) have turned aside, as well as
he, and made Breaches among Friends; of which he himself seemed formerly
sensible.

Thus, Friends, I have gone through his Fifty Charges, And said more to them,
than either they or he deserved of me. Which I have done for Truth's sake, and
yours, more than for my own. For I dare trust to the Goodness of the Cause I
have undertaken, and the Innocence of my Intention, in undertaking it; an
Evidence of which I have no doubt to find in the Heart of Faithful Friends.

But my Desire and Care is, so plainly and nakedly to lay open before you, what
Spirit he is of, and is acted by, and the mischievous Design thereof, that none
may be longer deceived by him; nor any, by seeming to countenance him, may
strengthen and harden him in his Opposition to Truth, to their hurt and his
Ruin. I confess I cannot treat him as a Friend, because I find him an Enemy to
Truth.

Yet none could be more glad than I, to see him return to a right mind. For
then he would see himself to be, what you and I see him to be; and would be
more forward to condemn himself, than to quarrel with others.

But I must needs say, I have little hopes to see so good an effect wrought on
him; because I cannot find sincerity in him. I gave many Instances in my former
Epistle of his Insincerity and double Dealing. Since which he has sent forth,

First, That Sheet single by it self, which he calls a Loving Epistle, but
without any spark or appearance of Love in it. He directs it to all the
Moderate, Judicious, and Impartial among the People called Quakers, intimating
thereby, that (in his Opinion) the Quakers, as a Body, or People, are not
Moderate, Judicious, or Impartial.

I dare say, should any one of those, that have appeared most favorable to
him, but thwart him in his way, or reprove him for his Unruliness and
disorderly Doings, he shall forthwith reject such an One, and raze him out of
his Roll of Moderate, Judicious, and Impartial Ones. And I am persuaded, should
all Friends deal so with him (which they have just cause to do) he would reject
them all, and not own one Moderate, Judicious, or Impartial among us.

Do ye not see, Friends, how he Slights, Rejects, and casts off, not only
Persons, but Meetings, at his pleasure, if they answer not his mind?

The Second Day's Morning Meeting, consisting mostly (as ye know) of Ministering
Friends, he Derives and Scoffs, and Represents it as managed by Parties.

The Yearly Meeting he represented in his former Paper, (called The Causeless
Ground, etc.) as divided: For which I taxed him in my last. In his Epistolary
Sheet, he does not vouchsafe to acknowledge it for a Yearly Meeting; but, when
he speaks of it, says, That which he called the Yearly Meeting, p. 4. so p. 5.
and so p. 7. Nay, he there suggests, as if that Paper, called A true Account of
the Proceedings of the Yearly Meeting, was not given forth by the Yearly
Meeting: For speaking of it, he says, p. 4. The Paper said to be given out by
the Yearly Meeting; though after he had heard it Read, it was delivered to him,
in the Yearly Meeting, in the Name, and as the Act of the Yearly Meeting.

But now in his last Book, which he calls A seasonable Information, etc. He
says downright, p. 28. As for that, called The Yearly Meetings Judgment, I own
it not to be such.

And of the Meeting its self, he says, It cannot be owned to be the Yearly
Meeting, nor any Meeting duly and regularly constitute, etc. p. 27. So that,
Friends, the nearer ye look upon this Man, and the more exactly ye weigh and
consider his Words and Actions, the more plainly ye will see his Shifting,
Shuffling and Double-Dealing, and that he is departed from the Simplicity of
Truth; yet uses the Terms of Truth to beguile the Simple by.

For ye see, he calls his Sheet A Loving Epistle Addresses it to you, under the
kind Compellation of Dear Friends and Brethren; and concludes, that he remains
in true Love your Friend in the Truth: As if, Who but he to Friends! And who
but Friends to him! Whereas, upon all occasions that have hitherto Offered
since his last Arrival in England, (so far at least as has come to my notice)
when Friends have had to do with him, he regards neither Friend, nor Friends,
nor Meetings of Friends, if they do not answer his humor.

And Friends, it is observable, and worth your taking notice of, that in the
Idle Challenge he made (in the Postscript to his Epistle) to me, and those
Friends that approve my Book, for a public Meeting between him and us, he
provides by a particular Caution, that all Sober and Moderate Persons, whether
Friends, or Friendly People, may have freedom to be present.

What else does this bespeak, but that he has more Confidence in the Populace,
than in Friends? In those that are not, of us, Than in those that are? Do ye
not see, Friends, even by this, Where his Life lies? Does it not appear that he
is departed from the Communion of the Saints in Light, and from the Fellowship
of the Faithful, whose Unity is with the Father, and with the Son, in the
Eternal Spirit?

And though he directs his Epistle to the Moderate, Judicious, and Impartial
among the People called Quakers: Yet it is the Moderate Persons (as he calls
them) that are not Quakers, whom he would have present, to make his Appeal to,
against the Quakers, could he but get a Stage to wrangle on. To procure which,
he urges that the Scripture says, Of making many Books there is no end. But how
unseasonably is this urged by him now, when he should defend his Books, who
has tumbled out so many Scandalous Books to the dishonor of the Truth, and
Reproach of Friends, as he has done, without any regard to that Scripture? He
urges also the Example of the Barbican Meeting, thereby setting, not me only,
but the Second Days Morning Meeting, and all Friends that approve and promote
my Book, in the place of those envious Baptists, that then made War against
Truth and Friends. By this, Friends, ye may see to what a degree he is
degenerated, and whither his Envy has run him. But as there is no parallel
between that Case and this, (those Baptists having Blasphemed the Principle we
prosess, traduced the whole Body of Friends, and in a Mock-Meeting condemned su
unheard) so their yiedling to such a Meeting at Friends demand, will neither
excuse him for demanding the like, nor would have blamed Friends had it been
denied. But since by his publishing his Fifty Charges against me, with such
proofless Proofs as he was able to make thereof, he has put the Cause into
another way of Trial, and given every Reader opportunity to judge, both of his
Charges and Proofs; I think not my self obliged to take any farther notice of
his daring Challenge, than to tell him, that, had he not himself superseeded it
by Printing, I should have expected some assurance of his being reclaimed from
that abusive rudeness, wherewith he usually treats those he contends with,
before I should have given him such an Opportunity to gratify the Rabble; (who
in such Assemblies, and on such Occasions, commonly make the greater part:) And
to disgrace his Profession he yet makes of Truth, by so public a discovery of
his ungoverned Passions; the remembrance of which, from the Yearly Meeting,
makes me desire never to see the like again.

But Friends, I desire that both you and I may be kept in the weighty Life, and
may dwell in a sensible feeling thereof continually, and grow up therein, from
day to day, that we may not only be thereby enabled to savor, discern, and
distinguish Right from Wrong, Good from Evil, that which is of God, from that
which is of the Enemy, in his most specious appearances; but so to cleave to
the one, and reject the other, that nothing that is of the Evil one, and which
tends to make Rents, Di isions, and Breaches among Brethren, or draw from the
Holy Fellowship of the Gospel of Peace, and throw public Scandals upon our
Religious Profession, may receive any Strength, Encouragement, or Countenance
from any that profess the Truth: But that we may all watch over our selves, and
over one another for good, in that which is of God. To whose Impartial Witness
in every one of your Hearts, I recommend the foregoing Lines; and in that Love
that desires, and seeks the good of the whole Body, and of every particular
Member thereof; I remain

The 22th, of the 9th. Month, 1694. Your Friend and Brother, T. E.
POSTSCRIPT.
HAD George Keith been a Man of any Worthiness of Mind, or had the Cause he
mannages been defensible, he would not (though an Adversary) have suffered John
Raunce to have clapped on his abusive Piece at the End of his Book, thereby to
throw Dirt at his Opponent. And had not John Raunce been an unmanly Adversary,
he would have scorned to have crept in at the Tail of another's Books, to
repeat an old Slander, no way relating to the Subject of that Book; when
another Book of mine, called A tair Examination of a foul Paper, relating
chiefly fo himself, hat^ ^ain this Twelve Month on his head, unanswered.

But George Keith's mean mind could not, it seems, withstand the slight
Temptation of John Raunce's Offer, to take off an Hundred of his Books:
(Besides, that he was glad of any help to run down his Opponent, if he could,
with Slanders, which he found he could not do with Arguments.) And John Raunce
seemed no less glad of the Opportunity, to creep behind such a Mickle Man, as
G. K. is taken to be, and from the Backside of his Book, to let fly his dirt at
me; wherein he has sufficiently showed his Envy, and the baseness of his mind.
In that former Book, called, A fair Examination of a foul Paper, I not only
laid open John Raunce's Notorious Folly, but plainly convicted him, by several
Instances, of downright Falshod and Lying; which it did more concern him to
have cleared himself of, than to renew (as he has done) his former slander upon
me, about my Father's Burial. But clear himself he could not; therefore he
undertook it not: Slander me he could; and therefore did. He had spread a
Report above a Year ago, That I did not allow my Father a Shroud, but that he
was wrapped in an Old Moth-eaten Blanket. When I heard this (and with what Joy,
and Glorying, he published it) I took notice of it, in a Postscript to that
Book (which was then just ready for the Press) and I therein disproved his
False Report. But because I said, I hear John Raunce has hatched another false
Story against me, he (waving what I had there said to clear my self of it)
catches hold of the Word [Hatched] and, under pretense of clearing himself*not
from having reported and spread, but) from having hatched that: Story, he takes
theadvantage of publishing it again, at the end of G. K's Book, that
wheresoever that Book shall go, he might defame me. The Account he has now
given of it, is, That my Father had no other Shroud but somewhat of an Old
Moth-eaten Blanket; and it was so little and so short, that it would scare
cover his Body. That he had no Cap on his Head, nor any Muffler for his Iaws:
And that The Shroud was so sorry a Thing, that the Man, he pretends to have had
his Relation from, said, He would not have given 6 d. for it. This Account he
pretends to have had from a Man, who, he says, helped to lay my Father into his
Coffin, and saw him Nailed up in the Coffin. But he Names not the Man, nor
where he lives, that he might be spoken with about it: Which shows he had no
mind his pretended Author should be found out, and spoken with, lest his own
Falsehood should be found out also. However, upon John Raunce's Publishing this
Account, I desired two Friends of Aylesbury, viz. Thomas Olliffe, and James
Smith, to go to Holton (the Town where my Father died) and inform themselves as
fully as they could, concerning this matter. I chose rather to employ others in
this Work, than to go my self, that whatsoever Account should be given thereof,
it might be free from all suspicion. Accordingly those two Friends went to the
Place, and though they could not find out any such Man as John Raunce speaks of
(not having his Name to inquire by:) Yet they spoke with the Man in whose House
my Father died, and with the two Women that laid out the Body, from whom, and
under whose hands, they received the following Certificates.

Holton, this Second of December, 1694.
WHereas we are informed that a Report is spread abroad, that Thomas Ellwood's
Father was Buried in an Old Moth-eaten Blanket not worth 6 d. We whose Names
are underwritten, who are the Parties that did lay him out, do hereby Certify,
that we did put on the Body a New Shroud, with a Cap and Muffler, and all
things that are usual for Burial. And that there was no piece of Old Blanket
Buried with him, as has been reported. And the truth of this we shall be ready
to declare to any sober Person that shall inquire of us.

The mark of Mary Weston.
The mark of Mary Stoakes.


And for a further Evidence of the Truth of this, I Daniel Stoakes do declare;
that I bought the Shroud, of Thomas Darvall, of Wendover, by the order of
Thomas Ellwood, who paid me for that, and all other Charges for his Father,
both in the time of his Sickness, and for his Burial. And I also saw the Corpse
wrapped in the Shroud, with the Cap and Muffler, and Face Cloth on; and I did
also help bring him down Stairs, and did help carry him to the Grave. And
Thomas Ellwood did, over and above all my Charge, give me Ten Shillings, to
distribute to the Poor of the Parish, which accordingly I did. Witness my hand.

Witnesses hereunto, Thomas Olliffe. James Smith. The mark of Daniel Stoakes.



Holton December the 10th. 1694.
Whereas it has been reported that Thomas Ellwood's Father was Buried in an
Old Moth-eaten Blanket, not worth 6 d. This is to satisfy all Persons whom it
may concern, that I Francis Weeden (who am the Man that made the Coffin, and
Nailed it up) saw no such thing as a Moth-eaten Blanket: And to the best of my
memory (it being, as I suppose, 12 Years ago) he was decently Buried in a
Shroud. And I do believe that no one can truly report otherwise. Witness my
Hand,

Francis Weeden.


These Certificates clear me fully from John Raunce's False Report, which he
has spread abroad, to the shame of his Slanderous Tongue: Let him, if he can,
clear himself as fairly from having been the Hatcher of it. And now he may take
the Moth-eaten Blanket to himself (if he please) and see if with that, or any
thing else, he can make a Shroud large enough to cover the Infamy of his own D
--. If (according to the saying) a word to the Wise is enough; I presume, to a
Cunning-Man, a Letter of a Word may be enough: And therefore shall forbear to
say more on that Subject, till further Occasion be given.

T. E.




The End.
ERRATA.
P. 16. l. 28. r. the fifty, p. 17. l. 16. for are, r. use. p. 25. l. 19. for
where, r. whose. p. 43 l. 8. for would, r. could. p. 46. l. 15. r. did it. p.
49. l. 25. for have, r. heard. p. 50. l. 27. r. we intend. p. 54. l. 9. for
writing, r. reciting. p. 57. l. 12. after unbelievers. r. etc. p. 58. l. 6. for
here, r. hence. p 62. l. last, dele that. p. 64. l. 27. after part, r. in. p.
69. l. 16. r. Papists. l. 21. r. into the. p. 77. l. 12. for there, r. either.
p. 88. l. 15. r. declare. p. 89. l. 26. for instance r. insconse. p. 91. l. 11.
r. work p. 94. l. 13. r. relating 10. l. 97. l. 21. r. God and Christ. p 115.
l. 9. for hat; r. has.


