AN ENCYCLICAL EPISTLE, Sent to their Brethren by the Venerable Dean and
Chapter of the Catholic CLERGY in England, upon occasion of Dr. Leyburn.
Venerable, and Hond. Brethren,
THE Blessing of Peace and Union is so essentially necessary to every
Community, especially to that which is to succeed the first Christian College
of the Apostles in their carriage and calling, that it is the very Life which
gives such Bodies both their Being and Beauty. 'Twas that which our blessed
Savior breathed upon his Apostles with his own sacred mouth, when he gave them
their Apostolical Mission; Pax vobis, sicut me misit Pater, ita and Ego mitto
vos: And it is that which we so much prize that no Consideration can be so dear
to us as the preserving so in estimable a Jewel. Nay, we judge that even a
Defensive, which may breed some disquiet, is disallowable, if order may be
taken to secure our peace by any other means. But, when we find by too late and
dear experience that our bearing with former injuries and calumnies against our
persons and Church, begets nothing but a more violent proceeding in them; when
we perceive that our long suffering finds no other effect but an implacableness
in contentious, uncharitable and seditious carriage; the same love of Peace
obliges us, though unwilling, to lay open the source of all the disunion and
disasters our poor Church has suffered these late years; ever since, through
our too charitable silence and connivence Doctor Leyburn was permitted to gain
so much opinion and authority as to be able to hurt her. Some particular
passages of whose Demeanor we thought good to signify to you our Brethren by
this our Encyclical Epistle; that being forewarned you may more warily avoid a
compliance with any Disturbers of our quiet or Commencers of Schism in our Body.

'Till about the year 1648. or the beginning of -- 49. our Clergy enjoyed an
happy and peaceable Union; the Chapter having good intelligence both with their
Bishop and their Brethren: not the least noise of siding and gathering into
Factions being heard among them. About which time Dr. Leyburn was sent into
England by my Lord, Vicar General in solidum. In August following there was
held a General Chapter; Mr. Fitton came from Paris sent by our Bishop to
preside in our Chapter as Dean. The Chapter-men from all their Districts being
met, Mr. Leyb. (against the known order and rule of such meetings) brings
thither, without the Dean's notice, two other which were not of the Chapter;
The Dean civilly told them the nature of such meetings permitted only Capitular
men to be present, Hereupon they retired; and it was ordered, that two should
be sent to them from the Chapter to give them reasons for their non admittance.
One of them was satisfied, the other vowed revenge. Mr. Leyb. took their
non-admittance as a great wrong done to himself; and had many contests with our
worthy Dean about it in the time of the Assembly; which was ended with much
satisfaction to all others except Mr. Leyb. Who, after the Assembly, draws a
party to himself, alleging all was governed by Mr. Harrington and Mr. Gage.
Insomuch that the Chapter in and about London, found a Schism insensibly
brought into the Clergy by Mr. Leyb's, means. To stop the increase of which
they desired a meeting with Mr. Leyb as the root from which it grew, and Mr.
Harrington writ a letter to invite him. All met, save Mr. Leyb. and another who
was sick. Only a letter came from Mr. Leyb. not to Mr. Harrington, who had writ
to him, and was his equal and fellow-Vicar, but to Mr. Herbert, desiring to
know the result of the meeting. Mr. Harrington waving this affront, to show the
desire he had of gaining Mr. Leyb. to an union, if possible, ordered two of the
Company to acquaint him that if he could not or would not come to them, they
would all come to him; He answered, they might come. All went, and being sat,
he presently fell very foul in words upon Mr Gage, and could not be brought to
any manner of condescendency unto them by any persuasions, and so after an
hours wrangling, all left him.

After this Mr. Clifford coming into England, did by my Lord Bishop's Order
endeavor to bring him to amity with his Brethren, which he refused, unless
they would yield to him in an unreasonable demand, which was neither in his
Patent as Vicar General, nor (as himself confessed) had he any particular Order
from the Bishops to exact it. Mr. Clifford desired him to refer it to the
Chapter; but he refused again, saying, he would not refer the matter in
difference to the Chapter, but to the ancient Priests, that is, to a few
private persons of his own faction; for scarce any ancient Priests of the
Chapter (though there were many) but he had disobliged them by particular
quarrels. And so Mr. Clifford returned, leaving him as irreconcilable as he
found him.

Finding no ways to prevent Mr. Leyb's. fomenting Divisions among the Clergy,
even in his absence at Doway, the Consult in London resolved to summon a
General Chapter, which met accordingly July 10. 1653. But Dr. Leyb. and his
friend who had vowed revenge formerly (though to end all quarrels kindly
invited thither) effected that my Lord sent his Mandate to dissolve the
Assembly as met to out him from his Episcopal Authority; They amazed at such a
groundless malice, protest their innocence to my Lord. Mr. Leyb's friend gave
under his hand that the letter he writ Dr. Leyb. to send my Ld, was altered in
one part of it, and that himself feigned the rest, to see how they who preach
patience and charity to others, could endure a wrong done themselves. They are
his own words in his own hand yet extant. Now this altered letter passing
through Dr. Leyb's. hand to my Lord, my Lord expressing that he had it a
personis fide dignis, Mr. Leyb. writing at the same time to my Lord, and
enclosing his friends letter, upon the receipt of which two letters immediately
issued the Mandate; it is no hard matter to perceive plainly who was joined with
that misinformer, and so made my Lord express them plurally. Upon examination,
my Lord confessed himself mislead by false suggestions, and promised not to lend
so easy credulity for the future. Yet still we were as far from union as
formerly,

For the whole Assembly writing a civil and condescending letter to Dr. Leyb.
entreating him to keep correspondency with Mr. Harrington, and give him timely
notice of such Missionaries as he sent into England, that Mr. Harrington might
be the better enabled to provide places for them; Mr. Leyb. in his letter to
Mr. Peterson utterly disavow'd ever writing to Mr. Harrington, or sending
Missionaries to him, or of communicating with him or with Mr. Blacklow in the
least; and this was after my Ld. (as appears by his letters to Mr. Walton) was
so sorry for the injury he had done Mr. Harrington, that he continued
correspondence with him to his dying day, and also professed he should hereafter
love him more then ever. Mr. Peterson in his reply demanded why he should
scruple to keep correspondence with Mr. Harrington more then his Predecessors
and our Bishop himself did, and the Clergy both here and abroad do upon all
occasions? or with Mr. Bl. more then Dr. Hyde did, who knew well Mr. Bl's.
Opinions, yet sent to him to live with him in the College; which he did, with
all love, peace, and exemplarity. Mr. Leyb. in his reply alleged exceptions
against Mr. Bl. for approving Mr. Damport 's book; That no man knew the sense
of the ancient Priests (a specious word he ever used, to oppose the Chapter
with) better then he did, and that he was not to be taught. Which was all could
be obtained of him. So that the due order of sending Missionaries hither (in
which consisted a main part of our Union) was utterly broken by his refusing
Communion with our principal Officer.

It was proposed to Vote in the Assembly of 1653. That, seeing the President of
the College of Doway is to be nominated by his Holiness, from whom he receives
his Authority, independent from the Clergy, insomuch that the Superior of the
Clergy (notwithstanding the many great sums the Clergy has given and
procured to be given to that College) has not power upon any occasion
whatsoever to place either Priest or Scholar in that College but by way of
entreaty, which many times has met with rejection; it be consulted whether it
may not be fit all the Clergy be advised to treat with such as give Alms to
that College that their Donations be so left to the Dispose of the Clergy;
that they may have power to raise a stock thereby, and that they may apply the
rents thereof toward the maintenance of such as the Clergy shall think fit to
commend to that College.

This Point was by the Assembly thought fit to be waved for that time for fear
of disgusting of D. Ley. who notwithstanding having notice of this Proposal,
which proceeded no further then a motion, and (though held reasonable yet) was
put off for his sake, calumniated the whole Assembly, that it went about to
take away all charitable Donations to the College: which we leave to your
Wisdoms to judge how true it is; as also, whether it may not now be fit to put
that point in execution, as occasion shall offer.

Afterward my Ld. constituted Mr. Andrew Knightley his Vicar General, a very
virtuous and good man; to whom Dr. Leyb. sent a letter, desiring him to
communicate the contents of it to our Brethren; which were That His Holiness
judged the principal head and members of our Body were Schismatical; that he
would take his Pension from our College because of Mr. Bl. That Mr. Bl. made
us odious to all Christian Princes, the Doctrine therein contained touching
them as much as the King of Scots, (as he termed his Majesty;) That his Book of
Obedience and Government is against the Protector Cromwell as much as any; That
it makes it lawful for any one to kill the Protector in some cases; That it
hence appears, (to wit, amongst other things, from it is being opposite to the
Tyrant Cromwell) That his Book is void of common sense, reason, and religion;
That it is high time to discard him as an unworthy Member out of our Society;
That the least we could do, is to disclaim under our hands and shut him out of
meetings, That he was actually excommunicated, That he sleights Decrees from
Rome, That his other Books have been long since censured, had not the plague
hindered the Congregations from meeting, that he teaches the happiness of
damned souls exceeds all the happiness of this life. Also in the close he has
a gird at the Chapters Authority, that he believes not Mr. Plantin (our Agent)
will say that his Holiness or the Cardinal Protector any ways approved the
Chapter, Dean or Sub-Dean, who yet is ready to attest the contrary, and depose
(if need were) that his Holiness both voluntarily mentioned those as fittest
to govern 'till we had a Bishop, and that the Cardinal Protector told him
hereupon he had not lost his labor in coming. Mr. Bl. aggrieved with this
letter, begged leave humbly of the Consult to clear himself of these
accusations, which can be denied by us to no Chapter-man. His request was
unanimously and equally granted by all; but of the printing or the manner of
his writing not a word spoken, or thought moved; Leave obtained, he replies in
a like return of language as Mr. Leyb. had used; and to save charges of
transcribing prints it, but took order the Copies should come only to the hands
of our Brethren whom it concerned. Mr. Leyb. replies furiously, prints his
Pamphlet, and publishes it to the Laity in the first place by express order of
his letters, so that even Protestants came to the sight of it, In it he names
the chief members of the Clergy about London in those dangerous times, vilifies
the Consult (who had not provoked nor meddled with him) by unworthy and
contemptible terms, and disgraces the Sub-Deanship with false aspersions;
which two Acts of his break asunder all that little union he had left among
them. He brings to light unnecessarily businesses concerning the Government of
the Chapter; he thanks two for not concurring with their votes, whereas one of
them did as much as the rest (that is, agreed Mr. Bl. should clear himself) the
other was absent and knew nothing of the business. Also in a private letter he
accuses another of concurring with us in our votes against him in that meeting,
who was not then in the Kingdom; and another to have been Councellor or
Secretary to Mr. Bl. who protests he knew not of the thing, nor the printing
it, 'till it was done. Moreover, in that Libel he seditiously endeavors to set
division between the Consult and their Brethren in the Country by bearing them
in hand that the Consult abuses them. The many falsifications and calumnies
which his Adversary made appear in this his Libel we omit as belonging to their
private quarrel, which we were so far from espousing in behalf of one side or
other, that we condemned and blamed both parties manner of proceeding. What we
insist on is, that we protest in the sight of God and Man, we gave him not the
least occasion by any Vote of our's to be offended at the Consult; and yet
received from him (and that in Print too to be published to the Laity) so many
unsufferable abuses, and seditious calumnies and accusations.

About the same time he writ this Letter to Mr. Knightley, that he might set
all his Engines awork at once, his particular friend Mr. Catterick Archdeacon
of York, whose indiscreet Zeal, misled perhaps by Dr. Leyb.'s great words and
Saint-like protestations (of which he is noted by persons of honor to be too
carelessly lavish) had totally submitted it self to his conduct, began to deny
to communicate with us, telling us flatly in his Letter of Ian. 1656. that He
would give no vote nor have any hand amongst us; that We disgraced our Clergy
at home and abroad, etc. Also in his Letters of Sept. 24. 1656. that We were
held a Schismatical Clergy: and in his Letter to Mr. Thomas Medcalf of October.
13. 1656. that he recalled his Vote, that he would not assent to any thing we
do, because we went on in a Schismatical way not only to the disgrace of our
Body but of our whole Nation: He writ also diverse disobedient and refractory
Letters to his Vicar General Dr. Blundeston.

While our Church was torn by these intestine Divisions, it pleased the Right
honorable Ld. Abbot Montague (never to be mentioned by us but with gratitude
and honor for his love then shown our Body) with our Venerable Brethren in
France Dr. Holden, Mr. Clifford and Mr. Carr, to interpose and endeavor to
bring the Two to an accord. Mr. Clifford also and Mr. Carr out of their great
Charity and Zeal of our Union took a journey to Doway to treat with Dr. Leyb.
about it, and to bring him to some terms of correspondency. Moreover, a common
Letter was writ by the four mentioned, to Dr. Leyb. complaining that out Unity
in Yorkshire was actually broken by his special friend Mr. Catterick who
calumniated the Chapter as schismatical, and refused flatly to consent to any
thing it should do; disobeying and writing offensive Letters to his
Vicar General Dr. Blundeston; earnestly requesting him to desist from all
schismatical resisting that authority, which our two late Bishops of happy
memory had established and left amongst us, that he ought not to go about to
remedy abuses by open resistance, this being the common pretext of all
rebellion against Authority, That the Catholic Church has her legal and
authoritative way both subalternal and supreme to examine and condemn whatever
may be amiss either in his or any other man's writings whatsoever; That
particular men can only inform those whose office it belongs to, of what they
judge erroneous or dangerous, though as friends and Brethren we may cover what
we think we are not necessarily obliged to complain of, That Information once
given we ought to forbear all scandalous and clamorous defamation till the
Delinquent be sentenc't; That they could not expect, much less exact and
demand of Mr. Bl. that he should renounce his Doctrines till they knew what and
how by an authentic censure, That they heartily desire both of them and all
our Brethren, they would cordially embrace our last Bishop's pious advice and
prudent Council given in several Letters to Dr. Leyb. himself and others, to
forbear all Acts of siding and faction tending to schism and Division as being
much worse then all Mr Bl's. Novelties: Thus they. Also by their Letters to Mr.
Bl. they dealt with him to give under his hand a submission of his writings to
the Church and See Apostolic, which was what Mr. Leyb. desired of him, and
with which he profes't he would rest satisfied. The sum of which Profession
(as we have it subscribed by his own hand) is this: I underwritten Dr. of
Divinity, and President of the English College of Doway, do by this present
Instrument declare to all my Brethren and Catholics whom it may concern: that
whereas by a common Letter signed by the Right Honorable Walter Mountague and
three other worthy persons, to wit, Dr. Henry Holden, Mr. William Clifford, and
Mr. Thomas Carre, I have been moved to concur in the settling of an union
amongst the Clergy. -- And that the difference between me and Mr. Thomas White
may be conceived a considerable Remora to the said Union; I do further declare
that if the said Mr. Thomas White shall make an humble submission of all his
writings to the Authority of the Sea-Apostolick. -- I say upon this condition
and consideration I do declare and likewise engage my self to my abovenamed
Brethren and Catholics whom this present Instrument may concern: that I shall
for the future respect and honor the abovementioned Mr. Thomas White with as
great sincerity and real affection as any friend or Brother alive; and the same
upon the same score I do promise to all others who may be esteemed his
Adherents. In witness whereof I subscribe my name.

GEO. LEYBURNE.
May 5. 1657.



On the other side Mr. Bl. desired only that he would acknowledge the Authority
of the Chapter, let his Brethren be quiet and not injure them by wrong
informations. And for what was required by Dr. Leyb. he yielded to it and gave
under his hand his submission of his writings in form following.

Whereas I underwritten have heretofore given a submission of my writings to
the holy Church and See-Apostolick to satisfy such as might doubt of my
obedience to the Pope. And that notwithstanding I gave it as full and ample as
possibly I could according as my true intention then was, now is, ever has
been, and ever shallbe, God willing; I hear that some have misunderstood it,
and have conceived that I intended only by those words [Holy Church and
See-Apostolick] the Catholic Church and Pope conjoyntly; but not the Sea of
Rome and S. Peter 's successor the Pope, separate from a General Council: as
also that I only declared my opinion but professed no actual submission of my
writings: I therefore do now ingenuously and freely declare and profess that
it is my opinion and judgment, all Catholics ought in heart and in all
humility and obedience to submit their Divinity writings not only to the Holy
Church in common and in a General Council, where the Pope may be in person, or
by his Deputies, but also to the particular See of Rome, and S. Peter 's
Successor the Pope, even out of a General Council; which as I have always
done in my heart, so do I now likewise actually and willingly submit all my
writings to the particular See of Rome and S. Peter 's Successor the Pope, even
out of a General Council; and this according as my opinion and belief has ever
taught me. Ratifying and confirming to this effect all the contents of my
former submission. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand this 2. July
57. thus Mr. Bl. The Consult likewise and the particular persons, he had so
causelessly and publicly injured in print, waved the clearing themselves, and
demanding satisfaction, and Mr. Bl.'s Reply to his Pamphlet, though printed and
ready to be published, was held in by him, and Mr. Leyb. permitted to have the
last word. By these condescentions and actual performances so amply and
satisfactorily on Mr. Bl.'s part, this charitable forbearance on the Consults,
and (as it then seemed) these faithful and truly intended promises on Mr.
Leyb.'s (being given under his own hand with so solemn an engagement to such
Venerable persons all our Brethren and Catholics) all things seemed to
conspire to a perfect union. To complete which by Mr. Leyb.'s performance of
what he had promis't, a General Assembly of the Chapter at the request of the
Mediators was called, whither Mr. Bl. and Dr. Leyb. were invited. It met Nov.
23. 1657. Mr. Bl. came thither in person. Dr. Leyb. sent his Agent: who at the
very entrance of our meeting, showed us how soon Dr. Leyb. had forgot his
promise, and that all Union with him was hopeless by his excepting against the
whole Assembly because it was of Chapter men only, and alleging, He was sent
to an Assembly of the whole Clergy: whereas the whole Clergy being some
hundreds, could not possibly meet in those times, nor indeed at any time
(without leaving all England destitute) but by their Representatives and
Superiors, who were the natural Deputies of the Districts. He began to press
also the disclaiming and censuring Doctrines in the first place ere he would
treat or any ways concur with us toward the obtaining a Bishop; He gives in
a paper in Dr. Leyb.'s name, and as his Agent, containing many unjust
accusations against our Chapter and it is proceedings. He urges violently both
in his words and his Vote (as also did Mr. Young Mr. Catterick's Deputy) and
expressed the same in his paper, that Dr. Leyb. might be proposed for a Bishop;
and lastly (all the rest unanimously concurring) he and Mr. Catterick's Agent
at the end of the Assembly, refused in plain terms to subscribe to the Votes of
the Major part (which common reason tells every one is the manner of all
public meetings) and gave under their hands their reasons, that, being
Deputies they could not exceed their Commissions: By which it is apparent that
their Commissions or Orders were that they should make no Union, nor have any
Communication with us as far as concerned the Acts of our Assembly; which
reached to a very great part of our Church Discipline, our petitioning his
Holiness for a Bishop, the establishing and completing our Chapter, and diverse
other most considerable points to the advantage of our Body. Though the same
Deputies subscribed to the Narrative of the carriage and transactions of the
Assembly as truly related: which to any one who reads the Acts themselves will
abundantly justify the sincerity and impartialness of our proceedings there.

Thus ended the General Assembly of 1657. intended by the Mediators and us to
conclude a peace by Dr. Leyb. to prosecute his revengefull and implacable
humor, against Mr. Bl. and withal (as we upon good grounds fear) his own
ambitious ends.

The Institute of Nostre Dame de Virtue near Paris under the reverend Fathers of
the Oratory, whose whole course of life breaths nothing but pastoral and
Clerical, was such an advantage to the Clergy and Church of England, as was not
to be hoped for by any solicitation of our Wishes, much less to be offerr'd us
out of a voluntary charity, by the most Reverend General of that solidly pious
Body. There might our Brethren have a place of retirement after their
Scholastical studies in Colleges or distractions in England; to prepare,
dispose or refresh themselves in order to their spiritual and Sacerdotal method
of living, and to enable and facilitate themselves in the best practices of
Pastoral functions; this was looked on by our most pious and learned Bishop of
Chalcedon as a blessing from Heaven upon our persecuted Church; who the last
journey he ever made, coming to that house, and seeing and blessing the Society
of English then present, he said, that his Eyes had seen that which his heart
had desired, and he had endeavored for thirty years before. This Institute
was put forward by the charity and favor of that most religious Order and most
venerable General, embraced and advanced by us to our utmost; and more had been
done, had Dr. Leyb. permitted our Chapter to have the due influence it had
otherwise enjoyed; This was very much extolled by the grateful return of most
high commendations by our pious Brethren who came from thence; and lastly, this
was most zealously promoted by the heroic charity and patience of our most
honored and venerable Brother Dr. Gough; who in the midst of all
discouragements and oppositions from those Colleges, whose Governors
belonging to another Body saw better then many of our selves, how considerable
that proffer was to our Clergy, and strove by all means to divert their
Subjects from going thither, yet still to his great expense and labor
preserved it on foot, till Dr. Leyb. by articling with him in most unreasonable
and unhandsome terms, and proposing conditions most senseless to be complied
with e're he would send any more thither (as if Dr. Gough and not our Body had
received the benefit) quite disheartened and extinguished the fervency of that
zeal; the impossibility of success, and it is progress being too apparent,
unless Dr. Leyb. would leave off that uncomplying humor and come to better
terms.

In the mean time our Venerable Dean having accepted the Deanship upon the
Letters of the Assembly, and the conditions being complied with which he
required e're he could conveniently settle in London, came up to reside amongst
us; and our Church began to close to an hearty Union through the general love
and respect every one bore him. Nay, even Dr. Leybs. most unreasonable friend
Mr. Catterick being unsolicited by him of late, and left to himself, began to
come to better terms: when the times opening and giving a freer passage for Dr.
Leyb. into England, he resolved to come in person to blast our hopeful Union
in the bud. Before Mr. Bl's. presence in our Consults was his greatest
corrosive, and his exclusion mainly pressed, which made us hope his so far
removal now from our Country and business would satisfy and pacify him. Yet
still (no consideration being had to the former Agreement, and Mr. Bl's.
compliance on his part by submitting his writings) the old tune of Declaming,
so ungrateful to the ears of our Reverend Bishop, our General Assemblies and
the Mediators, is sung to us, and our Brethren in town seditiously solicited
to subscriptions. Our Chapter and Venerable Dean's authority, though his own
Agent (as it happened) voted for his election in the Assembly, is disavow'd by
him; If we visit any person of honor who is a friend to Mr. Bl. he objects our
common civility to him as such an heinous fault, as if we had treated with an
excommunicated person. His unconscientious and rash censures even upon men's
souls and their future eternal state, as if he were sent to pass judgment
upon both the quick and the dead, we have both horror to hear and shame in his
behalf (considering his function) to relate. Mr. Mark Harrington our late
Sub-Dean, whose exemplar life and pious death were precious in the sight of
heaven and earth, he judges to have died in a sad case. Honored Dr. Blundeston
Vicar General of the North, a person of eminent learning and exemplar
conversation, receiving an hurt by a fall from his horse, and not long after
dying, is sentenc't to have been thus punished by God's just judgment for
being a friend to Mr. Bl. A learned Benedictin, who respected Mr. Bl. being
sent to Rome by his own Order in the time of the Plague, and dying of the
infection there, is pronounced to have this signal Judgment light upon him for
favoring Mr. Bl. Another Priest yet living because held a particular friend to
the same person, is doomed by his lavish censure to have utterly and
irrecoverably lost his soul; and this proclaimed by him in diverse companies;
All the Priests that have fallen from faith of late, though out of known
licentiousness or Skepticism, are given out by Dr. Leyb. to have fallen because
friends to Mr. Bl. whereas none of them were ever his Scholars, or had any
friendship or conversation with him, more then common courtesy required.
Diverse Honorable persons escape no better if he conceive them to dislike his
ways. Our Venerable Dean also whom he sees his principal cause of our Union,
and so most hindering his making himself a party and promoting a Schism in our
Body, is particularly piqu't at by him, could he find any hold to fasten his
Calumnies upon him. Mr. Bl. being absent, (and Dr. Leyb's. fashion having ever
been to have a quarrel with some particular person, to gain a pretense not to
join with the common) he falls upon our Secretary, and begins to set him in Mr.
Bl's stead the object of his anger. Dr. Leyb's. two friends Mr. Catterick and
Mr. Young coming to town to meet him, the Consult, that they might leave
nothing unattempted on their part, which Charity could suggest, resolved to
wave Mr. Catterick's defaming them for Schismatics, and we friendly invited
them to meet with us to hear what satisfaction we should give them, both
concerning the validity of our Chapter, as also to the complaints they had
against a certain Letter of our Secretaries written by order of the Consults.
We had hopes given too that Dr. Leyb. would be present, which we were heartily
glad to hear. They seemed willing to meet, being come as they said purposely to
London to unite with us. But, the evening before the intended meeting Dr. Leyb.
told our Dean, that he would not come in the place where our Secretary was, and
therefore if he were to be there he would not come. The other two met us, but
our Secretary (who by reason of his place as Canon, his office as Secretary,
and his being the party accused ought not to be absent) coming in and civilly
saluting them, Mr. Catterick turned his head to the door, went out without
bidding farewell to any of the grave persons assembled for their sakes, the
other followed him; and so without leave taking or affording us a word at our
Meeting, or so much as giving notice to some of our Brethren who had made them
a civil invitation as Guests, and obtained a promise of their coming, away they
went back into Yorkshire, carrying along with them, as we are informed, Dr.
Leyb's. Order to gather the hands of diverse there; which is the seditious way
he still takes, notwithstanding the Command or Counsel of so many Reverend,
Venerable and sober persons to the contrary.

Having seen how unappeasable and uncharitable Dr. Leyb. still declares himself
in his whole carriage against Mr. Bl. and all he conceives friends to him, it
were not amiss to desire our Brethren to reflect upon what he gave under his
own hand formerly, and to which he engaged himself so solemnly, that if Mr. Bl.
should make a submission of his Writings he would for the future respect and
honor him with as great sincerity and real affection as any friend or Brother
alive; and the same upon the same score, all who may be esteemed his Adherents;
and then leave to their judgments to consider and determine whether he has
the least regard of common principles of honesty; of any agreement, engagement,
protestation of sincerity, or of what he gives under his hand, or even any
civil respect for the Honorable and worthy persons, our Brethren or Catholics
in general, to whom he made this engagement, who, without any offense given
him, nay all possible condescensions used toward him, as soon as his fair
promise had obtained from his Adversary the conditions he required, carelessly
and boldly breaks through all these ties and considerations, to prosecute his
former anger with the same or a greater fierceness and violence?

Diverse other things Dr. Leyb. and his friends use to object to the Chapter; As
first, Their disobedience to my Ld. Bishop in making Mr. Harrington Sub Dean of
the Chapter without his Order. Secondly, for calling the General Assembly held
July 1653. without leave had first from the Bishop. Thirdly, that though the
ruling part of the Chapter in London still say they desire a Bishop. Yet their
intentions are thought to be otherwise, and that they mean to rule and govern
in a Capitular way without a Bishop.

To the first it is answered, It Is true, my Lord Bishop writ to those of the
Chapter in London, taxing them for making Mr. Harrington Sub-Dean without his
Order, which they could not do; but the Chapter returned Answer to his
Lordship that Mr. Fitton their Dean being to leave England ordered Mr.
Harrington Sub-Dean in his place till his return, This all the Chapter agreed
to, and this Dr. Leyb his Lordships Vicar General knew and made no complaint
of. Again it was not the dignity of Sub-Dean Mr. Fitton and the Chapter
conferred on Mr. Harrington, but only ordered for the time he should preside in
all Capitular meetings, which by virtue of his being the ancient'st Canon he
might lawfully do, without leave from the Bishop, and with this Answer sent to
my Lord, His Lordship was very well satisfied. To the second we answer, That
being the General Assembly was only a Capitular meeting to consult and order
such matters as might be for the good of the Clergy; and that all their votes
and resolves therein were to be presented to his Lordship for his Approbation
or Rejection thereof, there was no more disobedience to his Lordship in calling
that General Chapter then there was in calling any other Chapter or Capitular
meeting thereof weekly or monthly held, especially there being no difference
at all between his Lordship and the Chapter. And the reason why the Chapter did
not write to my Lord Bishop of this General Assembly was their fear they had
Dr. Leyb. would use means to make my Lord forbid it.

In answer to the third you may be pleased to know, that in the year 1653. it
was proposed in a Capitular Consult (Dr. Leyb. being one of them) to move my
Lord Bishop to admit of a Coadjutor as the best means to continue the
succession of Bishops in the Clergy. But Dr. Leyb. being of opinion that the
having a Coadjutor would shorten his Lordships life, it was then waved. Also
Dr. Hyde after writing to the Chapter that their friends at Paris together with
my Lord of Andover had moved my Lord Bishop therein, and that some Letters (of
which we have Copies) past between my Lord Bishop and my Lord of Andover
concerning that business, notwithstanding my Lord of Andover out of his noble
Goodness and Charity to us had made offer (if the Chapter would send him their
Commission to act their business for them) to go to Rome and in their names to
solicit for a Co-adjutor: yet the Chapter still replied, (with their humble
thanks to his Lordship) that they could not meddle in that point without my
Lord Bishops consent, whose satisfaction they esteemed more then the hopes they
had of a Co-adjutor. And indeed the Chapter in all things possible were zealous
in maintaining their Bishops honor and jurisdiction over them; for, some
Missionaries coming from Rome to London, and refusing the Canonical Oath of
their Obedience to my Lord Bishop, alleging they were informed his Lordship
had no Jurisdiction, the sub-Dean and Chapter of London by relating the
conditions of my Lords delivering up his Episcopal patent, satisfied them, and
all other Priests that came after them into England. By which it is evident,
that the Chapter was the principal and only upholder of my Lords power and
Episcopal Jurisdiction over the Clergy against all opposers; and omitted
nothing, either in my Lords life time, or since his death, that might conduce
to the continuation and succession of Bishops in the Clergy; as their sending
two Agents to their great expense and charge most evidently show.

Fourthly, it is objected that diverse Priests of the Assembly of 53. were
excommunicated by my Lord for their disobedience. But the direct contrary is to
be seen in my Lord's Letter to Mr. Walton, in which he acquits them and rather
puts himself in the fault for being too credulously persuaded; promising to
love the person he most suspected and by name sent his Mandate against, more
then ever.

Fifthly, they object Dr. Leyb.'s usual calumny That his Holiness judges our
Chapter Schismatical. But how infamous an untruth this is, both our Agents can
attest; and that they never received the least rebuke from his Holiness upon
that or any other score; nor yet the least signification of any suspicion that
we held unsound Doctrines. So that we fear (as his custom is here) himself
endeavored to fix that Calumny upon us at Rome, hoping the Echo of it, did it
take, might rebound hither to our disgrace. Besides how senseless is it and
derogatory to his Holinesses prudence and goodness to imagine that he would
receive the Agents of Schismatics and treat with them so long without
endeavoring all the while to reduce them from their Schism, nay not so much as
give them some gentle admonition or make the least mention of it!

Lastly, (to come to an end of their petty objections) we are accused as
uncharitable for denying to pray for Mr. Ogle's Soul. But our Secretary's
Letter, which themselves produce, says the express contrary, in these words;
The Consult agreed and Ordered me to write to our Brethren to recommend Mr.
Ogle 's Soul to God, as also I have done. Only, whereas in the last Assembly
it had been ordered that every Priest say two Masses for any Brother that dies,
and ordered likewise that none shall receive any privilege or benefit by the
Chapter unless they acknowledge the Chapter; hence we expres't our selves, that
as public persons we could not order Suffrages for him in case he had died in
opposition to the Chapter. So that 'twas only this benefit ordered in the
Assembly we spoke of, not the private prayers we owed him as Christians. Nor
was it meant or signified to be a denial of prayers either public or private
for him, (for the Letter shows we afforded him both) but we intended it as a
seasonable and proper admonition to Mr. Catterick's disobedient humor; which
is the true reason he thus without the least ground, exclaims against it.

But to proceed more close to Dr. Leyb.'s main difficulties; his greatest
calumnies against us at present, and which they insist most upon, are two; One,
that our Chapter has no Authority; next, that we are Blacklowists; whereas, for
the former we show him our first Bishops constitutive Letters, expressing,
that, Post maturam hac de re habitam deliberationem non tantum cum
prudentissimis gentis nostrae hominibus, verum-etiam cum exteris Praelatis
sapientissimis, qui ad Episcopum spectare, inque illius potestate situm esse
censuerunt Decanum and Capitulum constituere, illudque ad conservandam
Episcopalem atque Ordinariam Iurisdictionem omnino expedire. Itaque ad Dei
Omnipotentis gloriam ac Ecclesiastici Ordinis ac formae in caeteris Orbis
Christiani Ecclesiis instaurationem, Decanum ac Capitulum in Ecclesia Anglicana
nostrae pastorali sollicitudini commissa, erigendum, constituendum and
instaurandum curavimus, and per praesens Instrumentum ac litteras nostras
patentes omnibus melioribus modo, via, jure, causa, forma atque ordine, quibus
melius, validiusque and efficacius possumus ac debemus, erigimus, constituimus
ac instauramus, etc. We show him our second Bishops Instrument confirming the
first, and expressing, that, Ad Iurisdictionem Episcopalem Sede vacant
conservandam ac continuandam praedictum Decanum ac Capitulum in toto and in
part approbandum, validandum, ratificandum ac confirmandum curavimus, and per
praesens Instrumentum ac litter as noctras patentes omni-meliori modo, via,
jure, ac forma, quibus melius validiusque id possumus ac debemus, approbamus
validamus ratificamus and confirmamus, etc. Concedentes Decano and Capitulo and
omnibus and singulis Capituli Canonicis, ut in Capitulo legitime seu canonice
congregato, voce activa and passiva, in causis id requirentibus utantur ac
fruantur, and libere uti ac frui possint, praeterquam in casibus ob culpam a
jure exceptis; Lites and controversias graviores circa res Ecclesiasticas
occurrentes, aut causas ad forum spirituale spectantes adse perlatas audiant ac
decernant, Electiones Canonicorum, etiam Decani, locis per aliquorum mortem
vacantibus, faciant, cum nostro ac successorum nostrorum consensu; and, Sede
diutius vacant, etiam successoris nostri consensu non expectato, dummodo
numerus Canonicorum cum Decano triginta non excedat. Iurisdictionem
Episcopalem, ad regimen Ecclesiasticum and disciplinam procurandam necessariam,
sede va^ante, exerceat; etiam censuras Ecclesiasticas, ubiopus fuerit, inflig
endo, and pronunciando, in casibus tamen a jure permissis. Episcopi in nostrum
aut successorum nostrorum desunctorum locum subrogandi nominationi and
electioni adsint and faciant, atque ita a se nominatum and electum, Summo
Pontifici pro tempore existenti condigna humilitate as reverentia praesentent
Apostolico calculo approbandum, caeteraque agant and exerceant, quae ad Decanum
and Capitulum jure communi vel universali Ecclesiae consuetudine quovis modo
spectare dignoscuntur. We show him the Judgments of Canon-Lawyers, who were
consulted with when our Chapter was instituted, persons of knowledge in those
affairs beyond exception, one of them being Hermannus Ottenbergus, Bishop of
Arras, and formerly Auditor Rotae at Rome. We show him the same exceptions he
makes now against our Chapter, foreseen by our Bishops themselves and answered
in their very Constitutive Letters. We show him under Mr. Fitton's own hand,
that, It was the sense of Pope Innocentius returned to him by Cardinal Capponi
our Comprotectour, that we should govern by a Dean and Chapter 'till we had a
Bishop, that he would leave us to govern our selves, that he would not
disapprove what we did, but let us alone to agree upon what we our selves
thought fit. And this was in the vacancy of our Seat. We allege Pope Urban the
8ths. order to the same Mr. Fitton then our Agent, when our Bishop was about
renouncing his Authority; to whom, urging the inconveniences which would fall
upon the Clergy by this renunciation in regard of their want of Government; his
Holiness replied, that as to what concerned the Government of the Clergy, his
will was that it should continue in all things as it was, (that is, Capitular)
till the supreme See should order otherwise. We produce the testimony of Mr.
Plantin, our Agent there since my Lord Bishops death, a person of gravity,
worth, and integrity; that his Holiness signified to him we should govern by
the Chapter till we had a Bishop; Also, that whereas he expressed himself to his
Holiness and the Cardinals that we desired a Confirmation of our Chapter, not
that we held it invalid without it, but to show our deference to the
See-Apostolick, and our willingness to depend upon it, they never in the least
gainsaid our pretense of it is validity avouch'd in their own presence; and this
was attested by Mr. Plantin to Dr. Leyb's. face. We show him how his Holiness
and the Court of Rome have from time to time treated with our Agents as sent by
the Chapter, a sufficient approvement of it for us to proceed upon, especially
being in a possession of near forty years continuance, and the Interval of two
Bishops. We allege the Acts, opinions and submissions of two general
Assemblies of the Clergy, acknowledging the Chapter as valid and unanimously
agreeing to proceed with it. That of (53) delivering their Resolve in these
words, Concerning the Point of the Government of the Clergy after his Lordship
of Chalcedon's death, if he die before any change of Government come upon us by
the coming in of one or more Bishops, or otherwise, our Resolution is, that all
the Clergy stand in a modest defense of the Dean and Chapter, and yield due
obedience to the said Dean and Chapter and to such Vicars and other officers as
they de jure communi may and shall constitute to continue the Government, till
it shall please God and the See-Apostolick to send us a Bishop or Bishops to
govern us, or declare the first Institution, and after-Confirmations of the
Chapter to be invalid, and so the Chapter to be null. In which case our
Resolution is that the Dean, Sub-Dean, Vicars and other officers hold their
places of Superiority and Government (but without the names of Dean, Chapter or
Vicar) by a voluntary deference of the rest of the Clergy unto them, till it
shall please the See-Apostolick to establish some other Government amongst us;
but with this Proviso and Condition that the Superiors then exercise no power
but such as the diffused Clergy may by their voluntary submission confer upon
them; This was the order and resolution of that grave and prudent Assembly,
being the Representative Body of the whole Clergy, which was after confirmed by
another General Assembly of the Chapter held Nov. 1657.

We produce the Common Letter of the Right Honorable Lord Abbot Montague and
our Brethren in France, friendly admonishing Dr. Leyb. that to resist the
Chapter was schismatical. We produce him a Catalogue of our several Agents and
very many Letters sent to the Pope and Court of Rome by our Deans and Chapter,
and in their names, collected lately by our present Agent at Rome out of the
Archives there; some of them also subscribed by Dr. Leyb. himself, as then
Secretary, and authenticated by a public Notary. We show him diverse Letters in
our hands, and authentic Records of others sent to us in the name of Dean and
Chapter, or to Chapter Officers from diverse Cardinals, from our Protectours and
Comprotectours there, from the Congregation De propaganda fide, from diverse
Nuncio's, particularly from his Holiness's Nuncio Paris (appointed by Gregory
the 13. and Urban the 8 our Ordinary in the Vacancy of the seat) written to us
about a month ago; and inscribed Perillustri and admodum Reverendo Domino
Domino Onuphrio Elliceo, Decano Capituli Ecclesiae and Cleri Anglicani; and
within it, in the Popes name, these words; Supremus enim ac Universalis Pastor
Capitulum istud tanquam Filios charissimos diligit. Lastly, to come as near
home to him as may be in point of Conviction, we bring him his own Letter
written in my Lord Bishops life time, in Dr. Leyb's. own hand, and so
acknowledged by himself, asserting, that Our Chapter was to have Episcopal
jurisdiction after my Lords Death, and that this was conferred on it by the
sacred Canons of the Catholic Church, -- that the Chapter is to be looked on
as his heir apparent or lawful Successor, -- that our Government is to reside
in the Chapter after our Masters death, etc. Yet, all this, enough to convince
and satisfy even unreasonableness it self, works nothing with him to bring him
to an union with us; and to make him join with our last General Assembly
toward the obtaining one of the Six there mentioned for a Bishop; which is all
the charitable favor we desire of him at present.

His next Calumny is, that we are Blacklo'ists, a nickname he affixes, how
causelessly soever, on all that stand in the way of his ambition, that so he may
disgrace and remove them. Sometimes he charges Mr. Bl. with fault of cozenage
and injustice; as, that he has embez'ld or converted to other uses a sum of
Money left in his hand for the Clergie's good: whereas we know the contrary by
diverse persons both Ecclesiastic of our own Chapter and Lay-Gentlemen; in
whose hands and to whose trust he has left the said sum to be employed
hereafter for the good of the Clergy: Yet if any concur not with him in this
and such like unreasonable calumnies he is presently a Blacklo'ist. Sometimes
or rather continually, he mistakes Mr. Bl.'s Opinions, or wrests them to a
sinister sense, which the Author never meant; and if any one go about to
rectify his erroneous Judgment, he straitway charges him to have read Mr.
Bl.'s books, and therefore to be a Blacklo'ist; though the person charged holds
opposite to Mr. Bl. in the said points. The like is if any, to oppose his
uncharitable language, express a good Opinion of Mr. Bl.'s virtue, (which
others, even those who most dislike his Tenets confess unimpeachable) his very
following the common principles of Charity and Christianity shall make him too
a Blacklo'ist, and fall under the correction of his severe censure. If any
sober reason be calmly produced and pressed which confounds and non-plusses him,
he presently flies back all amazed and exclaims, that it is a Suggestion of the
devil. If the word (Rational) happen to slip out in discourse he is immediately
struck at it and expresses great abhorring of it, as being a word Mr. Bl. uses.
To such a strange height does his passion transport him.

Now, his main reason why we are Blacklo'ists, is, because we will not declare
against Mr. Bl.'s Doctrines, Our reasons not to do so, are,

First, Our last Bishops commands in his Letter to Dr. Leyb. himself, dated
July 6. 1652. delivered in these words, I have diverse times written to you to
suppress all clamours against Mr. Bl.'s novelties, and (as you have written to
me) you have so done; but still diverse of my chief Officers write to me that
you do the contrary, which I am very sorry to hear, for so you will cause the
inconvenience and Schism which will be worse then the Books are.

Next by our Reverend Bishops reason given in the same Letter, and in these
wise and charitable words, For Gods love by all means seek Charity and Peace,
and whiles the Sea Apostolic speaks not of these novelties, you have no need
to cry out so loud against them; let us follow and not go before our Pastor,
but with love and charity expect his final sentence. Which words show also,
that my Lord was jealous of Dr. Leyb's. disquiet spirit, and thought it
seasonable to keep it in due limits by this vehement admonition and exhortation
to Charity. Now whereas Dr. Leyb. pretends a contrary Order of my Lords, the
Letter he shows for it, contains no such thing; but only that himself, being
Vicar General, should not own the Doctrine, and that he should suppress some
books of Mr. Bl.'s, which were coming over, by preventing their publishing;
which is done in a silent and quiet way of intercepting or buying them up, not
by clamours and gathering hands of private persons, which is the very way of
Sedition. And that this was my Lords sense is seen in his Letter to Mr. Bl.
written, as appears after Dr. Leyb. had thus mistaken or would seem to mistake
my Lords meaning. I have been so far from commanding Dr. Leyb. to cry out
against your Book, that I desired him to suppress all speech against it, as I
assure you is true, and I hope he will not deny -- Perhaps he knowing I much
dislik't your Book, gathered, that I would have him speak against it: but
whatever he says or gathered, this is true which I write.

Thirdly, by the Orders and Decrees of two General Assemblies of -53. and -57.
representing the whole Body of the Clergy, who agreed that we should not
transgress my Lords commands in that point, but follow his grave, fatherly and
charitable advice.

Fourthly, by the Judgment of the right honorable Lord Abbot Montague and our
Venerable Brethren in France in their common Letter of Mediation to Dr. Leyb.
repeating my Lords advice to him, that we should follow, not go before our
Pastor. And this was when Mr. Bl.'s submission of his Writings to the Church
and See Apostolic stolick was not yet made; much less can it be exacted of us
now, since he has submitted his Doctrine to the Church; for by so doing he
has left the controversy now in the Churches hands, and so makes our's or any
other's intermedling very improper.

Lastly, We are moved not to disclaim Mr. Bl.'s Doctrines by the example of
other Bodies and Communities, and particularly that of the Society; who when
Tenets written by some of their Body, have highly scandalized the World, and
were actually censured by very many Bishops and his Holiness also, yet thought
it not prudent to make Declarations against them themselves, much less to
begin to censure them first. Nay more, (with respect to those grave and prudent
Bodies be it spoken) we have exceeded the most forward of them in this point,
having our selves upon this occasion requested the Nuntio of Paris (through
whose hands, as being our Ordinary, Commands from his Holiness are to come to
us legally, to send to us any Decree which concern's us, promising to receive
and publish it. We have signified also the same to his Holiness and the Court
of Rome, to the Cardinal-Protectour, the inter-Nuntio of Brussels and others,
which (as far we know) no other Order has done concerning any of their Body.

Now We appeal to all the World, whether it become the gravity of
Ecclesiastical persons of our place and vocation to neglect the prudent and
charitable Counsel and commands of our late Bishop, and of such venerable
persons as compose our Assemblies, that is, all the Vicar Generals, Canons and
Arch Deacons in England, as also of the most worthy Mediators, to neglect the
example of all other Communities, and the evidence of our own reason too, which
tells us that a mature and orderly procedure ought to be observed in such
Censures; and all this to follow and second the passion of one single man,
whose very moving and stirring in such a matter, is beyond his duty, in regard
he is but a private person, and can show no Order or Commission from any
Superior, is so plainly an Act of sedition, that nothing can suffice to
justify it in the opinion of any sober man, who shall but consider that the
Catholic Church has Order and Government in it; and that affairs of this
nature (determining what is Faith, what Heresy) are not to be carried on by
clamor and getting hands of a few ignornat or passionate Persons, by surprise
or misinformation, but by an Authority derived in an orderly and legal manner
from the Supreme Bishop; or, in case it be matter of Opinion and not of Faith;
then it is solid and prudent reasons and not empty and rude noises, which are
proper to confute such Errors.

As for Mr. Bl.'s person, we have known him to be ever of a most unblemish't
life and exemplar conversation; and, as such, we are taught by Christian
principles to honor and respect him. He has born many principal Offices under
our Clergy, done as many particular services, and has been Master to very many
of our eldest and gravest Brethren; with considerations give them and us a
grateful esteem and respect for him. His learning all grant to be eminent;
which by the common principles of civility and humanity oblige us to value him
accordingly; and to wish and pray he may so employ his pen that his other works
may be as serviceable to Gods Church, as those against Heretics have been. But
to defend him in any Tenet which may justly be conceived against Superiors
either spiritual or temporal, or against Doctrines held forth by the Catholic
Church, we abhor in our hearts; for his opinions very few of us know them, few
or none understand them all; and we seriously protest we know not one of our
Brethren who holds all the opinions he maintains; And if some hold some, what
wonder is it, or how is it avoidable, while it is left in the hands of the
Schools, that is, till the Church declare her self what we may hold consistent
with faith, what not? Yet to give satisfaction even in this. Our two last
General Assemblies have unanimously declared that we will readily approve or
disapprove all Doctrines and customs as we shall understand they are approved
or disapproved by the Sea Apostolic. Our Venerable Dean has sent a
Declaration to our Officers to be subscribed by all Priests, that they do
condemn Opiniones Iansenii aut quorumcunque aliorum novitates a sancta sede
damnatas; And we hope our following offers made to Dr. Leyb. will satisfy any
man not very far gone in passion and prejudice.

First it has been offered him that if he will pick out some opinions of Mr.
Bl's, and make them satisfactorily appear to be Heresies, we should heartily
express our abhorrence of them, which he refuses to do, but would have us
condemn them (as he strangely phrases it) in globulo; by which we conceive he
mean's in the bulk. Whence it would follow that we must condemn the Tenets of
the Trinity, the Incarnation, and all other mysteries of our Faith, all these
being found in Mr. Bl.'s Books, and going in the same Bulk or Book with the
rest: So that the same common Words of Condemnation must be levelled at one as
at the other, unless some distinction be made; Which yet he will by no means
undertake to do, but all his heat is to have them condemned in globulo.

Again, It has bin offered him, that if he please not to engage himself in a
Dispute with Mr. Bl. by particularizing which opinions he thinks censurable,
which not; he would pick out those Propositions he judged most dangerous, and
we would join with him to send them to the University of Doway to be censured
as they think fit: which proffer he likewise refuses, telling us, that Mr. Bl.
would fall foul upon that University to their small content and liking. To
which was replied, that if they could not or durst not censure them, fearing
some disadvantage thereby, how then durst we, whom we conceive himself judges
neither of greater Authority nor learning then the Doctors there?

Moreover our venerable Dean, in presence of his Brethren, offered him, that if
he would select those Propositions he judged to sound most dangerously, we
would join with him in sending them to Rome to his Holiness and requesting his
Censure of them, that so we might know what to eschew and what to allow of; and
that we would receive this Censure thus procured and sent us by our Ordinary,
the Nuntio at Paris; and publish it to all our Brethren to be observed
strictly, with as deep an Injunction as we could lay upon them. But all
proffers which have any thing of reason in them are equally disaccepted by him;
and nothing pleases his fancy but condemning in globulo; that is, good and bad
together. Which our judgment gives us is both unreasonable in us to do, and
pernicious to the faithful, and of whose Souls we have the charge.

Also before Dr. Leyb's. coming, some of our Brethren in Town dissatisfied with
some particulars of Mr. Bl.'s Doctrine, resolved upon a more peaceable,
rational and charitable way; which was to gather out of his Books diverse
Propositions most liable to exception, and to have them sent to Mr. Bl.
requiring of him either to explicate them in a Catholic sense, or retract
them. This Proposal of theirs we willingly and readily embraced, and promis't
our utmost concurrence with them: both because this way tended to the clearing
something, and so some kind of satisfaction and utility would redound to the
faithful, one way or other; whereas the condemning Opinions confusedly,
without telling which hazards to ensnare the faithful to abhor also the good
ones which run mixed with the bad in the same condemnation; And Mr. Bl.'s way of
writing being short and obscure, unless he were first put to explicate
himself, we might happen to engage Authority against a Tenet as held by that
Author, whereas perhaps he held the quite contrary; which would injure the good
Opinion Governers ought to conserve, making them seem partial, passionate, and
rash. Beside, this method of proceeding seemed well becoming Brethren of the
same Body; that if upon his explaining himself it appeared he was
misapprehended and faultless, Charity and brotherly amity might still be
preserved with him, and so all remain still united; If evidently faulty and
persisting in that fault, it might more unanimously unite all the rest against
him, and render their relinquishing him more justifiable. But the great fruit
we justly hoped from this fair procedure, was totally dash't by their
desistence and drawing back about the same time Dr. Leyb. came; whether by his
tampering with them to join with him in a more violent course, so to gain
himself a faction, will best be judged from his solicitation of other Brethren
of ours in town to the same purpose; and by his Attempts elsewhere, and lastly
by his own words upon this occasion, that God would send a Blessing upon those
who should in this disunite and divide the Clergy.

We must not omit one very material passage; which is, that Dr. Leyb.'s
friends, Mr. Catterick and Mr. Young, while in town much insisted upon the
disannulling our Chapter, and having a Bishop without a Chapter; that is, not
an ordinary Authority, which by the Canons is to govern with a Chapter, but an
Extraordinary one. As also Dr. Leyb. moved to our Dean, and writ to Rome
falsely pretending that the greater part of the Clergy in England are well
satisfied, and would think themselves happy in having a Vicarius Apostolicus,
and that only some few of the Chapter oppose it. Now to receive such an
Extraordinary Authority is both against the pleasure of HER MAJESTY, our most
gracious Patroness, expressed in Her Commands to our Agent at Rome, not to accept
it; against the Laws of our Catholic Ancestors, against the will of our
State; and so most dangerous for us to admit, subjecting us to a Praemunire and
all who adhere to It or us; Likewise, against the minds of our Brethren in the
two last General Assemblies, agreeing to petition for a Successor to our late
Bishop, who had Potestatem Ordinarii; Against all the Consults since the last
General Assembly, both in their orders to Mr. Pendrick and Mr. Gage. And lastly
this striking at the destruction of the Chapter is both against my Lords
Institution and Orders in his Instrument whereby he confirmed the Chapter;
against the judgment of the Mediators, against the orders of three Popes, nay
even against Dr. Leyb's. own thoughts formerly (as appears by a letter in his
own hand) till his passion against the Chapter was grown to the height.

But put case a Bishop without a Chapter was best for us while the Bishop
lived, and were neither against the command of our Superiors, nor endangering
security; let us consider what would become of our Church in the vacancy of the
seat, the Chapter being disannulled, what jurisdiction, what order should we
have, all being levelled into an equality, that is, an Anarchy? whence should
the Priests have extraordinary faculties, when they want them to dispense in
vows, degrees of consanguinity, affinity, marriages contracted or to be
contracted, absolving from Ecclesiastical Censures, Irregularities, and other
reserved cases not contained in the ordinary faculties of their Missions, as
consecrating Altar-stones, chalices, etc. the want of which power must force
the Clergy in such necessities to repair themselves, or send their Penitents to
Regulars (who, as so many standing Bodies here are empowered with these
faculties, or may be by their immediate Superiors in every of their Districts)
to the great prejudice and unheard of dishonor of the Clergy. Again, the
Chapter being null, how can the Clergy, in the Interval of a Bishop or
Superior in chief over them, be long kept in due obedience to the decrees and
commands of his Holiness, or of the Kings Majesty, as they are bound in
conscience; when there is no one higher then another, and so none at all who
has power to receive, publish, and enjoin their observance, or inflict
Ecclesiastical penalties upon the offenders? Besides, how shall the Clergy be
able to make any Contract with any for pious legacies, or to receive Donations
to raise a Found or common stock, to comply with obligations contracted for,
which in justice they must be bound to perform? And in defect of Chapter
Officers, to whom shall the Contractees have recourse? not to particular
persons, when each man may with truth say, he made no such contract. Lastly,
how can there be any means or way to pay common expenses of the Clergy, the
maintenance of Superiors and Underofficers? To whom shall Priests be sent
from the respective Colleges? Who must provide from them when newly arrived,
till they be placed? Who must relieve other indigent Priests of the Clergy? Who
must send Agents to his Holiness, be at the charge of Letters, keep
correspondency with our Brethren and friends at home and abroad, with the
Nuncio's, the Court of Rome, with the Colleges of Doway and Lisbo, etc.
without which the Clergy's affairs can neither be managed, nor themselves
subsist. Wherefore the Government by extraordinary powers being altogether
unsecure to us, and the Government by Chapter in the vacancy of the Episcopal
See, being both De jure communi Ecclesiastico, and also the most inoffensive
Government to our State and Laws; nay, a kind of Authority, particularly
agreeable to the sense of the King's most sacred Majesty, our gracious
Sovereign, to which we ought humbly to conform, when the necessity of
maintainingour Catholic profession obliges not our consciences to the
contrary; much more when the stream of Catholic Ecclesiastical Canons go along
with his Commands. Again, it being most evident from what has been said, that
the ruin of our Clergy, of it is Unity, it is honor and subsistence attend the
disannulling of the Chapter; It Is likewise most evident that Attempts to
disannull the said Chapter aim at this ruin of ours. Yet with this disposition
of wills Dr. Leyb's. two friends fled from our conversation here, and carry the
same along with them to communicate to as many as they can persuade; himself in
the mean time prosecuting it here to his utmost power: What greater
disadvantage could our busiest Emulatours wish, or even imagine against us?

We omit for the present to lay open at large his other manifold wranglings,
calumnies, and passionate carriages against Dr. Champney, Mr. Hammond, Mr.
Harrington, Mr. Southcot, Mr. Herbert, Mr. Gage Mr. Peterson, Dr. Holden, Mr.
Clifford, Mr. Carre, Mr. Fitton, Mr. Manly, Dr. Blundeston, Mr. Green, and (in
a word) against almost all the eminent and grave persons of our Clergy,
especially if they were of any authority to control him in the least, his
giving them the lie, his writing against them to my Lord, running away from
their Assemblies in case he were contradicted, and such like; enough to make a
large History, were they particularly laid out.

Nor do we at present much insist upon his misgovernment in the College, both
formerly, and of late more especially; so evident and testifiable by the
Depositions of many worthy persons, too many to be wiped off with a Letter of
the Inter-nunce of Brussels, surreptitiously procured, while none was summoned
to appear there against him to enforce and make good the Charge.

We only hint the unfitness of some he has sent hither not long ago as
Missionaries; As (to omit many others) of one who in another Seminary was
denied presentation to Orders, because of his unsettled brain, and (as we are
informed) wished the next day his throat had been cut when he took Orders.

Of another, a person in a manner phrenetical, who within six or seven months
at most, was a married man, a Widdower, a Priest and Missionary.

The third, of a wild mad nature, for open Sedition in the house and public
soliciting all the Scholars to the Wars, was expelled the College by him; to
whom yet, after his expulsion, he sent faculties to come hither as Missionary.
He has now been half a year in England, yet never officiates nor performs any
duty belonging to a Priest.

We only hint these few of many at present; hoping that the horror and shame
expressed by all who hear of it, and reflect how sacred the function of a Priest
and Apostle is, will make him more circumspect for the future; and that these
are enough to let our Brethren see how necessary it is to have a Dean and
Chapter, to examine who are fit, who not, ere they admit them.

Also these few instances are sufficient to show, how unfit he is to govern a
Church, who so ill governs a private house; how unworthy to be a Bishop who
has so little reverence or care of what belongs to that holiest of functions,
Apostolical Priesthood.

But not to insist longer upon his carriage in the College, and to return to
his constant Demean our here. It Is made too manifest by the several contents of
this our Remonstrance, that all Dr. Leyb's endeavors both formerly and at
present are to disunite and stir up Sedition in our Body, to keep a party on
foot for himself to work by: to what intent his own Conscience can best tell.
But, by his refusing to join with us in obtaining one of the Six proposed in
our last General Assembly for a Bishop, and by diverse other passages we omit,
he makes the common report and opinion an evident Truth, that he intends to
make himself our Superior; whom, to declare our selves freely and
conscientiously, we conceive every way unworthy that sacred Dignity, and much
more for his ambitiously seeking it by such indirect, uncharitable and
seditious courses. If this were not his meaning, and that truly he desires we
should have a Bishop, why should he refuse to join with us in proposing those
Six, they being persons beyond all Exceptions and even his own; that is, they
were never held promoters of Mr. Bl's. Doctrines in the least? Nor, as it
seems, is he content with aiming at only a bare superiority, but (as appears by
his and his friends urging the dissolution of the Chapter, and the acceptance
of an Apostolical Vicar) he intends to make himself Paramount and
uncontrolable; not bound to Canonical procedure, nor needing the concurrence or
assistence of any, that so he may rule in Virga ferrea, and give full swing to
his revenge and passion; Which we experience so implacable against the whole
Chapter, that we too plainly foresee no sacrifice is likely to appease it, but
the ruin and destruction of our poor Church.

Reflecting then upon Dr. Leyb's. proceedings from first to last, that he broke
the order of Capitular Meetings in the Assembly of 1649. by bringing in private
persons against the Dean's leave: That, he endeavored to gather a party of
private persons after the Assembly was finished, calumniating the proceedings
of his Brethren as illegal, and carried on by two persons only. That, he
passionately refused to come to an accord with his Brethren so civilly
treating, and so charitably desiring it of him; That, in private debates he
contentiously refused to stand to Arbitratours, himself inexorable. That, his
friends and he through false calumnies moved my Lord by his Mandate to dissolve
the General Assembly of 1653. and thereby injured the whole body of the Clergy
in that their Representative. That, he refused to send Missionaries to our
Chapter-officers though kindly entreated to do it by Letters from that whole
Assembly; That contemning our last Reverend Bishop's orders, which were not to
clamor against Doctrines till condemned by the Sea Apostolic, sleighting his
censure that this way of proceeding was schismatical, and the judgment of two
General Assemblies and of the Mediators to the same effect, he ever did and
still does pertinaciously continue to prosecute this illegal course. That,
transgressing and (as much as in him lies) disannulling the Institutes of our
two Reverend Bishops, the Concessions of three Popes to our several Agents, the
sense of the Court of Rome, of diverse Cardinals, of our Protectours, of the
Congregation De propaganda fide, of diverse Nuncio's, particularly that of Paris
(our now Ordinary) expressed in their Letters to us from time to time as a
Chapter; Also against the Agreement of two General Assemblies, speaking the
sense and bearing the place and authority of the whole Clergy, against the
judgment and advice of the Honorable and venerable Mediators (expressing in
their Letter to him that to resist the Chapter is Schismatical) he formerly
has and still does slight, vilify and resist the said reverend Authority of
the CHAPTER. Finding also that by his printed Libel he endeavored to sow
discord between the Consult and their Brethren in the Country, falsely and
injuriously charging them with what they are ready to depose they are no ways
guilty of. That, his Adherents through his suggestions disobeyed their
immediate Superiors and writ Letters against us, reviling us for Schismatical.
That Mr. Bl. having performed on his part what Dr. Leyb. required, by
submitting his writings, he performed nothing on his, that is, Neither
acknowledged the Chapter, nor desisted from calumniating and clamourous ways
to the great injury even of the Mediators themselv's, who are obliged in
honor to endeavor, to their power, to see the Conditions complied with, and
have a right over him to exact it from him. That the General Assembly of 1657.
meeting to receive his performance of those conditions he had promis't, and so
completing an Union, he by his own and his friends Agent broke them all,
clamouring against Doctrines, rejecting the Authority of the Chapter, and by
his express Commission, refusing to subscribe to the Votes of the Major part.
Seeing that he cuts up by the root all possibility of accord by his thus openly
breaking at pleasure all Agreements and Engagements, though made to most
honorable and worthy persons, given under his own hand, and fortified with
solemn protestations of sincerity; in preserving which inviolate, consists all
moral honesty, all commerce and civil conversation. Seeing that he rejects the
Authority of our venerable Dean upon frivolous and false pretenses; though his
own Agent (as it happened) voted for his Election. Seeing that by his
uncomplying and unreasonable Demands and Capitulations he has contributed
highly to the discouragement of our best friends abroad, and to the final
breaking up of the Institute of Nostre Dame de Virtu' (deservedly looked on by
us as a most considerable advantage to our Clergy. Seeing that he disaccepted
all rational profers made by his brethren to have Doctrines censured, and
calumniates all that will not follow his violent and unlawful way: Since
contemning all charitable and Christian principles, he casts about his
Calumnies and rash judgments at random upon the souls of persons both living
and dead, long known to us of approved virtue and merit, if he has conceived,
how causlesly soever, a private grudge against them; and that he looks upon all
both Nobility, Gentry and Ecclesiastics, whom his fancy dislikes, as on
Excommunicate persons, and so carries himself toward them; nay expects others
should do the like under penalty of his heavy censure; Seeing his two chief
Adherents refuse to treat with us, and are sent down by him (as we hear) to
gather hands to make new turmoils. Seeing that himself and his said two
Adherents press the Introducing Extraordinary Authority, against both the laws
of our Country, and the resolution of her Majesty, as also the sense of our
Reverend Assemblies and Consults in regard of it is insecurity and
dangerousnesse to Catholics. Seeing that, both against the Orders of several
Popes and the unanimous sense of our Assemblies and Brethren, they press the
disannulling the Chapter, so to reduce us to an Anarchy and Desolation in the
Vacancy of our Seat: Seeing that his whole course tends to oppose all
procedures which are orderly, legal, charitable, and authoritative, and, on the
contrary, still vehemently endeavoring to to carry things on by a violent
hurry of passion, clamor and censure: Seeing (we say) that not considering
himself but a private man, and as such, of no Authority at all here, he so
often has and still does unrelentingly persist to disturb our public peace by
his illegal machinations, we held it our duty to give you notice at large of
his many and manifold Schismatical proceedings, entreating you to satisfy all
whom it may concern of the patience and charity we have used toward him so
long time, and his unreasonablenesse and obdurateness in his Schism against
us. And lastly, beseeching you all to join with us in hearty prayers for his
timely amendment; that, leaving off this spirit of bitterness, Schism,
contentiousnesse, revenge and implacablenesse upon private disgusts, he may
unanimously join and go along with his Brethren, in the perfect settling our
Body under a pious and prudent Pastor. Which is now so far advanced through the
gracious favor of her Majesty, that we foresee no impediment, but his wrong
informations to the Inter-nunce and our Protector, can any way obstruct it. So
committing you to the Protection of the God of Unity and Peace, We rest,

Your affectionate Brethren and Servants in Christ, H. E. Dean of the Chapter
P. P. Canon. G. W. Canon. R. M. Deputy for Mr. M. S. Archdeacon of Lancashire.
L. P. Canon. J. H. Canon and Secretary. C. A. Canon. J. S. Canon. J. M.
Archdeacon of Northumberland, Cumberland and Durham.

October. 20. 1660.
ERRATA.
Page 1. line 23. Hond. p. 7. l. 6. so he. p. 14. l. 14. a peace; but -- p.
16. l. 14. Disclaming -- p. 17. l. 18. the principal. p. 18. l. 2. Consult. p.
27. l. 5. at Paris. ibid. p. 32. faults. p. 31. l. 14. matter, beyond. l. ult.
done us. p. 32. which consideration. l. 11. held Faith. l. 12. hearts. For --
p. 34. l. 6. faithful of whose. p. 36. 13. our security. p. 38. l. 17. Mr.
Gage. l. 22. least;

TO HER MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY HENRIETTA MARIA QVEEN OF GREAT, BRITAIGN D.R
LEYBVRN'S APOLOGY.
MADAME
The most renowned Card. Baronius representing wi^^ his learned pensil the
scene of troubles, which the Arrians had raised against S. Athanasius (for as
much, as in compliance with his pastoral charge, he zealously endeuor'd to
obstruct the spreading of their pernicious doctrines) expresses therein, that
this glorious Champion of the Catholic Church, being informed of sundry wicked
aspersions, which the said Arrians had craftily cast upon him, with design to
take away his good name, even amongst his own Brethren, judged it necessary to
address an Apology unto Constantius the Emperor for the clearing of his
innocence, least by neglecting to publish truth, the wounds his integrity had
received from slandering tongues migh grow wider, truth being the sole cure,
and soueraign remedy against such hurts.

After the example of this most illustrious Prelate, I have thought it
expedient to present to your sacred Majesty an: Apology of the like nature,
that is my own defense, in Answer to an Army of affronts and calumnies, which
a wanton scholar, and his Adherents have cast upon me: and (abstracting from a
special supernatural providence of God, that guided the pen of S. Athanasius
in all his writings, and so made him a great Doctor of his Church) I have
greater motives of advantage to induce me to this presumption, as to mine, then
S. Athanasius had, as to his Apology.

First, Constantius the Emperor was a Fauorer of the Arrians, and the sole
support of their nouelle Sect: but y.r Ma.tie has ever shown a great
abhorrence of all profane novelties, and an extreme dislike of each introduced
custom, that is not conform to the general practice of the Church of God, and
confirmed from the Chair of S. Peter.

Secondly I was the first English Priest, that was sworn of your Ma.ties
Chapel, in consequence of which, I do not bear the mark of a mere subject
only, but of both subject, and servant: and since an injustice done to a
servant, of necessity reflectes upon the master, or mistress, whose servant he
is, it follows by natural inference, that I can challenge something of right,
as to recurring to your Ma.tie for protection in a just cause; and truly if the
defense I have dressed up, shall appear guilty of false dealing, then I will
cease from playing the Apologer, and become an humble Petitioner, that my name
may be for ever blotted out of the list of your Ma.ties servants, and my self
bear the infamous brand to all posterity of being, as my Adversaries endeavor
to make me, a very rogue.

Thirdly Constantius the Emperor was not only a favorer of the Arrian
Clergy, but a persecutour of S. Athanasius, of whom that clergy had said all
mamer of evil. Contrariwise your Ma.tie has shown kindnesses for me, far
above any desert of mine; I was committed Prisonner to Dover Castle, upon
suspicion of being a Priest, and your Ma.tie compassionating my unjust
sufferings, obtained my deliverance. Again being falsely accused to principal
Ministers of our late king of most happy memory, under the support of your
Ma.ties protection, as to my Religion, I voluntarily appeared at the Council
Table even in a coniuncture of a violent storm casually raised against
Priests, and was dismissed with honor, nothing of evidence being produced,
that could render me guilty of the least meddling, in order to affairs of state;
and indeed during your Ma.ties stay in England you never protected Priest, or
lay-Catholick otherwise, then with this prouiso: If he has done nothing against
the state: your Ma.tie knew right well that the supreme providence had set
bounds to every vocation, so that no man ought to put his sickle on strange
ground. The office of a Priest is to manage only what is his own, and Christ's
business, and to leave to Caesar, and the wise Ministers of his Council, a
^^irs pertaining to the state, unless in regard of their extraordinary
abilities they be called thereto by Caesar himself, for Priests are bound to
serve their soueraign Prince in every employment, that can bring advantage to
him, and no disgrace, or prejudice to their vocation, or function.

Fourthly my greatest Patron, whiles I continued in the English Mission, was
that gallant person the R.d Father Philip, Beloved of your Ma.tie in a high
measure, suitable to his merits, for he executed his charge of Ghostly Father
with extreme prudence, and managed all his affairs with an admirable conduct:
b^^^es he was versed in all manner of learning, and as to an exact knowledge of
holy Scriptures, Councils, Fathers, and Controversies, I knew none in your
three kingdoms, except our most R.d Bishop of Calcedon that could equal him;
This learned wise person (...) alive when Iansenius novelties were spread in
France, and also when M.r White, alias Blacloe began to publish his phanatick
learning; and his sense being required (at sundry times my self present) in
order to both of them, he alwais gave the same answer, saying, that he was too
old to embrace any new Religion.

Fifthly I have hazarded my life, and spent, not of my superfluity, which I had
not, but of my poverty, what I had (after the imitation of the poor good woman
that cast into the Treasury of Jerusalem her two mites which were all her
riches.) To serve our late soueraign Lord your Ma.ties Husband of most happy
memory. The Church of God does not teach Catholics to desert their true, and
lawful Princes in their sufferings, neither does their adversity lessen the
power they had in their prosperity to exact obedience from their subjects, but
increase it.

Now MADAME having set down the principal motives, which have enbolden'd me to
address an Apology to your Sacred Ma.tie unto clearing of my Innocence, wherein
I have imitated the great Athanasius: I have an other part to play after the
example of the pious Mardocheus, whom the supreme providence had put to rule
over the Jews (the seed of Gods chosen people) which had been carried away from
Jerusalem in the captivity of Iechonias king of Judah: This great servant of God
Mardocheus perceiving that the wicked Haman, and his friends had a design to
destroy them, made humble Intercession to the glorious Queen Hester for the
preservation of the said People of God, whose Religion she professed. In like
manner whereas M.r White and his Adherents menace the College of Doway
(whereof the supreme providence hatth constituted me, (though most unworthy of
the charge) principal Governor) which received the seed of Catholics, that
had been carried away from England in the captivity of Catholic Religion under
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. For the preserving of the said seed after the
example of the pious Mardocheus I have thought it expedient to intercede to
your Sacred Ma.tie, who doubtless is as glorious a Queen in the sight of God,
as was Queen Hester, whom not only you have equaled, as to professing of the
true faith, but surpassed, as to the many sufferings your Ma.tie has endured
patiently unto gaining a crown of Martyrdom, and indeed according to our great
Apostle S. Gregory true belieuers that suffer persecution for justice sake
patiently, and innocently, are Martyrs without effusion of blood: and I am
certain of your Ma.ties unjust sufferings, and more grievous, I dare auerre,
then ever Christian Princess endured, Y.r Ma.tie haueing bin banishd
wrongfully, the king your Husband barbarously murdered, the King your son in
continual danger of his Fathers murderers and in want of requisits necessary
to his Ma.ties condition. Neither can I doubt, but that your Ma.tie has both
patiently and innocently endured them, because your most Religious Confessor
himself told me that he had heard your General Confession twice, (once in
eminent danger of death upon the sea going out of Holland, when the raging
wanes threatened present ruin) and professed, that he could never accuse your
Ma.tie of one mortal sin. Wherefore I intercede unto your Sacred Ma.tie not as
to a glorious Queen only, but as to God's Martyr also, for our poor College,
that has preserved the seed of Catholic Religion down from the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign till these present times. I intercede for a College of
Pastors, so called in as much, as since it was founded by that most excellent
Prelate D.r Allan (who was the first President, and afterward Cardinal) and
erected in Doway in the year of our Lord 1568. it has sent above a Thousand
Pastors into England for the ministry of that little Church I interced for a
College of Martyrs, so named because about a hundred and forty of her
Pastoral Priests have endured imprisonments, rack's, hyrdles, and at last shed
their innocent blood in defense of the Church, the sea Apostolic, and
Catholic Faith; a glorious harvest for so little seed, as came of the Relics
of Queen Mary's days, that is of a few grave learned Priests under the conduct
of D.r Allan, which under the Reign of Queen Elizabeth left their goods and
preferments and came to Doway. I interced for the Mother-House, so commonly
styled in regard, as it was the first Seminary erected according to the
ordinance of the Council of Trent, and a pattern of many others: so it has been
the mother of all our English Colleges in Rome, Spain, and S. Omers which it
furnishd for a great time (that is until S. Omers College was erected, and
some tym after) with Scholars, and fit subjects, yea many, and even the
chiefest of our English Regulars were children of this College: for example
Father Campian, and sundry others gallant Personages Priests of the Society;
that great Scholar Father Rudicind Barlow the first President of our English
Benedictins, and diverse other worthy men of that Congregation were Children of
this College; four Provincials of the English Recollects were Children of this
College, and one of these ought not to be named by me without an ample
acknowledgment of gratitude, for he being informed that his old mother this
College was reduced to great necessity, piously interceded for her to lay
Catholics and procured a relief of 200. l^ster. Lastly I intercede for a
College properly called the spiritual Mother of all our English Catholics,
for as much as before any other Community of our Nation sent Missionaries into
England, she had sent about a hundred Priests, who with much labor, and
effusion of their blood brake the first Ice, and made the way for such as came
after.

MADAME, for my self I am an Apologer only, but for our Mother-House I am an
Intercessor, most humbly beseeching your Sacred Ma.tie to look on her with a
gracious eye, to the encouragement of your Catholic Subjects, and the
discouragement of our few wanton Clergymen of this phanatick age, that
endeavor to hurt her, since they cannot make her a plantation of their new
notions. I cannot doubt of your Ma.ties gracious favor toward her, she having
had formerly (about 22. years ago) evidence enough of your Ma.ties extreme
tenderness and compassion unto conseruing her, when she was reduced unto great
necessity through war, and pestilence, wherewith as soon as your Ma.tie was
acquainted by Father Philip, and the Right Hon.ble Personage now your Ma.ties
great Almoner my Lord Abbot Montague (my self having moved them before to that
good work) you were pleased to order considerable supplies for her releife.
Likewise I intercede for her Clergy Children, that these through your Ma.ties
power may cast away all phanatick novelties, walk in the ways of their
glorious Predecessors, give obedience where obedience is due, and love one an
other carefully endeavoring to keep unity of Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians.
4. And MADAME all this is faisable enough, if your Ma.tie shall constitute my
L. Ab. Mountague your great Almener Judge of Matters in debate for your
authority, and his prudent conduct will be able to remedy what is amiss, unto
preventing of schism, that menace's the little Church of your Catholic
subjects. And as to my own person, if for my sake the present tempest is come
upon our Mother-House, and the Catholics of England; so that they be saved,
cast me into the sea, that is thrust me out of the Mother-House, and banish me
from my native Country (which was my offer to our wanton Brethren at my last
being in England) and as I speak this from my heart, so I will endure
affliction gladly for so general a good: a small hole in any corner of a
Catholic Commonwealth will serve to end the remnant of my days, and bring my
aged head with comfort to the grave. Howeuer let God dispose of me according to
his divine pleasure, I hope he will give me grace to fear him, and honor my
King, 1. Pet: also, as in duty and gratitude I am bound, to wish your Ma.tie
all prosperity both in this, and the next life, which is, and ever shall be the
daily prayer of

MADAME YOUR MAIESTIE'S Most Humble and most Obedient Servant GEORGE LEYBVRN.

D.R LEYBVRNS ENCYCLICALL ANSWER TO AN ENCYCLICALL EPISTLE SENT TO OUR
BRETHREN OF ENGLAND, AND SVBSCRIBED BY M.R D.R ELLIS, M.R PETER CVRTIS, M.R
GEO: VVARHAME, M.R ROBERT MANLY; M.R LAVRENCE PLAT, MR. JOHN HOLLAND, M.R
CHARLES CANCEFIELD, M.R JOHN SINGLETON, AND MR. JOHN MEDCALFE


Which style them selves the Dean and Chapter, or Church, of the Catholic
Clergy in England.

He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both
are abomination to God. Proverb. 17. AT DOWAY; By L. KELLAM, 1661.

DR. LEYBVRNS ENCYCLICALL ANSWER SENT TO HIS BRETHREN OF ENGLAND.
MVCH HONORED BRETHREN.
PERHAPS some of you do conceive that the contumelious Epistle subscribed by
Dr. Ellis, and the other few of our Brethren that adhere to Mr. Blacloe, will
swallow me up with overmuch heaviness; but Unfeignedly I am nothing trubled at
the foul aspersions it casts upon me. Non qui patitur, sed qui facit
contumeliam miser est: Hier. ad Marc. Not Joseph, whom his Brethren accused,
reviled, and persecuted, did suffer prejudice thereby, Genesis 37. but they his
Accusers, and slanderers, who conspired against him wrongfully, (that is, for
as much, as they were afraid, least he might come to bear rule, and authority
over them) carry the infamous brand to all posterity of being wretched men. As
it is no dishonor to be accused, since the best integrity, and innocence is
subject to that scandal: so it is an honor to be accused falsely: the unchaste
Elders falsely accused the Chaste Susanna of incontinency, and the accusation
turned to her honor, Dan. 13. The wicked Ammon falsely accused the pious
Mardochaeus of impiety, and he was exalted thereby Esther. 8. nay the
Eccesiasticall Annals of our Country afforde evidence enough of this asserted
truth: for all Catholic posterity celebrates with much reverence the memories
of S. Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, S. Wilfred Archbishop of York, and
blessed John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, for their godly, and Religious
enterprises, notwithstanding, that in the pursuance thereof, they were
resisted, falsely accused, and injured by their own Clergy respectively, and at
different times.

Again I am nothing trubl'd, because I know right well, that as it is natural
unto a serpent to hiss, unto a scorpion to stinge, and unto a Dragon to breath
forth poison: so is it usual, and familiar to wanton scholars, that are
ambicious to vent new notions, and become Authors of new sects, as likewise to
their adherents, to revile, and say all manner of evil against such, as resist
them in the pursuance of their pernicious enterprises: for example the
Pelagians, against S. Austin; louinians against S. Hierome, the Arrians against
S. Athanasius sharpened their wicked, and slandering tongues: the poison of
Adders is under the lips of such singular Teachers, which travel after
plantations of new notions, as a woman that is about to bring forth a Child:
and carried away with their own lusts, breath out of their mouths Venomous
calumnies to the lessning, and hurting of such as piously, and religiousely
endenoure to obstruct their wicked designs: howeuer innocence is a wall of
brass invincible: Gaude (says the great Dr. S. Chrysostom) Innocentia and
exulta, gaude inquam vbique illaesa es, vbique secura: si humiliaris erigeris,
si pugnas vincis, si occideris coronaberis. Innocent men, are like stork's, for
as these devour venomous serpents, and receive nothing of hurt, but much
nourishment thereby: so those digeste poisonous words, slanders, and all manner
of calumnies to the increasing of their honor, and celebrating of their name.

Moreover I do not value any slandering aspersion as proceeding from Mr.
Blacloe and his Adherents, having often a fore frustrated to their shame the
unhandsome endeavors, they have used to ruin my reputation: and three
remarkable victories I have obtained. The first happened soon after I engaged
in the management of our old mother's affairs, for one half year was hardly
expired, when I was summoned to encounter with a little army of false
accusations (forged by Mr. Blacloe, and his adherents) and exhibited against me
to the Nuncio of Brussels unto whose jurisdiction I was subject: and his
lordship after diligent inquisition, and mature examination of my answers to
all the said accusations, was evidently conuinc'd of the inordinate proceeding,
used by my Adversaries: in so much, that he was pleased to call the aspersions
cast upon me, the Bows of the wicked, and styled, my Adversaries malicious
men, as appears by his said lordships letter written to my self, which
although I have inserted formerly in my declaratory Epistle in answer to Mr.
Blacloes printed calumnies against me, nevertheless I have thought fitting to
set down in this my Encyclicall Answer, and it is, as follows.

EXIMIE AC ADMODVM REVERENDE DOMINE.
TAm ex candida, prudenti, atque benigna Dominationis Vectrae Responsione, quam
optimis aliorum relationibus Innocentiam eius perspectam habeo; cumque diuino
Tribunali causam suam probasse videatur, non efficient hominum iudicia, multo
minus maltuolorum criminationes. Vnum hoc periculorum est quae se passum fuisse
narrat S. Paulus Apostolus, nimirum in falsis fratribus: vnde nouum non est
proborum famam perperam sugillari. Sed patientiae clypeo ad sustinendum, non
minus quam brachio forti ad agendum, Dominationem Vestram munitam gaudeo,
aduersus retribuentes mala pro bonis, and detrahentes ei, quia secuta est
bonitatem. Porro non omittam Innocentiam Dominationis Vestrae vbi opus fuerit
propalare, and iniquorum arcus confringere, illam solum hortando, vt
quemadmodum tanta laud inceperic, ita in posterum malum in bone vincere
alacriter pergat; dum rogo Dominum Deum, vt condigna meritis praemia
Dominationi Vestrae retribuat in hac vita, and in futura. Bruxellis 10.
February 1654.

Eximiae ac Admodum Reverendae Dominationis Vestrae. Addictissimus servus
ANDREAS ABBAS S. ANGELI.


Which give evidence enough, in order to this conflict, of my victory and my
adversaries shame.

The second victory I obtained at my last being at london October. 1660. which
happened thus. Sr. Kenelme Digby Mr. Blacloes Maecenas, accused me to our
Queens grand Almener, the Lord Abbot Muntegue in the presence of Mr. Car, that
I had informed the Hon. Mr. Secretary Moris, that there was come over a Ball of
books (Mr. Blacloes statera morum) directed to Mr. Holland (Secretary of the
Chapter) under the name of Smith, and likewise that I had told his Honor that
it was a work of dangerous consequence as to the State, and therefore required
a warrant to intercept the said book: also that I had acquainted his Honor,
Mr. Secretary with private affairs concerning Catholics: again that I had
intercepted his to the Chapters Secretary, and the Chapters Secretary Letters
to him, and opened them. After Sr. Kenelme had finished this formidable charge,
my Lord Almener asked of him, if what he related were certain? certain,
replied Sr. Kenelme; my Lord: I come now from Secretary Moris, who told it me.
The next day my Lord grand Almener acquainted me with the aforesaid charge, and
giving credence to what Sr. Kenelme had uttered, seemd much trubled, that I
should carry my self so unhandsomely, as to that proceeding: I made Answer
saying surely Sr. Kenelme will never atteste such a passage, and Father it upon
me; surely replied his lordship, he has attested it: and being a matter of
fact, it is easily proved, or disprou'd; to which I answered, saying, it is very
true, and therefore beseech'd his lordship, that Sr. Kenelme, and my self
might meet, and dispute this business face to face; his lordship approved my
proposition, and promised to go with me to Sr. Kenelme. In the mean while I
assured his lordship in the word of a Christian, and a Priest, that neither had
I ever spoken with, nor been in the company of his Hr. Secretary Moris; neither
had I ever made addresses unto him directly, or indirecty: neither had I ever
in all the course of my life intercepted, or opened any letters, or Letter
directed to Sr. Kenelme, or his friend Mr. Holland, Secretary of the Chapter.
This my protestation amazed the grand Almener, in so much that his lordship
told me that of necessity I ought to go to Sr. Kenelme. In the interim, his
lordship meeting with, said unto him: Sr. Kenelme doubt less there is a
mistake, as to the information you gave me against Dr. Leyburn, for he will
depose, that he never spoke with Secretary Moris, or ever made addresses unto
him: he knows not the man etc. Sr. Kenelm replied in these words (as my lord
Almener told my own self) truly I confess, Secretary Moris did not name Dr.
Leyburn, but I gathered from the Secretaryes words, that Dr. Leyburne had so
informed him. Thus I carried the second Victory.

Notwithstanding all this I am informed that Sr. Kenelme, believing me to be
the person, that especially obstructe's the spreading of the Digbean Theology,
according to his wonted manner at Paris, and after the imitation of his all
knowing master Mr. Blacloe (who in a printed letter calls Dr. Leyburn
sycophant, madman, hissing serpent, calumniatour, sylly, and ignorant man)
brandeth me at London with the names of perjured man, and pedanticall fool:
which contumelious speeches without proof do not beseem him, neither as he is
a mere man, nor as he is a Gentleman, nor as he is a knight, nor as he is in
outward profession, a Catholic. There is parity between me and Sr. Kenelme in
all these degrees: for as to human nature, he is no more man then myself upon
that scoare. There is parity as to Gentility, because when William the
conqueror invaded England, there was a Sr. Roger Leyburn of Conswick in
westmoreland (as appears by the Records of Durham) which is the ancient house
of the Leyburns, (whereof now actually my own Brother is seigneur) and so has
continued from Generation, to generation unsold: The last knight of Conswich
was Sr. Nicholas Leyburn Father to the Duchess of norfolk, whose name was
Elizabeth Leyburn mother to the old Countess of Arundell and Grand mother of
the earl of Arundell that now is: and likewise Father to the Lady Howard of
Noward in Cumberland, and to the lady Munteagle of Hornby Castle in lancashire.
And if we will peruse the Records of Dover Castle (which Sr. Edward Dyring
showed unto my self when I was his Prisonner there) we shall find that my
Ancesters have performed, as good, and faithful service to their soueraign
Princes, as perhaps Sr. Kenelm's family has done. But it is true, that in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth our family lost great fortunes for mayntaining the old
Religion, which it never Changed. This does evidence enough, that there may be
parity between Sr. Kenelme Digby and myself as to Gentility: and I am certain
that there is parity, as to knightship, for as much as I am a Dr. of Divinity.
Again there is parity, as to Catholic, because I am a Catholic Priest, and
Sr. Kenelme is but at the most a Catholic layman, howeuer I will say with S.
Hierome, Gratias ago Deo meo, quod sim dignus, quem oderint homines, quoniam
illi magis, quam his studeo placere. Moreuer I will say to Sir Kenelm, what S.
Austin said before to his Adversary a manichaean, Sentide (Ley burno) quicquid
libet, sola me in oculis Dei conscientia non accuset.

The third victory was got thus: being come to london I was informed, that my
Chapter Adversaries there had persuaded sundry of our Brethren, how in my last
great sickness I had an intent to give our College away from the Clergy. Which
was only a crafty enterprise of the said Adversaries to render me more odious
to all my Brethren, for the report was so false, that as God best know's, I had
no thought of any such design. Besides it was no more in my power to dispose of
Dow: College, then it was withim my reach the last summer to hinder Mr.
Holland, the Chapter Secretary, from his Secret iournay to Roterdame, where he
continued about two months with Mr. Blacloe, that then was printing his Statera
morum: Or prevent Dr. Ellis, and other Chapter men from reporting, that their
Secretary Mr. Holland was in one, or other County of England, when he was in
the Town of Roterdame. Furthermore, as soon as I perceived that my Physicians
dispaired of my recovery, I called unto me the seniors, and Counseled them to
think of some one, that might succeed in my room, as likewise to the end a
person named by them might find something of advantage by my recommendation, I
signed two blancks with my own hands for letters to the Pope, and Cardinal
Francis Barbarin, our Protector, and Ordered Mr. Edward Robinson Professor of
Divinity (who will attest as much) to write the said letters: Moreover being
desired by the said Seniors to nominate my Successor, I answered, that I should
advise them to make choice of D. Ellis: such was the opinion I had of him then.

After the gaining of these three notable victories as to vindicating my
integrity, no man as to reason could have imagined, but that I might have been
freed of my Adversaries calumnies for the future: notwithstanding I find too
true in our age what S. Bernard l. 2. De considerat. C. 10. observed in his
days, Alius inoleuit mos, dies alij sunt, and alij hominum mores, and tempora
periculosa non instant iam, sed extant: fraus and circumuentio and violentia
inualuere super terram. Calumuiatores multi, defensor rarus. And indeed, as to
my own particular I dare with confidence say, that in this present age falsi
accusatores sunt multi, to wit Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis, and seven more (which M.
Blacloe in his last book names the Clergy of London and they call themselves
the Church of the Catholic Clergy) who have put forth an Encyclicall Epistle
filled with many seandolous aspersions which they cast upon me, unto wounding
my honor, and reputation, as by my Encyclicall Answer will appear, or
otherwise let me fall in the judgments of all my Brethren, and lay Catholics
of England. Wherefore in pursuance of my design, as to the conseruing of my
good name, I will take my rise from these words of the said Epistle About the
year 1648. Dr. Leyb: was sent in to England by my lord Vicar General in
solidum. Which Dr. Ellis Mr. Curtis etc. set down in the 2. page of their
Encyclicall Epistle, and shall furnith a fit occasion to form a Preamble
narratiue (before my engagement in order to a special clearing of my self) to
show how first of all dissension, and division crept into our Clergy, as
likewise how I came to be invested with the Ecclesiastical Dignity of Vicar
General.

As to these two points, it is obseruable, that about the year 1628. I was
constituted Sole Agent, as to the outward management of all affairs pertaining
to our Bishop, his Clergy, and our old Mother: and so continued till about the
year 1642. during which space of years, and long before, our Clergy
extremely flourished, and enjoyed fulness of peace amongst them selves, and
perfect union with their old Mother, whose affairs were then managed by that
gallant person D. Kellison, (Cuius memoria in benedictione est.) and during the
time of my Agentship the supreme providence so prospered Dr. Louell, (who was
an excellent Clergy man) and my own endeavors, that, in order to the Clergy's
conservation, we persuaded the ancient Priests, and others to contribute
considerable sum's for the erecting of a fund unto assisting and relieuing such
Brethren, as might be either destitute of Residences, or otherwise brought to
necessity. Also in order to our old Mother my own particular endeavors were
crowned with success, as appears by Dr. Kellisons last will, and testament,
which contain these express words written with his own hand, Viz: I give to
Mr. George Leyburn who has been a great friend, and Benefactour to me, and
this House, my best Ring, and Jewel, and what else my Executours shall think
fit to bestow on him, for he deserves more then I am able to give. In like
manner my lord Bishop by his lordships last will, left unto me his god
pectorall Cross, and considerable Charities to this community But about the
years 1638, 39, 40. dyed all the most eminent Clergy men, namely Dr. Kellison,
Dr. Stratford, Dean Bennet, Dean Collington, Dr. Louell, Dr. Shell, Mr.
Broughton, Mr: Troloppe, Mr. Rogers, to geather with Sundry other Chapter men
of great Zeal, prudence, and eminency, who even in the time of those before
mentioned years respectively, begun to perceive Mr. Blacloes inclination to
profane nouellties, and therefore extremely disliked him, but especially Dr.
Kellison, Dr. Stratford, D. Louell, Mr. Musket. and my lord Bishop who suruiued
the other four to publish his dislike and resist the pernicious doctrines set
forth by him which before he had taught in private only: Whereas Mr. Blacklo
about the year 1633. had unadvisedly approved a certain book that contained
sundry new notions, that disedifyed many lay Catholics and the Clergy
Generally, my lord Bishop, Dr. Kellison, Dr. Stratford, Dr. Louell, M. Musket,
and my self dealt with him to recall his approbation. Which he obstinately
refused.
and indeed his Iordship was wont to say to me, and others whom I can name,
that he had the two marks of an Heretic, to wit Singularity, and nouelty: and
for my own part I had so great an abhorrence of his wicked opinions, even before
they were published in print, that as his Adherenrs cried them up, I
contrariwise cried them down. Et hinc illae lacrymae: that is the sole ground
of the grievous persecution which as to calumnies, I have endured less, or
more, for the space of 18. years: but about the year 1642. considering
seriousely with my self the great distempers then beginning in our Country,
the absence of our Pastor, the miss of Dr. Kellison, Dr. Stratford, D. Louell,
etc. the chief ancient heads of our Clergy, and our new Deans advancing of Mr.
Blacloes Adherents, I resolud to retire out of England, following the example
of S. Gregory Nazyanzen, who perceauing that, the great labors which he had
exercised in his Episcopal charge at Constinople for the bringing of souls out
of sin, and heresy, had brought a mighty Odium upon him self, the Arrian
Bishops, envying extremely the happy success he had in his godly enterprises,
quitred even his Bishopric, conceiving, that it would not ly in his power to
overcome his potent Adversaries, and imagining that by his absence they might
the sooner be brought to reason, or at least be appeased thereby: which indeed
was my imagination in order to Mr. Blacloe and his Adherents. Wherefore after I
had acquainted our Dean, that was not versed in our affairs (having not been in
England in 40. years before) as likewise Mr. Gage who principally directed him
in the government of his Charge, with the end for which the fund was erected,
and with the monyes entrusted with Mr. Blacloe, I delivered up all my offices,
and steered my course for France, with design to spend the rest of my days in
some obscure corner of the world: but being to pass by Paris, my duty obliged
me to wait upon my lord Bishop, thorough whose earnest persuasions, I engaged
in the service of Turnay College for the space of two years. In the interim,
came to Paris Sr. Kenelme Digby, Mr. Blacloe, Mr. Fitton, and Mr. Harrington,
Dr. Holden was there before, and then (together with Iansenisme) Digbean
Blacloisme begun to be taught even to laymen and women, before it came forth in
print, which was an occasion of continual disputes; my lord Bishop showed an
extreme dislike of Mr. Blacloes nouellties, and as to me, after my wonted
manner I endeavored to crush them in the bud, and cry them down as often as I
heard them mentioned: which rendered me more vngrattfull unto Sr. Kenelme, Dr.
Holden, Mr. Fitton, Mr. Harrington, and Mr. Car they all being great Admirers
of Mr. Blacloes Learning. Yet as to Mr. Fitton, he about the year 1636. being
brought to the point of death by a redeous Sickness, delivered all Mr. Blacloes
books, which were then put forth to the Inquisitour of florence showing his
dislike of the Tenets therein contained: and foretelling, that they would be
condemned, if they were not already: as the Hon. Mr. Henry Sommerset, and Dr.
Kitton (Mr. Fittons executeurs) have attested.

About the year 1645. having finished the time of my engagement, as to the
serving of Turnay College, I humbly requested my lord Bishop for his leave to
depart from that employment, and even from the Town of Paris; his lordship
refused to grant my request: telling me in plain terms, that he would not
trust the said College with Mr. Fitton, nor with any other except myself: Mr.
Clifford having before quitted his principalship. Howeuer after two, or three
bouts, I quieted my lord, and obtained his lordships condescension to my
departure, on condition to return, when his lordship should lay his commands
upon me.

Thus being freed of my engagement, and thereby delivered from the sight of my
Adversaries, that looked upon me with an envious eye, in reguarde they saw, that
I went about to obstruct the spreading of Mr. Blacloes new doctrines, I retired
from Paris to Rhemes in Champaign, where I had not continued above three
months, but my lord Bishop sent me an express order signified in two several
letters, to bring me again to Paris, because our Queen was newly arrived out of
England, and had oppointed Sr. Kenelme Digbie as Agent to his Holiness, and
intimated with all, that he in respect of his great abilities, her May.
countenance, and the great kindness he had for Mr. Blacloe, Mr. Fitton, Dr.
Holden, etc. might extremely advantage our Clergy. In obedience to his
lordships commands I returned, and suddenly after my arrival, a consult was
held in my lord Bish: chamber, consisting of his lordship, Mr. Fitton (newly
constituted Dean) Mr. Clifford. Dr. Holden, Mr. Blacloe, Mr. Car, and my self.
The sole business, that Mr. Dean propounded at this meeting, was the
Seasonablenes (in reguard of Sr. Kenelme's Agentship) for our Clergy to
supplicate the Pope unto obtaining of his Holiness approbation, and confirmation
of our Chapter, and therefore required that letters might be expedited
together with a commission to empower Sr. Kenelme, with authority unto
negotiating in behalf of the Clergy: which accordingly was performd* being
carried by plurality of votes; and indeed I was, against moving in the Court of
Rome for a confirmation thereof (and only his lordship voted with me)
alleging as a reason, that we had continued in possession of Ecclesiastical
dignities (constituted by his lordship, and his Predecessor) for a considerable
series of years, without any sentence pronounced by the Court of Rome unto the
disannulling of them, and if we shall still so continue, it will be a great
motive to his Holiness (whosoever is Pope) to continue unto us a Bishop, which
is the happiness we desire only: but if our motion for the confirmation
thereof, said I, were rejected, where as now we build on the tacit consent of
his Holiness, as to the confirmation of the said Ecclesiastical dignities, we
should then wholly destroy the ground on which we build. The success Sr.
Kenelm Digbie had in the pursuance of that negotiation I will not tell for
sorrow.

About the year 1648. Dean Fitton in compliance to his charge, and in
consideration of the times that begun to be more calm, and moderate under the
Government of a new master, resolved to go into England, and at the same time
my lord Bishop was desired to constitute Mr. Harrington his Vicar Genesis In
solidum; where fore his lordship after a serious deliberation with himself (as
he told me) thinking it inconvenient that the sole principal men of his
Chapter should consiste of Mr. Blacloes Adherents, whereby novelties might be
countenanced to the prejudice of our body, and others also, called me unto him,
and said, that he had made choice of me for his Vicar General, and therefore
desired, I would prepare my self to go suddenly into England. But I refused
absolutely the charge, alleging that the acceptance thereof might bring me to
my grave, with continual vexations, Mr. Blacloe and his faction (that would
bear cheef rule in the Chapter) looking on me with an envious eye. To this,
his lordship replied, saying, my desire is to obstruct the spreading of new
Doctrines, in our Country, wherefore you must not refuse even to suffer
inconveniences for so good, and laudable an end, and thereby it shall appear
that I am an Enemy to all profane novelties. In sum his lordships great
earnestness prevailed with me so far, as I promised to consider seriously, and
commend to God his lordships proposal, and to this end, and purpose I exacted
7. days respite, before I might bring my Answer, which was granted me: and as
God is my witness, in each one of those days, I frequented places of greatest
devotion, and such especially as had the B. Sacrament exposed, beseeching the
divine goodness to direct me, as to the Answer I was to give. The seven days
being expired, I repaired to his lordship, who instantly asking of me what I
had resolved, my replye was in these words; Qui vos audit me audit, qui vos
spernit me spernit: The will of my superior must be Gods will, and therefore
resolved to do it, although I should encounter with Armies of troubles in the
performance thereof. My lord Bish. having thus obtained my consent, caused a
patent to be drawn, writ two letters himself, one to our Chapter men, an
other to the Hon. Mr. Mountague who is now our Queens great Almener, and so
dispatched me away suddenly without acquainting Mr. Fitton, Dr. Holden, Mr.
Blacloe, or Mr. Car. But as soon as these understood, that I was arrived at
london, and constituted his lordships Vicar General, unto excluding of Mr.
Harrington (Mr. Blacloes principal Disciple) they were starteled, yet
perceiving no remedy, there being an impossibility to undo my lord Bish. own
Act, betook them selves to crafty dealings. For under a specious color of
greater union they much importuned his lordship to create Mr. Harrington a
second Vicar Genesis In solidum, that his power might equal mine: and in the
pursuance of their importunity they employed the endeavors of all such (men,
and women) as they were sure, his lordship had a special kindness for; in so
much that his lordship wrought upon by their importunity, and carried on with
the specious pretext of establishing greater union, by creating Mr. Harrington
a second Vicar General, he yielded. Thus having gained a great advantage
against me they believed (as they had reason) that my authority would be so
ecclipsed thereby, that it should signify nothing in the Chapter, the
principal members thereof (which were a pack of Mr. Blacloes friends) having
obtained a Vicar Genesis of their own faction, invested into equal power, and
jurisdiction with my self. Howeuer men's Proposals, and Gods direction do not
alwais agree: and such as too much attend their own ambitious ends, seldom
confine themselves to Gods pleasure, and means, as plainly appeared by the
ungodly endeavors they used to incense my lord Bishop against me, and to lessen
my reputation in the opinion of all our Brethren. For the supreme providence
that did not leave Joseph in his prison, nor Danyel in his Den, did not
desert me in the persecution these men craftily by wicked Calumnies raised to
the obscuring of my good name for my power with my lord Bish. my credit with
the Lay-Catholicks in General, and my authority with our Brethren, such
especially as were no London Chapter-men encreasd thereby, while I remained in
England. But I dare say that Mr. Blacloe, and his faction persecuted me as
violently, and Calumniated me as craftily, as the Arrians did S. Athanasius.

From the premises does evidently appear the flourishing cofidition of our
Clergy as to good seed, that was sown in the field of their hearts, till Homo
inimicus came, qui super seminauit zizania discordiae, and haeresis. Thus much
as to showing the manner how division crept into our Clergy, and the means
whereby the dignity, or office of grand Vicar in solidum, was conferred on me;
and although these sole passages set down were sufficient enough to defeat my
Adversaries, as to the particular aspersions, they cast upon me: neuertheless
that they may not brag hereafter, as if I had returned them but a lame Answer.

Iam, iamque animo maiora paranti Da ventam lector.

Page 2. Of the Encyclicall Epistle. In August following (1648) there was held
a general Chapter in which presided Mr. Fitton our Dean. The Chapter-men from
all their districts being met, Dr. Leyb. (against the known order, and rules of
such meetings) bringes thither without the Deans notice two others, which were
not of the Chapter. Mr. Dean ciuilly told them. -- VVhereupon they retired one
of them was satisfied, the other vowed revenge. -- Which (Chapter) was ended
with much satisfaction to all others except Dr. Leyb.

This first charge, for as much, as it obiectes scandalous matters and proves
nothing thereof, carries the infamous mark of a slander, for Accusatio, quae
caret probatione, calumnia est: and indeed, if to accuse were sufficient enough
to take away a man's good name, innocence could not be delivered from the malice
of slandering tongues: In consequence of which I am not bound to Answer.
Howeuer since the accusation comes from Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. whose bare
Testimonies may have something of weight, and authority, therefore I have
thought it expedient to clear each particular point of the said Charge.

As to the first, that obiecteth transgression against the known order, and
rules of such meetings, for bringing thither two of our Brethren, which were
not of the Chapter: I replye to this pythagorian Testimony (which is Dictum
proprium named by Aristotle Argumentum stultorum) that inuolues two false
supposals: whereof the one is, that there were known order, and rules unto
excluding such Brethren from a general Assembly, as were not of the Chapter:
for before any of my Accusers were Clerici (except Mr. Curtis, and Mr. Plat my
scholar) I was in all the consults and general meetings of our Clergy, and in
those it was the use, and custom to inuit thither such grave, and deserving
Brethren as accidentally came to London, in the time of the said meetings,
although they were no Chapter-men; the intent whereof was to do them honor in
respect of their great merits. The other false supposall is, as to our two
Brethren which Dr. Ellis etc. say, I brought unto the before mentioned general
Assembly: truly I did only summon them in virtue of my lord Bishop his own
letter, wherein his Lordship expressed that he had constituted both of them
Canons, and the letter I showed to the Dean even while he uncivilly, and
disobediently dismissed them before the Assembly begun to sit; and hence arose
the first dispute between the Dean and my self. I produced his Lordships
letter whereby the two foresaid Brethren were constituted Chapter-men, and
complained of the Deans inciuility, and disobedience, but he pretended that his
Lordship had given him leave to make such a number of Canons: and accordingly
had completed it: withal added, that it was not in his Lordships power to
increase the said number. Whereunto I replied, that surely the power of a
Bishop to make Chapter-men more or less, as he pleases, is not exhausted by
making thirty, whereas before he might have created thirty two, unless he had
tied his hands to a Non plus vltra, which Mr. Dean could not euince.

But this was not the sole contest between me, and the Dean in that Assembly
(as they say) for he, and Dr. Holden especially had composed a small book of
rules, and constitutions to be observed by the Chapter. These the Dean read in
our first session, and after the reading thereof required approbation and
confirmation of them: I resisted this request, alleging that they contained
sundry points destructive of my lord Bishops Episcopal authority, and
instanced principally in one particular constitution, that exacted obedience to
the Chapter, from all Clergy Priests of England, and Wales: and this I carried
against the Dean, and his party, the Assembly refusing to pass it without their
Bishops condescension unto it. Likewise I instanced in an other constitution,
that required an oath from all Chapter-men, obliging them not to reveal
passages, and transactions done in the Chapter, to any persons, or person
whoseouer. I perceiving, that Mr. Blacloes Adherents intended thereby to keep
his Lordship from the knowledge of affairs, stood up, and said, that I excepted
against the particle, Whosoever, alleging, that it might bear no good
meaning, and withal told the Dean plainly, that I should refuse to take an
oath unto excluding my lord B. from the knowledge of his Chapters proceedings.
This netled extremely the Dean, and that party; howeuer being put to votes, I
carried it, and in the oath of secrecy, that my self, and the rest of the
Assemby then took, his Lordship was excepted: and truly I acquainted my lord
immediately with these passages, who as God is my witness, writ back unto me,
as to the rules, and constitutions, Mr. Fitton, and Dr. Holden had shown them
unto him, and that he had signified, for as much as he had read, his dislike of
them: and as to exhibiting obedience to the Chapter he commanded me to
prohibit in his name the execution thereof. Notwithstanding after the
dissolution of the Assemby, Mr. Blacloes Adherents continued in the pursuance
of their design, as to exhibiting obedience to the Chapter, in so much that my
lord Bishop threatened to deprive them of their faculties if they should not
suddenly desiste from that enterprise.

As to the second point of the charge; that is of moment, to wit, The other
vowed revenge. By this pythagorian Testimony without proof; evidently
appears, that Dr. Ellis, M. Curtis etc. do not sharpen their slandering
tongues against me only, but likewise against all such, as show a dislike of
Mr. Blacloes Doctrines, and these men's proceedings in the countenancing
thereof. For I dare boldly auerre, that the worthy Party, Whom they accuse of
vowed revenge, is guilty of no other sin in order to them, or their affairs,
then his dislike etc. He is a person that I have known for the space of above
40. years, he took the degree of Licentiat, and performd all Acts required to
the creating of him Dr. in the schools of Sorbon, when Dr. Ellis was a mere
youth: he has laudably labored in the Apostolical mission about 30. years
without reproach: he has had ever an extreme abhorrence of such actions as
beseem not Priests, namely, going to plays, hanting of Alehouses and Tauerns,
playing the solicitour, trafficking out of a desire of wordly advantages; also
he has had ever a great kindness for Dr. Ellis, whom he had known a young youth
of modest behavior, and has given him much good advise, and Counsel, at his
entering into his office of Deanship, and since; which if he had embraced, he
would never have so uncharitably abused the president of Dow. Coll: that is to
say, his Father, (that College being his old Mother) by putting forth
unadvisedly an Encyclicall Epistle, wherein, he accuses the said President of
sundry grievous crimes, and extolleth above the clouds the said Mr. Blacloe for
his gallant parts, his vnimpeachable virtue, vmblemisht life, and eminent
learning, which vnparalelled Elogium to the everlasting dishonor of our Clergy
Mr. Blacloe has published in Latin as follows.

De me Cleri Londinatis Encyclica ad Fratres per Vniuersam Angliam Epistola,
hoc testimonium continet. Quantum ad Albij (alio nomine, quo notus sum
Fratribus, me appellat) Personam attinet, nouimus eam semper vitae
irreprehensibilis and exemplaris conuictus fuisse, and propterea ex Regulis
Christianae pietatis tenemur eam aestimare and honorare: Plura insignia munera
Cleri authoritate gessit, totidem egregia seruitia Clero rependit. Pluribus
Fratrum nostrorum granissimis and aetate prouectissimis Scientias praelegit;
quae nos obligant vt and nos and illi cum gratitudine honorem rependamus.
Scientiam ipsius esse eminentem fatentur omnes, quae nos ex legibus naturae and
societatis humanae cogit ad paremilli aestimationem retribuendam. Hactenus de
me Epistola Encyclica.

As to the third point, or third pythagorian Testimony, that is, Proprium
dictum without proof, Viz: which (Chapter Aug: 1648.) was ended with much
satisfaction to all others except Mr. Leyb.; there will be no great need to
replye, because the premises set down do clearly show, that to the extreme
dissatisfaction of Mr. Blacloes friends, I obstructed the confirmation of the
constitution, that exacted obedience to the Chapter from all Clergy Priests: as
likewise I prevailed so, as to the oath of Secrecy, that it was taken in that
Assembly without excluding my lord Bish: from the knowledge of the Chapter's
proceedings, and transactions. Again, as God is my witness, sundry members of
that Assembly told me in express words, that it was a Parliamentary Chapter,
for, said they, as the parliament has deprived their king of his whole power,
so the Chapter goes about to take away their Bishops authority: which does
evidence that it ended not with much satisfaction to all others, except Mr.
Leyb. Wherefore the premises of this, and the other two replies clearly
verify the saying of the great Dr. S. Chrysostom: Non modo nullum incommoduns
ijs, qui perferunt infidias, verum etiam, id omne in caput insidiantium
conuertitur.

Page 4. A general Chapter met July 10. 1653. but Dr. Leyb. and his friend,
who had vowed revenge formerly, effected that my lord sent his mandate to
dissolve the Assembly, as met to out him from his Episcopal authority etc.

In this, as in the former Charge Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. imitate
pythagoras, as to their Testimony, which is Dictum proprium only; they produce
no conuincing reasons to prove what they assert: neither indeed can they
allege any, the said charge consisting of two most false propositions the
Latter whereof is, that my lord Bish. sent his mandate to dissolve the Assembly
(July 1653.) as met to out him from his Episcopal authority. The other is:
That Dr. Leyh. and his friend effected the sending of the said Mandate.

As to the latter proposition set down in the first place, in regard of my
lord, that is thereby concerned, I do prove, that it has nothing of truth,
thus: His Lordship never harbored such a thought, as to believe, that the
Assembly was met to machinate against his Episcopal authority: Ergo his
Lordship did not send his mandate to dissolve the Assembly, as met to out him
from his Epicopall authority. The consequence is good, and the Antecedent, from
whence I infer it, evidently appears by my lord's Answer to Mr. Harrington,
Mr. Harrison, alias Herbere, Mr. Knightly, Mr. Walton, Mr. Ashton, and Mr.
Peterson, alias Curtis writ Aug. 1653. after that Assembly was ended: and is as
follows.

R. Brethren Mark Harrington William Harrison etc.
I Have received your letter dated the 1. Aug. in which you grieuousely accuse
me (to repeat your own words) to have condemned by a public Instrument your
late Assembly, and therein all the Priests of England, and Wales represented by
them, as ingratefully, and seditiously machinating against my Episcopal
authority, without hearing any one of you: and you earnestly require me to
recall the said condemnation under my hand, and seal for reparation of your
good name.

To which I Answer 1. that you prove not at all your said accusation of me; and
you know well, that accusation without proof is a mere slander, and none
should be innocent, Si accusasse sufficiat. Secondly I protest sincerely, that
I never meant to condemn the late Assembly, and much less, all the Priests of
England, and Wales of ungrateful, and seditious machinating against my
Episcopal authority. Thirdly I say, that though because you be my Accusers
herein, the whole burden of proof lies upon you, and I ought to be acquitted,
if you convince not your said accusation: yet because my Innocence herein is
Clear, I will prove it out of my Mandate, in which you say, I have condemned
your Assembly, and all Priests of England, and Wales. First by the word
Ingrate, which can no way be meant of your Assembly, because I neither
gratifyed, nor obliged them any way, and therefore they could not be thought to
deal ungratefully against me. Secondly by the word Seditiose, which is joined
to the words, Convocasti presbiteros, and the Assembly did not conuocate, but
was conuocated. Thirdly by the whole Mandate, which consists of two parts:
in the former whereof, are those words, Ingrate and seditiose, in which I
speak only to Mr. Harrington, as is evident by these words: Quoniam (vt a
fide dignis accepimus) Tu Marce Vicarie mi Generalis, nuper ingrate and
seditiose convocasti quosdam presbiteros saeculares etc. And in the second part
which begins: Et similiter praecipimus omnibus presbiteris a te nuper
convocatis etc. In which I speak to the Assembly, there is no word of
ingratitude or sedition, but only a command to recall whatsoever they had done
in that meeting against my authority: nor can any such thing be inferred
thereby, unless you can prove (which you never can) that nothing can be done
against Episcopal authority, but ungratefully, and seditiously, and they
having done nothing, the command became null. Thus Clearly, and manifestly I
have proved my Innocence, as concerning the foresaid condemnation of your
Assembly, and of all Priests in England, and Wales: so that, I need not
produce (as you require) Testes fide dignos to prove that condemnation to be
just: But you need bring conuincing reasons out of my Mandate to prove, that I
made any such condemnation, if you will show Yr. selves to be lawful Accusers
of your Spiritual Father, and Superior; likewise I need not recall under my
hand, and seal, what I never said, or thought, but you are bound under your
hands to recall what you have plainly, but untruly imposed upon me: and that
shall suffice me for reparation of my honor, and credit, which ought to be as
much (if not more) dear to me, as yours to you, for I attribute your error
herein, not to malice, or ill will against me, but to a simple mistake of my
meaning upon insufficient consideration of my words: As for proceeding
iuridically, which you say, I have refused to two or three: I used it, at my
first coming into England, but I found not, that it wrought any good effect,
and therefore left it; and indeed judge that it is not fit for these times in
England: neither do. I think you would take it well, if I should force you to a
iuridicall proof of your foresaid accusation against me; what I wrote lately to
Mr. Walton, that he had satisfied me concerning the Assembly, that therein
nothing was done against my Episcopal authority, which before I suspected:
but not that the Assembly had vngratfully, and seditiousely machinated against
my Episcopal authority, which I never suspected, nor ever imagined till I read
this your letter. You call Mr. Harrington Sub Dean of Yr. Chapter, which office
I never gave him, nor any other, that had authority from me. Is not this to
usurp upon Episcopal authority, and to take Spiritual authority given by
none? Which what offense it is, you well know.


To the same effect, and purpose his Lordship writ an Answer to Mr. Blacloe,
who espoused Mr. Harringtons quarrel, and I have judged it expedient to ioyn
it with the former, that the Matter in debate may be confirmed, and Mr.
Blacloes insolent petulancy appear thereby: The Answer is expressed, as
follows.

I have received yours of the 31. of October, and much marvelled to see a
letter of that subject from your self, because you are not interessed in the
quarrel of the five Priests, for whom you plead, and have enough to do for
your own works, as also because they needed not your help, and as you confess,
A treaty of accommodation between me, and them, is set on foot, which perhaps
your letter may hinder. You say, you will not espouse their quarrel, and yet
you do it in the chiefest point, and therein spend two third parts of your
letter, and endeavor to prove, that this consequence is good; If Mr. Metham
(Harrington) were condemned as seditiously conuocating the Assemble, the
Assemble it self was condemned as seditiously conuocated, Because, forsooth,
where there is an active, there is a passive, as if there were no more but an
active, and passive: but if you look well, you will here find two actiues, to
wit, two condemnations, the former, of Mr. Metham: the latter, of the Assemble,
and the latter I say will not follow of the former: whicht I proved both by the
example of the Apostles, whom we condemn not in any sort of sedition, though
we condemn the Jews thereof, in conuocating them, which example you touch not:
and also by reason, because the conuocated may nether know, nor consent to the
seditious intent of the Conuocator, and without knowledge and consent, there is
no sin at all, and consequently no cause of condemnation: and this I took to
be the state of the Assembly conuocated by Mr. Metham. But say you, if the
convocation be illegal, the conuocated are faulty in yealding to an illegal
action. I answer, the convocation it self may be legal, because according to
law, and by lawful authority, and yet the intention of the Conuocator,
illegal and seditious, for a good deed may be done for an ill end, and one may
know and consert to the good deed, and yet nether know nor consent to the ill
end, for which it is done. But you reply, that the Assembly could not be
ignorant, of what themselves did. True, but yet they might be ignorant of the
intent of him who procured them to do what they did. Nether will it follow,
that if I feared they did something prejudicial to my authority, that
therefore I suspected them of sedition against my authority, because they
might be persuaded* that either that was not against my authority indeed, or
if it were, they had just cause to do it. For example, the Council of
Constance acted against the Papal authority of three Popes, yet were not
guilty of sedition against Papal authority, because they were persuaded that
what they did, was just and necessary for the good of the Church. And it is
Sedition, which I am charged to have imputed to the Assembly, and to all the
Priests in England, and Wales, and is that, which I deny, and you should
prove, but of which I never suspected the Assembly.

Thus I think I have briefly, but sufficiently answered the substance of your
letter, which I would not have answered at all, if I had not suspected, that by
my silence you would either have thought your self contemned, or me convicted by
you, but if you will write any more of this subject, look for no answer from
me, for I purpose to spend my time better then in quarrels.

Only for your souls sake I request you to leave those naughty reproaches,
which you give to one equal to your self in all things, but you name him not
(you know why) that he is A lying and perjured Sycophant, a wretched Sycophant,
a bouttefeu, who cares not what disodrer he breeds so he nourishes discord
for his own ambition. And young Mr. Leyb. (whom Mr. Clifford here says, is
beloved of all) you say if you meet him you will tell him he is a saucy boy.
To omit the tauntes of paramont Bishop and domineering ways, and such others,
which you bestow upon myself, it seems you have forgotten your solemn promise,
which you made at your ordination, to give reverence and obedience to your
ordinary, and the prayer of the Church, which she makes in the ordination of
a Bishop, Qui maledixerit tibi, sit ille maledictus, and qui benedixerit tibi,
benedictionibus repleatur. But I pray you forget not the words of the Apostle:
Maledici regnum Dei non consequentur. Nor of our Savior: Qui dixerit fratri
suo, fatue, reus erit Gehennae ignis. Such reproachful words as you use in
your letter, beseem nether Christian nor Priest, but discover too too great
passion.


These letters give full evidence, that my lord Bish: never believed,
suspected, or imagined our Chapter men assembled July 10. 1653 to machinate
against his Episcopal authority, in consequence of which, the before mentioned
proposition, His Lordsship sent his Mandate to dissolve that Assembly, as met
to take from him his Episcopal authority, has nothing of truth. My lord feared
no prejudice, as to him self from the Assembly in general, but suspected
crafty dealings from Mr. Harrington, and some few other (principal members) of
Mr. Blacloes faction. And here is obseruable, that immediately after the
breaking up of the said Assembly, Mr. Harrington, Mr. Harrison, and Mr. Curtis
persons of greatest power and authority, and principal favorers of Mr.
Blacloe, so wrought with Mr. Knightly, Mr. Ashton, and Mr. Walton, that they
got them to join in the unhandsome letter, that accused my lord of condemning
all the Priests of England, and Wales (though his Lordship had only condemned
Mr. Harrington) and required him to recall the said condemnation under his
hand, and seal, for reparation of their good name, whereas, as to reason, and
obedience due to their Spiritual Father, they should have used greater
moderation, as likewise believed, that it might have been a sufficient ground
of sending the Mandate and accusing Mr. Harrington his Vicar General of
ingratitude, and sedition, because he had called the said Assembly without
acquainting his Lordship; and indeed such a proceeding, as coming from such a
subject, if it had been brought to a iuridicall Trial, would have been
sentenced as ungrateful and seditious, especially if my lord had urged against
Mr. Harrington the crafty dealings, that he and his party had used to out his
Lordship of his Episcopal authority in the Assembly held Aug. 1648. But what
was the intent of Mr. Harrington, Mr. Harrison, and Mr. Cuttis who contrived
the foresaid letter, to bring all the Priests of England, and Wales under the
condemnation of one particular man, God knows best, though there wanted not
sufficient ground to conceive, that they imagined, they might thereby engage
the whole Clergy in their quarrel: ho^^ when the other three Mr. Knightly, Mr.
Ashton, and Walton saw my lord's Answer to the letter they had scribed, they
submitted themselves instantly, and my sel^ ^^ceiued Mr. Knightlys, and Mr.
Ashtons submissions to sen^^ his Lordship.

Besides doubtless my lord was informed a fide dignis that (...) Blacloes
faction had a design to prejudice his Episcopal aut^^^ 1. because Mr. Ashton,
that was a Deputy for our lancha^^^ Brethren in that Assembly, when he
perceived, that my (...) Bish: took in ill part the before mentioned letter
which ^^nocently had subscribed, writ unto me in these express (...) (his
letter I have shown to our Seniors) I so behaved me Assembly by opposing
whatsoever, I thought would disguste our (my Lord) or entrenche upon our
Mothers ancient privileges, a^^ in private meetings that I have been called,
and am accounted a Leyburnian. I do not shame of the Title: for I never knew
(...) any thing, that was not justifiable; but now after all this; and if I had
time to relate it, may not I cry out of fortune, if you think me inueigled
into their party; I hope you can never harbo^ a conceit of me: my complying in
some things with them, has m^^^ better learned in their passages, then I
should have been: far was (...) me, and far be it from my thoughts, to join
Issue with them in op^^^^^ to our master, who is so much worthy of honor,
reverence, and Secondly, the worthy person, who, as you say vnad^^^ vowed
revenge, writ expressly unto me thus. Since Yr. de^^^^ they (Mr. Blacloes party)
have labored much to bring of those went Yr. way, and with many they have
effected their purpose, shake their heads, and will be indifferent, so no
opposition appear^^^ Grandees begin to declare the intention of their meeting
which is tot^^^ out your master as you call him. An authentical copy o^^
letter I have shown to our Seniors and therein is a long dis^^^^ also between
him self and Mr. Herbert, which you boa^^ say he has disauowd; if he has
done so, I suppose he (...) after the imitation of that worthy Arch Deacon Mr.
T. B. now living, to whom Mr. Gage, and Mr. Curtis, at my coming into England,
had communicated the design of outing my lord Bish: and of the course they
intended to steer for the effecting it; The virtuous person after he was
departed from them, reflecting upon his duty, office, and oath, came to my
chamber, who was his Lordship Vic: Gen: in solidum, and revealed what Mr. Gage,
and Mr. Curtis had imparted unto him in secret. wherefore I told him, that he
was bound to make a certificate thereof, sign with his own hand, and send it
to his Lordship: which was done accordingly. Afterward Mr. Gage, and Mr.
Curtis being informed from Paris that his Lordship was extremely offended with
their machinating against him, they replied to the Informer, that the good
Archdeacon ought not to be credited, because he was (said they) a person much
addicted to the Jesuits, thinking to discredit his Testimony thereby. But his
Lordship writ unto me after the arrival of this information, that Mr. Tho. B.
inclination to the Jesuits was not a sufficient ground to inualide his
Testimony, so that his Lordships just wrath continued, and they put to new
inventions, unto appeasing him: wherefore they made their addresses to Mr. T.
B. himself, signifying that the Testimony, he had given, would of necessity
cause great distractions, and divisions in the Clergy: and therefore vrgd him
to moderate it in such a fashion at least as his Lordship might have some
grownd to think that their meaning and intent, as to the words of the said
Testimony, might bear no sound of a rebellious design, which thorough their
importunity, and his own virtue, and piety (that desired unity in our body
though with the lessening of his own honor) he moderated accordingly. But
after he had done so, they vanted, that he had recal'd his said Testimony. I
believe that, after the same manner Mr. Harrison, alias Herbert dealt with the
other before mentioned: wherefore it is probable that Dr. Ellis etc. make use of
the piety and pity showed toward Mr. Herbert to revenge themselves of that
pious, and virtuous person, in regard he is counted an enemy to Mr. Blacloe,
and his Adherents; for truly what he relates of Mr. Herbert in his letter I do
easily believe, because Mr. Herbert, (whom I preferred to the best Residence of
England) tol'd me to my face, that he saw no reason, why that man should be our
Superior, who never came among us; and after my arrival in the low Country's
he writ unto me, that it was not Hon. to oppose Mr. Blacloes Doctrines, who had
been my Master; to which I replied, that I had only studied his writings in
the first book of physics, for the space of about 3. monets, till Dr.
Stratford returned from Paris; howeuer I added, that I preferred my Spiritual
Father, and Superiors Counsels which were, that we should abhor profane
novelties, before a million of masters, that should be carried about with every
wind of Doctrine. Thirdly my lord Bishop in a letter dated after the breaking
up of the Assembly July 1653 (I have shown it to our Seniors) writes thus: Mr.
Lancaster tells me that Mr. Page (a virtuous Priest, and Archdeacon) upon
his deaths Bed told him that, the intent of the pack (so Mr. Blacloes Adherents
were named) in the last meeting was to cry up Mr. Blacloes Doctrines, and
overthrow my authority, which (authority) Mr. Car said lately to my face was
imaginary, and this, I assure myself, he said not of him self alone: so they
can make use for themselves of an authority, which they account imaginary. And
indeed Mr. Blacloe held it for such, as appears by a letter, he writ to the
Nuncio of Paris, which is set down in my declaratory Epistle published 1656. he
dares not now deny the letter, though his Paris friends made him once disclaim
from it, and persuaded my lord Bish. that it was composed by our Adversaries
unto fomenting of dissentions.

As to the other proposition, to wit, Dr. Leyb. and his friend, that vowed
revenge, effected that my Lord sent his Maudate. To this I replye, that it is
so false, that as God best knows, I had no such intent; howeuer Dr. Ellis, Mr.
Curtis etc. to persuade our Brethren, that I was an efficient cause of the said
Mandate they dress up a proof with dark words, and sentences, knowing well
that if they had spoken plainly, I should have discovered their crafty dealing
as plainly. The proof (such as it is) they set down page 4. thus Mr. Leyb.
friend gave under his hand, that the letter he writ him, to send my lord, was
altered in one part of it, and that himself feigned the rest, to see how they
who preath patience, and Charity to others, could endure a wrong done
themselves. They are his own words in his own hand yet extant. Now this altered
letter passing through Dr. Leyb. hand to my lord, my lord expressing that he
had it a Personis fide dignis, Dr. Leyb. writing at the same time to my lord,
and enclosing his friends letter, upon the receipt of which two letters,
immediately issued the Mandate: it is no hard matter to perceive plainly who was
joined with that misinformer, and so made my lord express them plurally.

As to the proof, it is a mere story cut out of a phanatick brain that has
nothing of sense or reason. For 1. Dr. Ellis, and Mr. Curtis etc. auerre, that
Mr. Leyb. friend writ him a letter to send to my Lord: but Mr. Leyb.
protests that he had no order from his friend to send any letter to my lord
that friend writ at any time. Secondly they auerre that the letter writ to
Mr. Leyb. was altered in one part of it: but they do not specify in what, it
was altered. Thirdly they put in a different character: To see how they, who
preach patience and Charity to others, could endure a wrong done themselves;
and immediately follows these particles expressed in the ordinary character,
They are his own words in his own hand yet extant. Here I was extremely
troubled to conceive whether the immediate, written in a different, or the
precedent words expressed in the ordinary character ought to be meant, By his
own words in his own hand yet extant: Neither as yet can I pick up the meaning
thereof. Fourthly they auerre that the altered letter passed through Mr. Leyb.
hand to my lord; but they do not mention by whom, or whether before, or after
the receipt thereof it was altered. If they had meant aright without design to
abuse our Brethren they would have set down the letter, and declared plainly
in what part thereof, and by whom the alteration was made. But they durst not
do so, for they know well, that though their great support at Paris intercepted
the original, nevertheless there is an authentical copy in being subscribed
by two Priests. Whereby appears that the said letter was written to my own
self, and not to my lord, neither was I advised to send it his Lordship.
Howeuer I do confidently believe, that the foresaid friend, what he did, was
out of tender compassion toward Mr. Harrison, to the end, he might be
reconciled to my lord Bishop, least his nephew then his Lordships Secretary
might suffer prejudice thereby: and I am certain that mere pitry moved the
above mentioned Archdeacon to qualify and moderate his Certificate. But it is
not a Priest-like action to slander a worthy Brother for performing an act of
Charity to the lessening of his own honor. Fistly they auerre that my lord
Bish: in his Mandate said ( Vt a personis fide dignis) plurally, because I sent
the letter to his Lordship; whereby they do most petulantly accuse their Bishop
of manifest ignorance as to the Churches canons which require two testimonies
to the constituting of Personas fide dignas, in matter of debate: but he that
sends one sole Testimony, or the messenger that carries it does not make two
witnesses: and as God know's best, I sent to my lord my friends letter writ to
myself only. Again the letter sent was dated 23. June 1653. Stilo veteri, and
I am sure, that his Lordships received a copy thereof about the 2. of July,
and the original intercepted was sent 6. weeks after at least, whereby plainly
appears, that Dr. Ellis etc. speak unadvisedly, in saying, that upon the
receipt of that letter issued the Mandate, seeing that the Assembly began to
sit July 10. 1653. and hereby further appears that there was neither sense,
nor reason to accuse me of being an efficient cause of my Lords Mandat.
Besides, the ample Testimonies which I have produced to the manifesting Mr.
Blacloes parties intent to invade my lords Episcopal authority in that
Assembly) do evidence enough, that his Lordship might hear of that design a
Personis side dignis without the help of my friends letter. Wherefore let Dr.
Ellis etc. make better use for the future of the holy Churches prayer set down
before the preface of the mass. Pone Domine custodiam ori meo, and ostium
circonstantiae labijs meis: vt non declinet cor meum in verba malitiae ad
excusandas excusationes in peccatis.

Page 5. Mr. Leyb. in his letter to Mr. Peterson utterly disauow'd ever writing
to Mr. Harrington, or sending missionaries to him, or of communicating with
him, or Mr. Blacloe; and this was after my Lord (as appears by his letters to
Mr. Walton) was so sorry for the injury he had done Mr. Harrington that he
kept correspondence with him to his dying day.

This Charge has two branches, whereof one importes my refusing to write or
send missionaries to Mr. Harrington; the other expresses my Lord Bishops
sorrow for having injured the same Mr. Harrington. As to the first, though I am
confident that the words, as they are dressed up never came, from my pen,
howeuer it matters not, as to the point in debate. For I do grant unto Dr.
Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. that I refused to send missionaries to Mr. Harrington,
and I had great reason so to carry my self, because I knew well that he was
carried away wholly with Mr. Blacloes pernicious and blasphemous Doctrines,
obstinately maintaining them to my face in the presence of Lay-Catholicks, at
sundry times; wherefore I thought my self bound both as to reason, and
conscience neither to entertain a familiarity with him (that being against the
Apostles Counsel and the Churches canons) nor commit my children to his
direction, and instruction for that might bring their souls to everlasting
ruin. Again by doing so I should have trangressed the law of God and nature;
these exacting from a Superior care, and vigilance to the conseruing of
himself, and such as are committed to his Charge. I have thought it expedient
not to particularise here the pernicious Doctrines, but to to reserve the
naming of them for my answer to Mr. Blacloes Vnimpeacable virtue, unblemished
life, and most eminent, learning, which are the illustrious Characters Dr.
Ellis, Mr. Curtis, together with 7. other Canons (which name themselves the
Church of the English Clergy) have Canonically given him.

As to the other branch, that imporees my Lord Bish. expressing of his sorrow
for having injured Mr. Harrington etc. Here Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. after
their wonted manner bring nothing of proof; but as pythagoras required from
his scholars, so they exact from their Brethren credence to their Propria
dicta. Yet I perceive that they would willingly have our said Brethren
imagine, that Mr. Waltons letters carried some sound that way, and therefore
they shut within a parenthesis these particles (as appears by Mr. Waltons
letters) so as that they may relate to the precedent, unto signifying the time
of my refusing to send missionaries to Mr. Harrington, or to the subsequent
words, unto testifying my lords sorrow for the injury done Mr. Harrington, This
in earnest is crafty dealing: but doubtless if in their evidence boxes any
letters were extant, that might express this aspersion, which they Cast upon
our most R. B. they would have set them down with an Io Triumph. But if his
Lordship expressed sorrow for iniuring Mr. Harrington: of necessity it was
either in order to the Mandate, that calls Mr. Harrington ingrate, and
seditious, beginning thus. Quoniam vt a fide dignis accepimus, Tu Marce
(Harrington) Vicarie mi Generalis ingrate, and seditiose conuocasti etc. Or in
order to his Lordships Answer written to the six Priests, Viz, Mark
Harrington, William Harrison, Andrew Knightly, sames Walton, Thomas Ashton, and
Peter Peterson, alias Curtis. Wherein his Lordship expresses him self thus in
order to Mr. Harrington. You call Mr. Harrington Sub-Dean of Yr. Chapter, which
office I never gave him, nor any other, who had authority from me. Is not this
to usurp upon Episcopal authority, and to take Spiritual authority given
by none? which, what offense it is, you well know: Or lastly in order to my
lord Bish. his Answer written to a letter to five of the fore mentioned
Priests, Viz: Mr. Harrington, William Harrison, Peter Peterson, Thomas Ashton,
Andrew Knightly, wherein, as to Mr. Harrington, his Lordship says thus: And as
for Mr. Harringtons Sub-Deanship, I Answer that I never constituted such an
office, nor would make him Sub-Dean, though Mr. Fitton did desire me, nor ever
assuredly knew, that he ever usurped such an office, till I read Yr. first
letter: wherefore I command him to give it over, till he show me, both that
Mr. Fitton had authority to make him Sub Dean and legally made him such Pacem
and veritatein diligite, and Deus pacis crit vobiscum Farewell, 11. Oct. 1653.
Now if Mr. Dr. Ellis, Mr Curtis etc. can demonstrate that his Lordship ever
recalled his Mandate, as to acknowledging of wrong done Mr. Harrington, or his
words expressed in order to Mr. Harrington in either of his foresaid letters,
then I shall believe, that my lord was sorry for the injury done M. Harrington:
In the mean while am certain that 3. of the six Priests, Viz: Mr. Knightly,
Mr. Ashton, and Mr. Walton submitted, and gave full satisfaction to his
Lordship without standing out. Besides (though a good while after) Mr. Harrison
(by the help of my friend, who is accused several times in the Encyclicall
letter of vowing revenge) made his peace with my lord, through an humble
submission in so much that his Lordship immediately after, writ unto me in
these very words. New Mr. Harrison, and I am friends: wherefore I desire that
you two will be friends also. But of Mr. Harrington, or Mr. Curtis
submission, and reconciliation I never heard. I will end now with the
exclamation, that St. Policarpe used in the time of his persecution. Deus bone,
ad quae tempora nos reseruasti? A company of 9. Priests brand a most R. Bishop
their Spiritual Father, and Superior, that dyed a Confessor, and Martyr: brand
him I say to all posterity with the infamous mark of committing a deadly
injury; for Iniuria est Inris alieni violatio sine cause.

Page 6. It was proposed to Vote in the Assembly of 1653. that (...) seeing
the President of the College of Doway is to be nominated by his Holiness, from
whom he receives his Authority, independent of the Clergy. -- whether it may
not be fit all the Clergy be advised to treat with such as give Alms to that
College that their Donations be so left to the Dispose of the Clergy that they
may have power to raise astock thereby. -- This Point was by the Assembly
thought fit to be vvaued for that time -- we leave to your Wisdoms to judge
-- whether it may not now be that point in execution, as occasion shall offer.

Here Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. after their wonted manner endeavor to render
me odious to all my Brethren accusing me for having calumniated the whole
Assembly of 1653. but since they do not prove the calumny, it fallows of
necessity, that they have calumniated me, (Accusatio quae caret probatione
calumnia est) and indeed so they have; for the aspersion they Cast upon me is
so false, that as God know's best it never came into my thought to conceive
amiss of that whole Assembly, either in order to the inuading my Lords
Episcopal Authority, or preiudicing our old Mother-House committed to my
charge; notwithstanding I knew well, that Mr. Blacloes faction had conspired
against each of both. And as to their design against my lords Episcopal
Authority, the ample Testimonies before mentioned prove evidently enough their
conspiracy: likewise, as to myself, and our Mother-House, they had laid their
plot to ruin us, before that Assembly began to sit. For Mr. Foster sent me a
letter about that time (I have communicated it to our Seniors) which contains
these express words. I had a sight of the proposition; ere the Assembly met*
one of them was, that all legacies that should be left to your House, at the
instance of any one, or more of the Clergy, should be by them disposed of
toward the maintenance of well disposed youths of each County to be brought
up in Yr. House, and thence being qualifyed to return to their Country, Yr.
House not being to meddle therein, as also that none should be sent over, but
such as had ended their studies. This was what I savv before the Assembly met.
I was invited diverse times by the Prime of the Assembly (Mr. Harrington) yet I
never did go, that so by my absence I might testify the dislike I had of a
proposition destructive, I thought, to the good of our Mother-House. Besides
our North Country Chapter-men, men, that sat in the said Assembly, namely Mr.
Ashton, and Mr. Young, together with some others, writ unto me how valiantly
they had carried themselves in behalf of their old Mother. As God know's best
I mistrusted not at all that Assembly, though I knew that all the Grandees,
that is the principal members thereof, were Mr. Blacloes Adherents: Nay
albeit that Mr. Blacloe has much strengthened himself since the conuening of
the said Assembly, and my Lord Bish: death, for as much as he has new
Chapter-men created, which are according to his own heart: for example Dr.
Ellis. Mr. Plot, Mr. Manly, Mr. Singleton, Mr. Cancefield; neuertheless, if now
a general Assembly of Chapter-men were to be called I should not apprehend
prejudice as to our Mother-House thereby, because I am confident, that there
would be called unto it sundry conscientious, pious, zealous, and well affected
persons to their old Mother, and myself, that might hinder Mr. Blacloe, and
his partys machinations and ungodly enterprises as to our prejudice. And
notwithstanding that this disaffected party may imagine, that they have undone
both of us by their Encyclicall Epistle, howeuer I do not doubt, but that our
old Mother shall receive benefit, and my self honor thereby, whiles they
bear the infamous brand to all posterity, of being ungrateful (and ingratum
si dixeris, omnia scelera dixeris) for Dr. Ellis was an Alumnus of our
Mother-House, Mr. Plot had all his breeding in it, was my scholar about 3.
years, and besides I moved Dr. Kellison to receive him for nothing. Mr. John
medcalse, and Mr. John Singleton were like wise Alumni, and the first amongst
our yorkshire Brethren, that have cast dirt in the face of their old Mother:
in like manner Mr. Manly, and Mr. Cancefield the first amongst our Brethren of
Lancashire, that have committed such an impiety. Hereby appears evidently how
unadvisedly, and unhappily these few of our Brethren have dressed up this
charge against me. But whereas in the close thereof they craftily exhort our
Brethren to put in execution Mr. Blacloes former design, as to disposing of
Charities given to this Mother-House, Saying. We leave to Yr. vvisedomes to
judge -- whether it may not now be firt to put that point in execution, Moved
thereby out of a tender care for the conseruing of the Mother-House, and
preserving her children, from profane novelties, I have iudgd it expedient to
have recourse to all our English Catholics, unto preventing of their ungodly
enterprises.

Page 7. Dr. Leyb. sent a letter to Mr. Knightly, wherein was signified, that
Mr. Blacloe made us odious to all Christian Princes, the Doctrine therein
contained, touching them, as much as the king of scots (as he termed his
Ma.tie) that his book of Obedience, and Government is against the Protector
Cromwell etc.

In this Charge Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. imitate the crafty fisherman who
loves to fish in troubled water, for thinking to make some advantage against me
by the said letter, they have troubled, transplaced, and confounded the words
thereof; though not so much, but that I shall be able to escape their nets: for
they do not conceal the chief substance. And indeed I do acknowledge that I
writ to Mr. Knightly a letter wherein I signified, that Mr. Blacloes Doctrine,
contained in his book of Obedience and Government, made us odious to all
Christian Princes, and was as much against Cromwell (then kinging it) as
against the king of scots and so I called his Ma.tie; this I am certain was
the substance, and the words where with my Adversaries charge me importe as
much. But it seems to me a strange thing, that Dr. Fllis, Mr. Curtis etc
should dare to object unto me the abhorrence I have from the Doctrine contained
in Mr. Blacloes book of Obedience and Government (cut out of Mr. Hob's
leuiathan) rendering the English Clergy odious to all Christian Princes; since
Mr. Tho. White, alias Blacloe in the said book of Obed. and Gouer. writes
thus, 1. Page 133. If a Magistrate has truly deserved to be, and is
dispossessed, every one to his power is bound to resist him. Secondly Page
135. If a Magistrate be innocent, and wrongfully dispossessed, he is obliged
absolutely to renounce all right, and claim to government: and if he does
not, he is worse then an infidel. Thirdly page 147. Any, who has suffered
wrong by a Monarch, when he is dispossessed may proceed as if there were no
Commonwealth, by the law, which in a wilderness warranteth us to kill a Tiger
or Robber, that seeks to kill us, not pretending law, for our action, but
that it is manlike, and rational.

The ground, or foundation on which he seems to build these his horrid,
Unparalleled, Vnauthorized, and Unchristian Tenets, is laid before page 38. It
fallows not (says Mr. Blacloe) that I wrong him (an other man) even though I
do him harm, or secke his ruin for he is no otherwise to me, then a piece of
cloth or wood, which I cut, and shape after my own will, fittingly for my use.

I name the Doctrines set down Horrid, because no reasonable man can read them
without being horrour-struck: Unparalleled, because no writer Christian or
Heathen has ever broachd the like: Vnauthorized, because Mr. Blacloe can not
show that he is sent to teach them, and mission to teach and preach the Apostle
requires, Romans 10. Quomodo praedicabunt, nisi mittantur: Lastly I name them
Unchristian Tenets, because the Doctrine of the Apostles on whom Christian
Religion was built, bear not the least sound that way. For example Romans 13.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; for there is no power but of
God, whosoever therefore refisteth the power resists the ordinance of God,
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation -- wherefore ye must
be subject not in regard of wrath only, but also for conscience sake. Which
scripture-Testimony does evidence plainly, that subjects shall receive to
themselves damnation, if they take away from their Prince his Royal authority:
and those are to receive greater damnation that wrong, hurt, resist, or kill
him so deprived, because he endeavors, though by force of Arms, to be restored
to his just rights. Again 1. pet. 2. subjects are commanded to obey not only
good and courteous, but also froward Princes; and as a king that is dispossessed
by his own subjects, by the law of God and nature continues their king: so the
dispossessers of him continue his subjects, in consequence of which, they,
under penalty of everlasting damnation, are bound, not only not to wrong him
so dispossessed, but to Cherish, obey, honor, and restore him to his former
power, and authority.

Hereby it is evidently manifest that Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. have nothing of
reason, or advantage against me by their charge in order to Mr. Blacloes book
of obedience, and government, which I dare say was Odious to Cromwell
himself, though the Author, and the party that put him upon that work
conceived that they might have gaynd him thereby unto giving them power to give
laws to all the Catholics of England. But such, as attend their own ambition,
work without Gods means, and direction. For Cromwell conceipted himself to
be as great a Magistrate, and Monarch, as any other whosoever, and when he was
informed (as I have heard) Mr. Blacloe taught in his book, That to do harm
unto, or seek the ruin of an other, was not to wrong him etc and likewise,
that it was manlike, and rational, for any that had suffered vvrong by a
Monarch to proceed (when he is dispossessed) as if there were no
Commonwealth, by the law, which in a wilderness vvarranteth us to kill a
Tiger or Robber, that seeks to kill us; Therefore Cromwell moved with these
reasons set light by the said book.

But lastly Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. accuse me of calling our gracious
Soueraign King of the scots; to which I replye that very unadvisedly they cast
that as an aspersion upon me, because in their Encyclicall Epistle they extol
Mr. Blacloe for his eminent Doctrine which was plainly destructive of his
Ma.ties person; for if a man will judge by Mr. Blacloes Tenets set down, he
would have made our king Charles no king at all; howeuer his Ma.ties own
servants durst not give him a greater Title then the king of scots, in their
letters writ into England. Moreover I am so well known to his Ma.tie and his
principal Ministers of state, that it will not lie within the reach of Mr.
Blacloe, and all his Adherents, to prejudice me in the opinion of our gracious
Soueraign, for whom I have hazarded my life, and spent my little fortunes in
his Ma.ties service.

Furthermore Dr. Ellis etc. out of the forementioned letter of mine to Mr.
Knightly object against me thus. He (Mr. Leyb.) belieues not, Mr. Plantin (our
Agent) will say that his Holiness, or the Card. Protector any ways approved
the Chapter, Dean, or Sub-Dean. To this I replye, that at my last being at
London I conferred with Mr. Plantin, as to this point, and enquired whether
the Pope used the word Approho (I approve) and he answered only, that having
Audience of the Pope in the nick of his departure he demanded of his Holiness,
how the Clergy might be governed till a Successor were constituted: whereto
was replied this mere Quere: Nunquid habetis Capitulum, Decanum, Sub-Decanum?
without naming the word Approbo, I approve: whereby appears, that I did no
wrong, by saying, that I will not believe, that Mr. Plantin, our Agent etc. But
perhaps Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. will replye, that the Quere, Nunquid habetis
etc. imported approbation: Transeat, which is to say the interpretation is
admitted, though not granted; and I am certain, it cannot be clearly inferred
from his Holiness Quere. But then perhaps it may be demanded whether his Holiness
so interrogating Mr. Plantin, meant of a Collegiate or Cathedral Chapter, for
it might be in the power of our Bishop to moulde, fashon, and make ready either
of both for his Holiness confirmation; now how this question can be decided out
of, Nunquid habetis Capitulum, Decanum etc. I do not conceive; wherefore I told
Mr. Plantin that he should have humbly beseech'd his Holiness to declare his
will, and pleasure in writing, as to the exercising of lurisdiction, till a
Successor might be constituted, because the salvation of souls dependes
thereof. And truly if the Chapters Dean have not power to give faculties, and
notwithstanding give them he commits a grievous Sin; for the Council of
Trent sess. 14 defines, Nullius esse momenti eam absolutionem quam Sacerdos
profert in cum, in quem nee ord narians vel delegatam habet iurisdictionem:
Again though the Pope did approve the Chapter by saying. Nunquid habe^^s
Capitulum etc it will not appear thereby that he invested the Dean with
Episcopal authority unto making him an Ordinarius; wherefore if my Counsel
might have been heard, nether Dr. Ellis nor the Chapter had exercised
Episcopal authority without his Holiness leave expressed in a Breue. For
immediately after the death of our Bish. I sent a letter to Mr. Knightly his
Lordships Vic. Genesis wishing him to advise our Brethren pertaining to the
Chapter to make addresses suddenly to his Holiness for a Successor and for the
Interim, to desist from the assuming of Episcopal jurisdiction (as the Chapter
did at the death of his Lordships predecessor) the exercise whereof might
beget a iealousy in the Court of Rome, that they were resolved to make their
Chapter a Bishop in effect, whether the Pope gave them a Successor, or not:
Two other reasons more I alleged; the one was, that I knew well that my lord
Bish. who was versed in the Canons of the Church, did not believe, that the
Chapter (which after the imitation of his Predecessor, he had molded,
fashoned, and put in readiness for his Holiness confirmation) ought to succeed in
Episcopal authority, without the Creation of a Successor, or confirmation
from his said Holiness; for as God know's best, his Lordship sensible of his
great age, commanded me To give to our Chief and most deserving. Brethren
extra-ordinary faculties, telling me with all, that be did not think that
after his death, such faculties would be suddenly obtained. The same power and
command his Lordship gave to our Hon. Brother Mr. Clifford. In compliance to
this command I empowrd sundry of our principal Brethren whereof Dr. Ellis,
was one (but Delegatus non potest delegare) with extraordinary faculties. My
other reason was, that Dr. Gage residing at Paris at the time his Lordship
dyed, and intending for his Country, sent me a letter wherein he requested me to
grant him the ordinary faculties pertaining to the missionaries of this house
saying that he did not think that the Chapter had power to grant them; and
indeed a Bishops authority expires and dies with him; unless Ius commune
Canomcuns, or prinilegium speciale pontifieis (who is above the Canons)
continue it in a Chapter, till a Successor be appointed, and constituted.
These were the grounds and reasons of my Counsel communicated in my letter to
Mr. Knightly; but Mr. Harrington, and the principal Chapter-men Mr. Blacloes
Adherents despised them: they never sought to the Court of Rome till they were
constrained so to do, our Brethren generally pressing the London Chapter-men
(which managed all affairs) to send an Agent to Rome for the obtaining of a
Successor, and confirming of their Chapter. But from the death of my lord
Bish: and before also they had so deported themselves, that their Agent Mr.
Plantin returned without a letter written from his Holiness, or the Protector,
to the Chapter that sent him: which nothing troubled Mr. Blacloe, and his
party. For though Mr. Blacloe had no opinion of my lords Episcopal authority
while his Lordship was alive: neuertheless he made no doubt of the Chapters
Episcopal authority, my lord being dead; besides he defended openly in the
Assembly of 1657. what he had asserted in his printed Insti. Tom. 2. lee. 8.
parity between a Bishop and a mere Priest, as witnesses Mr. Progers, that was
in the said Assembly in his letter written to myself and dated 14. November.
1657. (which I have shown to our Seniors) I told (sais he) the members thereof,
Mr. Blacloe being present that I thought they intended not a Bishop. And in his
letter dated Nouemb. 28. 1657. (which I have showen likewise to our Seniors)
wherein he gives me an account of all proceedings in 4. several meetings, or
consults, in the 7. account, he has these express words: It much encreasd my
suspicion of their being satisfied with their present Government, and not to
desire a Bishop to see them so peremptory in refusing to subscribe to a
disclaim from all novelties and scandalous opinions taught by Mr. White,
alias Blacloe. It Is Mr. white together with the London Chapter-men his
proselytes that have ruined our whole Clergy by depriving them of their
natural head, which might have prevented many great scandals. Howeuer they
still continue so obstinate in their ways, that whatsoever Brother does show
himself against Mr. Blacloe, or an enemy to their inordinate proceedings they
represent him to our Brethren residing in the Country, as disaffected to their
Chapter, seditious, and factious: and young missionaries if they do not say as
they do unto extolling Mr. Blacloes, Vnimpeachable virtue, vmblemisht life, and
most eminent Doctrines (which art the illustrious characters Dr. Ellis, Mr.
Curtis etc. give him in their Encyclicall letter to endeare him thereby to all
our Brethren) they menace, and deprive them of common charities, as men
disaffected to their Chapter. And truly at my being at London Sundry Priests
did complain unto me of those horrid abuses. And in order to my own
particular as I have been constant in expressing an extreme abhorrence from
Mr. Blacloes pernicious Doctrines: so they have been as constant in casting
upon me slanders, and proclaming me an enemy to the Chapter establyshd by two
Bishops (upon that scoare only) though God is my witness, I ever esteemd a
Chapter the best Government our Clergy could have, and the best means to
secure unto them a Bishop, which is the natural head of Clergy Priests. But I
profess ingenuousely that my heart often times has been swallowd up with
heauynes to see such as manage affairs, carried away with the wind of profane
Doctrines unto the loosing of that best Government. And this shall suffice in
Answer to all the pages of the Encyclicall letter, wherein I am accused for
having a gird at, or going about to dissolve the Chapter, that being so false,
that as God best know's I never had the least thought that way: my zeal
tending only to the preserving of our Chapter, and Chapter-men from suffering
prejudice. And to dissuade from the exercise of Episcopal authority, till a
Successor might be constituted, was not to invade, but to conserve the
Chapter, nor to persuade the Chapter-men to a disclaim from wicked Doctrines
unto taking away of scandalls, was to hurt, but to save their honor, and
reputation. But as to what our two Bishops did act in the establishing of the
Chapter, I do assure it was in order, reference, and expectation of the sea
Apostolicks confirmation as appears plainly by sending of Agents to Rome, and
by their frequent solicitations, and supplications exhibited to his Holiness for
the obtaining of a confirmation. And indeed it is not in any particular
Bishops power to dress up a Chapter otherwise, especially in a Country where
Chapter-men have no Collegiate, or Cathedral Church to meet daily together to
the celebrating of divine service. For in this case not only his Holiness
approbation, but dispensation is required in order to the Churches ordinances
which confine Chapter-men to a Collegiate, or Cathedral Church, for such an
end, and purpose. Let not the Counsel of our great Apostle S. Gregory be
forgotten Si obedientes suerimns Praepositis nostris, obediet Dominus
^rationibus nostris.

Furthermore Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. mention Mr. Blacloes reply to the
foresaid Letter, that Dr. Leyb. sent Mr. Knightly, and use these express words.
Page 8. He (Mr. Blacloe) replies in a like return of language, as Dr. Leyb had
used. For this I Answer, that it is an aspersion as falsely cast upon me, as
it is true that Mr. Blacloe in his reply calls me Sycophant, hissing serpent,
boutefeu, madmen etc. But perhaps Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. will answer, that
in the forementioned Letter I cried against Mr. Blacoes Doctrine contained in
his book of Obedience and Government as rendering the Clergy odious to all
Christian Princes; O Brethren Let us follovv the truth in Charity, and in all
thing grow up in, and into him, which is our head, that is Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 4. Such false pieces of coined aspersions which you cast upon Yr.
Brother in every page of Yr. Encyclicall Epistle, do not beseem Christians and
much less men of Yr. function. Loquimini veritatem vnius quisque cum proximo
suo. Zacha. 8. quia testis falsus non erit impunitus Proverb. 19.

Page 9. About the same time he (Dr. Leyb.) writ this Letter to Mr. Knightly,
that he might set all his Engines a work at once, his particular friend Mr.
Catterick Archdeacon of York shire-whosemdesertet zeal etc.

Because Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. call the Archdeacon of Yorkshire my
particular friend, which is very true, and truth being seldom put down in any
one passage of the whole Encyclicall Epistle I have thought expedient to take
notice of it, and to say thus much in his vindication, that I know him to be a
person of great worth, and merit, of a good conscience, of excellent piety and
Religious zeal, as to giving duty, and Obedience to his Spiritual and civil
Magistrates, or great humility, as to honoring the Current of D.ts in the
Church of God, and as to running in the steps of his glorious Predecessors.
Besides he is a benefactour, and a most grateful child to this Mother-House,
that bred him. And as to the accusation you have dressed up unto lessning the
esteem our Brethren have of his vprightnes in all his proceedings, I will add
thus much more, that in regard he was not ignorant of Mr. Blacloes partys
crafty dealings against our Spiritual Father, and Superior my Lord Bish: and
our old Mother, as likewise of their design to countenance Mr. Blacloes
pernicious Doctrines unto dishonouring of our whole Clergy, he might have great
and just reason to name the Chapter schismatic as to that part of it; but
all such Brethren, as except against Mr. Blacloe and his pack of friends you
proclaim as slanderers of the Chapter and Clergy. If we shall, not abide in
truth, God will not abide in us, Quoniam veritatem requirit Dens. Psalm. 30.

Page 9. 10. Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. make mention of a common Letter writ to
me by the Right Hon. L.d Abbot Montague, Mr. Clifford, Dr. Holden, and Mr. Car,
in order to an accord between my self and Mr. Blacloe, which common Letter
they produce with this preamble: p. 9.

While our Church was torn by these intestine Divisions, it pleased the Right
honorable Ld. Abbot Montague (never to be mentioned by us without gratitude and
honor for his love then shown our body) with our Venerable Brethren in France
Dr. Holden, Mr. Clifford, and Mr. Carr, to interpose and endeavor to bring the
Two to an accord. Mr. Clifford also and Mr. Car out of their great Charity and
Zeal of out Union took a journey to Do way to treat with Dr. Leyb. about it,
and to bring him to some terms of correspondency. Morcover. a common Letter was
writ by the four mentioned, to Dr. Leyb. Complaining that our Unity in
Yorkshire was actually broken by his special friend Mr. Catterick who
calumniated the Chapter as schismatical, and refused flatly to consent to any
thing it should do, disobeying and writing offensive Letters to his Vicar.
General Dr. Blundeston; earnestly requesting him to desist from all
schismatical resisting that authority, which our two late Bishops of happy
memory had established and left amongst us, that he ought not to go about to
remedy abuses by open resistance, this being the common pretext of all
rebellion against Authority, That the Catholic Church bath her legal and
authoritative way both subalternal and supreme to examine and condemn what ever
may be amiss either in his or any other man's writings whatsoever, That
particular men can only inform those whose office it belongs to, of what they
judge erroneous or dangerous, though as friends and Brethren we may cover what
we think we are not necessarily obliged to complain of, That Information once
given we ought to forbear all scandalous and clamorous diffamation till the
Delinquent be sentenc't;

Again page 13. Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. mention a general Assembly of the
Chapter, at the request of the before named the Rt. Hon. L.d Abbot Montague, Mr.
Clifford, Dr. Holden, and Mr. Car; moreover in order thereto express themselves
in these very words. It (the Assembly) met Nou. 23. 1657. Mr. Blacloe came
thither in person, Dr. Leyb sent thither his Agent (Mr. Progers) who at the
very entrance of the first meeting, showed us how soon Dr. Leyb. had foregot his
promise, and that all Union with him was hopeless by his excepting against the
whole Assembly, because it was of Chapter-men only, and alleging that he was
sent to an Assembly of the whole Clergy, whereas, the whole being some
hundreds could not possibly meet -- He, (Mr. Progers) began to press also the
disclaiming and censuring Doctrines in the first place etc.

Whereas Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. here name the Rt. Hon. the Ld. Abbot
Montague. Mr. Clifford, Dr. Holden, and Mr. Car: And thence take a rise to
dress up their likely tale concerning an accord between my self, and Mr.
Blacloe as procured by them, in order to the establishing of a much desired
Union amongst all our Brethren, and likewise ascribe the obstruction thereof to
my violating of my promise; I have judged it expedient, for as much as a false
tale may seem true till another, that is true indeed, be told, to tell my tale
before I do engage in an Answer to the accusations set down: to the end the
falsenes of their tale may more clearly appear thereby. My true tale in order
to both the accusations, is as follows.

About the year 1656. Mr. Blacloe being much incensed at the above mentioned
Letter sent Mr. Knightly, set forth in print a larg phamplet full of calumnies,
and reproachful language, unto wounding of my honor, and reputation, which he
and his Adherents spread in great diligence, and extreme exulting, and
triumphing there was amongst his friends at home, and abroad, at Paris
especially (where resided principal Clergy men, and Lay-Catholiks of our
Country, which supported, countenanced, and defended Mr. Blacloe and his
learning) imagining that the said pamphlet had cast upon me so great an
affront, and disgrace, that my resisting of Mr. Blacloes learning would signify
nothing for the future. But men's supposals, and Gods directions seldom agree.
For this proceeding ministered the occasion, that begot my Manifest, which laid
open so plainly his crafty dealings, and extreme ambition to begin a
plantation of new notions, and pernicious Tenets, that the veil, which hid his
ungodly purposes being drawn, and taken away thereby, he appeared, what he was
indeed, A wolf in sheeps Clothing: Now after Mr. Blacloes chief friends
residing at Paris had perused my Manifest, and heard of the applause it had got
amongst all sort of Catholics respectively, as appears by above 20. sundry
Letters: then and never before, Dr. Holden, and Mr. Car thought it expedient to
endeavor an accord between my self, and Mr. Blacloe, under the specious color
of bringing the whole Clergy unto union thereby, and for the effecting of this
design they got the right Hon. the Lord Abbot Montague, and the Hon. Mr.
Clifford to engage in the pursuance thereof, wherein they carried themselves
most piously, and Religiously, hoping to extinguish thereby the fire of
discord, and dissension which Mr. Blacloes profane novelties had kindled in
our Clergy. In order hereto Mr. Clifford, and Mr. Car: gave me a visit at our
Mother-House, delivered a Letter subscribed by the Rt. Hon. the Lord Abbot
Montague, Dr. Holden, and themselves expressing their joint desire for a
setlement of peace and Union unto taking away division, wherewith our said
Clergy was branded: and in sum me wishd conference with me about the carrying
on of so good a work; and for my part I showed as great a willingness to
embrace, as they had demonstrated readiness to promote so good a work.

In our first conference I excepted against the Letter for as much, as I saw,
that it was written by Dr. Holden, and as I conceived by him contrived out of
information received from the adverse party and indeed diverse points thereof I
might have disprou'd. Howeuer I was not a little troubled to see Dr. Holdens
hand to the Letter who was a party against me, and had enough to do for his own
works; for when I was at Paris Dr. Holden put forth a pamphlet unbeseeming his
Religion, and function, wherein he accused the Court of Rome of ignorance and
corruption: likewise he had set forth a book much derogating from the Popes
authority. Again neither Mr. Clifford nor Mr. Car moved me to approve the
contents of the said Letter, the intent thereof being only to express a joint
desire of peace and Union which I embraced gladly, and accordingly propounded
such points, as I judged necessary requisits to the effecting of peace and
Union. Which were these 1o, that Mr. Blacloe might submitt all his writings to
the sea Apostolic and print nothing more without the approbation of these Drs.
of Divinity named in the common Letter sent Mr. Blacloe, and subscribed by the
Rt. Hon. the Lord Abbot Montague, and the other three. Secondly that some of
our grauest and chiefest Brethren out of each District respectively might
assemble together to determine of all affairs pertaining to our Clergy, and I
named grave and principal Brethren, because I knew well that the far mayor
part of our Brethren then pertaining to the Chapter, were a pack of Mr.
Blacloes friends, so that it seemed to me a thing impossible to vote down in
such a Chapter, his profane Doctrines, on the extinguishing whereof peace, and
Union necessarily depended. Besides I knew likewise, that some of our Brethren
had resigned, and others had refused to accept Ecclesiastical dignities (in
our Bishops life time) that so they might avoid contests with Mr. Blacloe and
his party; and truly in the year 1654. by order from my Lord Bish: I moved Dr.
Daniel twice to accept of the Vicar Generalship In solidum, who replied unto me
in a Letter the 10. of Ian. 1654. in these express words. (I have shown it to
our Seniors) You move again, and I see my lord is ready to honor me far above
my desert and expectation. Truly Sr. I am not so wedded to my own defires, or
Interests (which has long been to lead a single, and quiet life) as not to
yield my vimost endeavors to the common, when it may appear that I may really
further it: Give me leave therefore to represent my doubts, I conceive in this
^ffered employment. First then Mr. Clifford tells my Lord, that noe
exceptions will be made against me; but this I much fear, because Mr. Blacloe
is, as yet, no way appeased, or satisfied with me, and then certainly beth
he, Dr. Holden, and both their friends, will oppose me what they can. And
although afterward Dr. Daniel made his peace with Mr. Blacloe, and thereupon
was chosen Dean (which happened after my Lord Bishops death) neuertheless he
judged it necessary for our Clergy to disclaim from Mr. Blacloes new notions
unto extinguishing the fire of discord, as can witness Mr. Wolstan Paston, a
Lay-Catholick of great worth, and merit, whose singular charity has extremely
obliged both the secular and regular Clergy. Thirdly being I was of Dr. Daniels
opinion, as to the necessity of a disclaim, I propounded that our Brethren
assembled together might in the first place disauow all Doctrines contrary to
the general practice of Gods Church, whether vented by Mr. Blacloe, or any
other, as likewise to give obedience to such declarations or declaration as his
Holiness should make in order to profane novelties.

This was the sum of what I propounded to the Hon. Mr. Clifford, and Mr. Car
for the effecting of our desired Union: and they approved each point thereof,
and at their return to Paris acquainted therewith the Rt. Hon.ble the Lord
Abbot Montague, who in a Letter dated 13. of October. (which I showed to our
Seniors) writes to me in these express words. I doubt not but at the meeting
proposed, which will be more convenient at London, then Paris (I had
propounded to Mr. Clifford, and Mr. Car that our Brethren might meet at Paris)
by reason of the impossibility of so many appearing here, as are requifit to
that work, the proposal is to be made of disauowing all that is new, and
uncomfortable to the received practice, and Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and
promise to submit to any declaration, the Pope shall make in point of nonelties
either vented already by Mr. Blacloe or any other, or what shall occurr here
after upon any declaration. This profession I judge convenient to be made in
the entry of that Assembly we propose, and am assured of the acceptance of it
vnanimousely, which answers fully to Yr. desire. This Testimony alone coming
from a person of so great eminency, as is my Lord Abbot Montague gives evidence
enough to show to our Brethren how falsely Dr. Ellis, Mr. Onrtis etc. have
accused me of forgetting my promise to the obstructing of the desired Union.

And if my Deputy, Mr. Progers excepted against the Assembly for as much as the
far mayor part thereof was a pack of Mr. Blacloe friends, and if in the first
place he urged the disauowing of nouelle Doctrines, he proceeded according to
his instructions, which were conform to the propounded points, and approved
unanimously by my Lord Abbot, Mr. Clifford, and Mr. Car, as necessary requisits
to the effecting of the said desired Union, and this shall suffice in answer to
the slander cast upon me in the cited 13. page

Now as to the common Letter set down page 10. it seems to me a strange thing,
that Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. should produce the said Letter with intent to
prejudice me, since I was not required to admit, and acknowledge the contents
thereof as to matter of fact, which I purposely wau'd regarding only the
joint* desire in Order to Union. Again I can in rigor deny the Letter as it is
set down, to be the common Letter subscribed by the Rt. Hon. the Lord Montague
etc. I can personate them and say, as Martial the Poet did to one Fidentinus,
that had rehearsd a poem of his amiss.

Quem recitas, meus est, o Fidentine, libellus:
Sed male cum recitas, incipit esse tuus.
FOR example Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. to make our Brethren believe that by
that Letter I only am desired not to resist the authority, which two late
Bishops established, and left amongst us, in the room of Earnestly requesting
you (to wit my self and Mr. Blacloe jointly, as plainly appears in the
original Letter) they set down Earnestly requesting him (Dr. Leyb.) And
whereas immediately follow these words directed to my self alone; This
authority we are confident you are far from opposing, unless, as perceiving it
led, and gouernd by a faction of Mr. VVhites. In earnest Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis
etc. have used crafty dealing in the changing of You into Him, but especially
in omitting to set down the other words immediately following. This authority
we are consident you are far from opposing etc They had no desire our Brethren
should know, that my Lord Abbot, Mr. Clifford etc. were consident, that my
self was far from opposing our Chapter, that is, the authority established by
two Bishops, unless etc. or that our said Brethren should know, that my Lord
Abbot etc. did make a difference between opposing the Chapter, as Chapter, and
opposing Mr. Whites faction, as leading and governing it, and therefore
conceald that part of the Letter, because Mr. Curtis etc. represent, as enemies
to the Chapter, all such Brethren, as show a dislike of, or move a disclaim
from Mr. Whites pernicious novelties; nay my self is proclaimd in their
Encyclicall Epistle as girding at, and seeking dissolution of the Chapter,
because at my last being in London out of pure love, and Zeal, I told Dr.
Ellis, that although the Chapter were without exception, he ought not to
exercise any Jurisdiction as Dean, in regard his election according to the
Churches Canons was made void, because he had not accepted his said election
with in the prefixed time, set down by the Canons which require acceptance of
election within the space of one month, and Dr. Ellis did not accept it within
the space of 8. months: Besides Priuantut iure per electionem acquisito; qui
post acceptationem intra tres menses confirmationem non petunt. C. quam sit. de
Elec. and Elect. pores. in 6. Item qui ante Confirmationem administrant. ibi.
C. Auariliae. But he that tell's truth, draw's an odium upon himself.

Furthermore if Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. had been minded to deal sincerely
in publishing my Lord Abbot, Mr. Clifford etc. their religious endeauours in
order to the before mentioned Union in our Clergy, they should not have produced
only, their common Letter to me, but like wise their common Letter to Mr.
Blacloe, which they craftily concealed from our Brethren; because my Lord
Abbot, Mr. Clifford etc. in their said common Letter sent Mr. Blacloe (whereof a
Copy was given me) have these express words: If herefier you intend to publish
any thing concerning or nearly relating to Religion, you will be pleased to lee
it be perused, and consented unto by Mr. Blusion Mr. Daniel* Mr. Ellis, Mr.
Gennings Dis. if Divinity. And in the close of the common better* are these
words in relation to the former. This we conceive would be a means to
preuente all future occasions of Dr: Leyborne or any others complaints against
Yr. Doctrine; This will satisfy, as we believe, and in some sort preserve
our body (whereof you are a principal member) from those fears of blemish,
which are pretended to fall upon it through Yr. exotic opinions. By the
premises is plainly verified to the shame of Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. the
scripture Testimony proverb. 27. Qui fodit foueam incidet in eam, and qui
voluit lapidem reuertetur ad eum. They dug a pit to swallow me, and they are
fallen therein themselves, they rolled a stone unto shaming of me, and the stone
is returned with sham unto them.

Page 11. whereas, I vndervvritten (Mr. Blacloe) have etc.

Here Dr. Ellis, and Mr. Curtis etc. produce a copy of Mr. Blacloe's
submitting his writings to the Sea Apostolic, and both they, and all other his
Adherents much glory therein without cause: for indeed that his submission
signifies nothing, fince Mr. Blacloe, and his pack of friends, soon after in
the Assembly 1657. did not only reject his Holiness Decrees, that prohibited,
and condemned sundry of his profane books, but also went about to forewarne
our Brethren against censures from Rome, If procured by indirect ways (against
Mr. Blacloe) though by direct they should come to them: I use Mr. Progers (that
was present) his words set down in the 9. account of the declaration he sent me
as to the passages of that Assembly, and he sais further in the same account,
that in order to that fore warning he made this Quere. Be not such prevention
and forestalling, the beginning of Rebellion in the state, and schism in the
Church? Moreover whereas I sent the said Decrees to Mr. Knightly by order from
the Nuncio, Mr. Curtis writ unto me unadvisedly, saying that he wondered that
I would send Decrees, which I knew did not bind there: and of this unhandsome
writting I chalengd him, when last I was at London: But Bone Deus in quae
tempora, hoc est, in quam dierum inobedientiam nos reseruasti? Again since the
rejecting of the said Decrees, Mr. Blacloe has put forth a pernicious book
entitled Statera morum, fiilled with fordid, and damnable Doctrines, and this
he dedicates to the Bishops of this Country: also has dispersd it in sundry
places, with design to stir up such as are addicted to Iansenisme unto
rebellion against the authority of the sea Apostolic: wherefore since Mr.
Blacloes subsequent actions have unmade, what his precedent Act, as to
submitting to the Pope, had made before, his submission now signifies nothing;
in consequence of which the producing of it must of necessity turn to the sham
of Mr. Blacloe, and such as produce it in his favor. Wanton scholars of new
notions in all ages whiles they were without a Potentate to protect, or a
strong party to secure them from the power of Rome, submitted their writings to
the Pope; a stratageme only to gain time unto spreading, and establishing of
their wicked Doctrines. And indeed Ecclesiastical Histories make mention of
sundry Heretics submission of their Doctrines to the sea Apostolic, before
they were fast in the saddle.

Page 12. Mr. Blacloes reply to his (Dr. Leyb.) pamphlet, though printed and
ready to be published, was held in by him, (Mr. Blacloe) and Mr. Leyb.
permitted to have the last word.

To the disprouuing of this Tale, I can say thus much, Mr. Car himself told
me, that Dr. Holden had received a Letter from Mr. Blacloe, wherein was
signified, that he had an Answer in readiness to Dr. Leyburns book, and Dr.
Holden writ back unto him, that if he had prepared an Answer he should do well
to light a faggot and burn it: for he would gain nothing of credit by answering
it. This Mr. Car had from Dr. Holden himself. Again as to reason it is not
probable that Mr. Blacloe would suppress his Answer, if printed, out of his
innate goodness to spare me; The Encyclicall Epistle, that breath's forth rank
poison of malice, gives evidence enough of his, Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc.
their great charity toward me. But perhaps the said Encyclicall Epistle is cut
out of the said Answer which lies hid out of bashfulnes.

Page 16. Mr. Mark Harrington our late Sub-Dean he (Mr. Leyb.) judges to have
died in a sad case;

In Answer to this accusation I say 1.o that it seems to me a strange thing that
Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. dare name Mr. Harrington Sub-Dean, since my Lord
Bish. in his Letter to Mr. Harrington, and Mr. Curtis, alias Peterson before
produced, says expressly, that neither himself nor any other who had authority
from him, gave Mr. Harrington such an office, and thence his Lordship inferred
that they usurped upon Episcopal authority by assuming to themselves
Spiritual authority given by none. Secondly, as to Mr. Harringtons dying
condition, Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. attest point blanck, that I judge him to
have dyed in a sad case; but in regard their Testimony importes an accusation
without proof, of necessity it bears the infamous mark of a slander; and
indeed such are the other aspersions they cast upon me all a long their
Encyclicall Epistle. Besides I know well that the power of judging is a
reserved case pertaining to the son of God Joan. 5. Pater omne indicium dedit
Filio. Yet notwithstanding all this it is lawful for me, or any other Catholic,
that was acquainted with Mr. Harringtons perverse, and obstinate defending of
Mr. Blacloes pernicious Doctrines, to conceive coniecturally, that the
Tribunal of the same son of God (which judges every one according to his
works 2. Cor. 5.) might show him nothing of favor, since in the sickness of
which he dyed, he had made no outward show of disauowing them, though his Dean
Mr. Fitton, brought to the like extremity, had disauow'd them.

Furthermore, whereas Mr. Knightly, the Genesis Vicar, had writ unto me, that Mr.
Harrington after a sickness of many days was departed out of the world without
receiving any one Sacrament, as likewise without disposing of any one penny
unto procuring of prayers for the benefit of his soul, perhaps I signified in
my Answer, that thereby might appear a just judgment of God that Mr.
Harrington, who in his life time had impugned the efficacy of holy Churches
Sacraments as to conferring of Sanctifying grace, and the Sacramental
absolution as to taking away sins without perfect contrition, and also the
deliverance of good souls out of purgatory through the prayers and suffrages of
the Church, before the general Resurrection, should want the comfort, and
benefit of the Sacramental viaticum, that is the holy Euchariste, the
Sacrament of Extream-Vnction, and a Priests Sacramental absolution, but hence
can only be inferd, that I might conceive (as indeed so I did, and do still)
Mr. Harringtons death not to have been outwardly at least so pious, and
precious in the sight of Heaven, and earth, as the Encyclicall Epistle, makes
it. For truly I do think that neither the Heaven of the Church triumphant, nor
the Earth of the Church militant do approve the death of such, as dye with
singularity of Doctrine, which is contrary to faith, and the general practice
of Catholic belieuers; howeuer to think or conceive Mr. Harrington to have
dyed in a sad condition in order to outward signs and circumstances, is not to
judge him as to the Tribunal of the son of God, who for as much as his mercy
is above all his works, might assist him with efficacious illuminations in the
last moment of life: men can only form conceptions conform to outward sensible
actions; it is God alone, that has inspection into the whole man, and
consequently it is he alone, that can judge him, who has an exact knowledge of
both his outward, and inward action.

Page 21. Fifthly they object Dr. Leyb. usual calumny, that his Holiness judges
our Chapter schismatic -- so that we fear himself endeuour'd to fix that
calumny upon us at Rome.

In Answer to this obiecton which is built upon Dictum proprium (a Testimony
without proof, that Dr. Ellis, etc. use all a long their Encyclicall Epistle)
I protest fincerely that it is so false, that as God knows best I never had an
intent to brand the Chapter with schism, or inform against it at Rome. Howeuer
I am very certain that the Apostolic seat, does harbor no good opinion of Mr.
Blacloe; for Dr. Gage their Agent in his Letter of Feb. 20. 1661. (which has
been shown to our Seniors) has these express words. Mr. Blacloe Doctrine is in
so great a detestation here, that neither that of Luther or Calvin ever was in
a greater. Whereby is euidene'd, that Mr. Blacloe has no such enemy, as his
own Doctrine, nor our Chapter any such Adversaries in the Court of Rome, as are
those Chapter-men, that adhere so fast unto him, as to dare to publish his
Doctrine for eminent learning, which is held in detestation at Rome, censured
by the Vuiuersity of Doway as scandalous, Heretical and impious. These London
Chapter-men are those, which if not prevented by a supreme providence, of
necessity will bring our Clergy to ruin: and whereas Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc.
endeavor after their wonted manner to abuse our Brethren by seeking to persuade
that even in this present time our Chapter is in esteem, and credit at Rome, I
dare boldly say unto disabusing our said Brethren, that it is so odious (as
they have made it) that not any friend of our Clergy residing in that Court
will presume to open his mouth in favor of it.

Page 24. We show him (Dr. Leyb.) the judgments of Canon lawyers, who were
consulted when our Chapter was instituted, one of them being Ottenbergus Bishop
of Arras -- we show him under Mr. Fitt^n's own hand, that it was the sense of
Pope Innocentius returned to him by Cardinal Capponi our Comprotectour, that we
should gonerne by a Dean, and Chapter till we had a Bishop.

This objection has two branches, whereof one is built upon the judgments of
Canon lawyers as to a Bishops power unto instituting a Chapter: which importes
nothing of the question in debate, to wit, whether a Chapter instituted by a
Bishop can succeed in Episcopal authority at the death of their Bishop without
his Holiness obtained condescension thereto? or whether a Dean elected a new is
not bound to ask confirmation of his election before the exercising of
Episcopal Jurisdiction? If Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. could have produced
Ottenbergus or any other Canon lawyers Testimony, that might have decided the
said two Queres in confirmation of what they now practice, they had performd a
great work unto justifying their proceedings.

The other branche is built upon a testimony under Mr. Fittons own hand as Dr.
Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. auerre, although in good earnest I have no inducement
from the words set down to give credence unto them. 1.o because to my knowledge
Mr. Fitton was at Paris when Innocentius was made Pope, and there continued for
the space of diverse years. Secondly Cardinal Capponi was not our
Comprotectour after the death of my Lord Bishop, for his Comprotect our ship
continued only till: Cardinal Francisco Barbarini was restored into
Innocenti^s fauous, which is about 10. or 11. years ago: so that my Lord
Bishop was not dead till long after Cardinal Capponi was outed of his
Comprotectourship, and therefore it is not as to reason consonant, that Capponi
should return the sense of Pope Innocentius in these express words; That we
should govern by a Dean* and Chapter, till we had a Bishop, since my Lord
Bishop was not dead then. Howeuer I make no doubt, but that the Apostolical
sea in the vacancy of our natural Head, has at least tacitly assented to its
government in order to the faculties left by our la^e blessed Bishop; yet
thence it follows not that the Chapter can assume the exercise of Episcopal
Iutisdiction, especially a new dean being elected, that neither observed the
holy Canons, as to his election, nor ever sought to Rome to confirm him so
Vncanonically introduced.

Page 27. Lastly we bring him his (Mr. Leyb.) own Letter asserting, that our
Chapter was to have Episcopal Jurisdiction after my Lords death -- that the
Chapter is to be looked on, as his Heir ^pparent, or lawful Successor, that
our government is to reside in the Chapter after our masters death.

To this accusation I answer: inregard I have found by experience that Dr. Ell
is, Mr. Curtis etc. do corrupt, and falsity the original Letters, which they
mention in their Encyclicall Epistle, I cannot be induced to believe, that they
have repeated my words aright, neither do I think that there are the particles
Our Chapter etc. I remember that upon notice given me, that Mr. Blacloe, and
his Party went about to out my Lord Bishop from his Episcopal authority, and
that Dr. Blundston upon that scoare endeuour'd to draw all our Brethren
residing in his district, to promise obedience to the Chapter, I writ the said
Dr. Blun. a Letter, telling him that he proceeded unadvisedly because a Chapter
ought not to execute the Bishops authority while he was alive. For in all
Catholic Contries where Bishops seats are established, the Bishop while he
lives gouernes the Clergy, and not the Chapter: to which (if Cathedral) the
Canons of the Church give leave only to suceeed in his authority during the
vacancy of the seat. And if a new Dean be elected in the mean while, or
afterward, he is bound by the said Canons to ask of his Holiness confirmation,
as, to his election, otherwise it is null, and inualide: wherefore to have writ
that the, or a Chapter is looks on as the Bishops Heir apparent, or that our
government is to reside in the Chapter after our masters death, is not to
approve the exercise of Episcopal Jurisdiction in the Chapter without his
Holiness condescension thereto: and this I counseld as a necessary requisite to
our government my Lord Bishop being dead. But my Counsel had no weight with,
Mr. Blacloe and his Adherents, who played not one, but many Bishops suddenly,
without consulting the supreme Pastor.

Page 27. Sometimes he Charges Mr. Blacloe with cozenage, and injustice, as
that he has embez'ld, or converted to other uses a sum of money left in his
hand for the Clergies good: whereas we know the contrary by diverse persons,
in whose hands, and to whose trust, he left the said sum, to be employed
hereafter for the good of the Clergy.

In Answer to this accusation, I say, that Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. do me
wrong, for as much as they assert, that I have accused Mr. Blacloe of cozenage
and injustice as to embezling a sum of money committed to his care, and
trust; I never Charged him with injustice as to spending the principal stock,
but for converting to his own use the Rents thereof contrary to all justice.
For example our last Bishop about 55. yeates ago preuaild with an Hon.ble
person his friend to bestow a sum of money unto the erecting and maintaining
of a little community in the Town of Paris which might consist of such
Clergymen as their Superior should judge fit and proper for the end the
erection was intended, to wit, for the keeping a continual succession of able
scholars as to positive, scholasticall, and polemicall Theology especially;
knowledge in controversies being thought necessary unto resisting the Enemies
of Catholic Religion. To the advancing of so good a work the most Rd. and
Illustrious Abbot of Arras lent our Clergy a small College, built in the said
Town of Paris pertaining to his Monastery, and therefore named the College of
Arras. The money procured for the entertainment of this community was delivered
into the hands of Mr. John Colleton to whom the trust was committed; but he, in
regard of his imprisonment thought fit to recommend the trust, and management
of the said fund unto Mr. John Hammon, who about the year 1640. entrusted Mr.
Blacloe with it, who has never employed one penny for the end, the fund was
erected. The Rents that maintained constantly before a community of some five
prime Clergymen (and indeed two Bishops, and two Deans were of Arras College
community) now entertain Mr. Blacloe in poor clothing. Of this Mr. Blacloes
most unjust dealing at my last being at London I complained to Mr. Curtis that
receives the Rents, and told him plainly that it was a mighty shame to our
Clergy to suffer or countenance such an unworthy, scandalous, and unjust
proceeding. To which Mr. Curtis replied saying: But how can we help it, Mr.
Blacloe is entrusted with the money: we cannot take it from him but he says
that he will leave it to the Clergy. Besides said Mr. Curtis; Mr. Blacloe has
given to Lisboa one hundred pounds, and allovv's the Dean Dr. Ellis thirty
pounds yearly, and twenti pounds yearly to Mr. Robert VVorsley out of the
Rents of an other fund left by Dr. Bosvvel, and vvherevvith Mr. Blacloe is also
entrusted. What I have herein set down in relation to the fund of Arras
College, I protest sincerely, I heard from Mr. Collingtons own mouth, from my
Lord Bishop, from Dr. Kellison, and Dr. Louell: besides I have some reason to
have full knowledge of the said fund, because my self together with Mr.
Bitcon, Dr. Blundston, Mr. Ireland, and Dr. Reyners, were entertained in Arras
College, and maintained with the Rents thereof. And as to the substance of my
answers to Mr. Curtis aforementioned, I will be deposed, that I have expressed
them most sincerely. Wherefore I leave it to the wisedom's of our Bhrethren to
judge, whether Dr. Ellis does not commit a grievous sin, for as much as he
employes money to his own, that was given, and alwais before applied to another
use and purpose, that is the entertaining and maintaining of a small community
in the Town of Paris. For indeed Mr. Blacloe has noe color of right as to the
dominion or disposing of the said fund in any other way: and this truth does
evidently appear by a continual custom of paying the Rents for the use of
such a community, and by the Testimonies of Dr. Boswel, and other principal
members of our ancient Clergy which are extant in our Mother House, and my
self have seen them.

Page 28. 29. Our last Bishops commands in his Letter to D. Leyb. himself,
dated July 6. 1652. delivered in these words, I have diverse times written to
you to suppress all Clamours against Mr. Blacloes novelties, and (as you have
written to me) you have so done; but still diverse of my chief officers write
to me that you do the contrary, which I am very sorry to hear, and so you will
cause the inconvenience, and schism, which will be worse then the books are.

In amazemen^ as to this accusation, I wonder if our last Bishop writ me such a
Letter (which I am confident he did not in the words therein expressed) how Dr.
Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. came unto it, of necessity they must have intercepted
it; because it is not, as to reason credible, that my self should put it into
their hands: and in case they intercepted the said Letter, in consequence
thereof, they kept from me his Lordhips commands; wherefore they have nothing
of ground, or reason to object to me commands that I never received. Besides
the particle Commandes is not set down in his Lordships Letter, as themselves
express it. Again my Lord, that was a prudent, and wise Prelate, would never
have let fall from his pen the words: And so you will cause the
inconvenience and schism, which will be worse then the books are: These
particles carrying the sound of a little nonsense, for as much as The
inconvenience, importe a relation to something said before, which is not
expressed: and if his Lordship would have had the said particles to relate unto
the subsequent words, he would have said, An inconvenience, which etc.

Howeuer as to the clearing of this matter in debate, it is obseruable, that
about the year 1653. Mr. Blacloe published in print his pernicious book
concerning the middle state, or condition of souls, and dedicated it unto my
Lord Bish. who upon that occasion writ a Letter unto me (which is imparted to
our Seniors) wherein are inserted these express words following. Mr. Blacloe
has presented me with his new book, which he has dedicated to me, wherein he
has done me this pleasure, that he acknowledge's, that I dislike his
novelties, so that I shall not need to make any public declaration of my
dislike of them, seeing himself has published it. Whereby evidently appeare's,
that in case Mr. Blacloe had not acknowledged his Lordships abhorrence from his
Doctrines, he himself would have published it by an open declaration.
Notwithstanding his Lordship being nothing ignorant of his pastoral duty,
which was to watch, for the souls of his flock, as one bound to give account
thereof, Hebr. 13. writ an other Letter, wherein order was given me, to
suppress the before mentioned book of the middle state of souls, as containing
naughty Doctrines, that contradicted holy scriptures, Councils, Fathers, and
the general practice of the Catholic Church: and to the same effect his
Lordship writ to Mr. Harrington, who was the second Vic. Genesis In solidum;
wherefore in Obedience to the order enioyn'd me, I dispersed copies thereof
amongst sundry of our Brethren respectively, and his said Lordship's order made
so great an impression in the hearts of our Brethren residing within the
districts of Yorkshire, that twenty of them joined vnanimousely in a modest
disclaim from Mr. Blacloes Doctrines, judging that the best, and most necessary
expedient to the suppressing of them. The Tenor of the said disclaim together
with the names of such as subscribed unto it, I have thought fit to set down,
and they be as fallows.

CVm ex Reuerendissimo piae memoriae Episcopo Chalcedonensi acceperimus, Thomam
ex antiqua Familia de Albis, East Saxonum varios Libros edidisse; In quibus
multa erronea scandalosa, temeraria, and Doctrinae, praxique Sanctae Romanae
Ecclesiae dissona, reperiuntur; Cumque magno quidem, and intimo dolor
intellexerimus, totum Clerum Anglicanum, apud quosdam magnae Notae Viros, ideo
male audire, adeoque horrenda Schismatis inuri Infamia.

NOs infrascripti eiusdem Cleri Anglicani indignissima membra, Collegijque
Anglo-Duaceni aliquando Alumni, testamur, Nos eiusdem Thomae de Albis Doctrinas
suspectas nullo modo approbare, sed ab omnibus, and singulis taliter suspectis,
intimis ex praecordijs, penitus abhorrere; In cuins fidem proprijs manibus
Nomina subscripsimus.

William Ogle Archdeacon. John Mettcalfe. James Dalton decan: ruralis.
Robertus Chamber. William Meynell. Matthew Thimbelbi. Thomas Duffield. Thomas
Sutton. Michael Robinson. Gulielmus Salisburius. Georgius Cathericke Arch:
Ioannes Young. Thomas Goodricke. Ioannes Iowley. Mattheus Chamber. Francis
Blacstone. Ioannes Hardwicke. Thomas Faceby. Nicolaus Postgarte. Christophorus
Lawson.
But here is obseruable that one of these zealous Brethren, in the performance
of their Pastoral charge, namely Mr. John Mettcalfe, is fallen from his
subscription; He that before protested against Mr. Blacloes learning as
scandalous, and dissonant to the general practice of the Catholic Church, now
for as much as he is invested into an Ecclesiastical dignity extolle's it
above the clouds, as eminent.

Now Mr. Harrington together with others of that faction residing in London,
as soon, as they were informed, that I had used endeavors to obstruct the
spreading of Mr. Blacloes Doctrines, they complained to their Paris friends of
the order which my L. Bish. had sent me, and of my proceeding in the execution
thereof, which they styled a clamorous decrying of Mr. Blacloes learning. Here
upon the said friends expostulated with his Lordship, 1o. as to his order,
which they named a condemnation of Mr. Blacloe, and thence inferd, that his
said Lordship had usurped upon our supreme Pastors authority, since to
pronounce sentence of condemnation, is a prerogative pertaining thereto. His
Lordship replied as to his own order, that he had not condemned Mr. Blacloe;
and indeed a mere order to suppress a book, does not importe a condemnation,
taken in the proper sense. Secondly as to my clamorous decrying, his Lordship
answered, that he never gave me order to cry out against Mr. Blacloes books,
there being a great difference between crying out against, and a gentle
suppressing: and likewise between suppressing all speech against, and mere
suppressing of a book. Howeuer doubtless if my Lord Bishop were now alive to
peruse other books put forth since his Lordship death by Mr. Blacloe, and
likewise to read the illustrious Testimony, which he alleages (in his weak
Answer to the Vindiciae) of his own Vnimpeachable virtue, and eminent Doctrine
given him by Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis, and seven other Chapter-men under the name
of the London Clergy, doubtless I say his Lord^hip Surgeret vt M^yses, surgeret
vt Phynees, pro domo Dei. At least he would publish against Mr. Blacloe, Pope
Lueius 3. (C. Ad abolendam, de Haereticis) his definition, and proceed also
against Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. as did the glorious Bishop of Alexandria S.
Peter the Martyr against Arrius for favoring of Milesius, Qui (as attesteth S.
Epiph.) sectam dumtaxat fecerat, and non a fide defecerat. My Lord Bish. knew
right well to exercise his Episcopal authority, that is, to use it either in
the spirit of love, and meeknes, or in the Pastoral rod (1. Cor. 4.) unto the
conseruing of his flock: his Lordship knew right well, that it was a necessary
requisite unto a full execution of his charge to resist profane notions of
wanton scholars even in their bud or first springing up. For although to
pronounce sentence of condemnation against Teachers of new notions, which
contradict Councils, and the general practice of Gods Church, is the supreme
Universal Pastour's prerogative: neuertheless the Pastoral staff is not given
to a particular Bishop in vain. Besides every particular Bishop, for as much as
he is the Chief Spiritual Dog of the suprem Pastor, is bound to bark, and
fight against such, as endeavor to hurt his flock. If a wolf come, and the
sheapard's Dog shall not give warning thereof by barking, of necessity he will
be counted guilty of betraying the Sheep unto the wolf. The french (as Cicero
in one oration relates) attempted to seize on the Capitol of Rome, and because
the watch, or Guard Dogs did not bark unto giving notice of their coming,
they were brought before the common Court of justice, and there sentenced to
have their things broken. Priests, yea Lay-Catholick's (as to the matter in
debate) but Bishops especially, are the Spiritual watch-Dogs of the supreme
Pastor: and their office is to bark at and bite wolfes, that go about seeking
among the flock of Christ, whom they may deceive, and devour: that is to say,
they are bound to speak, teach, and write against singular Doctors of new
notions which are wolfes in sheep's clothing, and such, as to this point,
shall neglect the duty, that God requires from them, will receive their Trial
at the high Court of divine Justice, unto being condemned as unprofitable
servants, to a far greater punishment, then was that of the Capitols
watch-Dogs, to wit, To utter darkness Mat. 5.

Page 30. We are moved not to disclaim Mr. Blacloes Doctrines, by the example
of other bodies, and communities.

If Dr. Ellis etc. would have followed the example of other Bodies, the many
great scandals, whereof they now bear the guilt, had been taken away long
ago: Religious orders do not defend, or countenance such of theirs, as vent
pernicious Doctrines to the ruin of souls, and the dishonor of their bodies
respectively. The society turn out, other Regulars inflict severe punishments
upon such, as bear the infamous brand of being suspected for heresy, or for
any disobedience against the Spiritual, or civil Magistrate: Besides Dr. Ellis
is not ignorant of our English Benedictin's Zealous proceeding unto securing,
and punishing of that learned man of their order Father ^ohn Barns as soon, as
they were fully acquainted with his wicked designs to broach dangerous Tenets
to the destroying of souls. And indeed that famous man of their order Father
Rudicind Barlo himself told me, that the securing of the said Father John
Barns cost the order 300. l. ster. But D. Ellis etc. contrariwise do bolster up
Mr. Blacloe, observe his directions in the management of their affairs, keep
constant correspondence with him, receive his pernicious writings, give public
Testimony of his vnimpeachable virtue, unblemished life, and eminent learning:
again have refused to publish the sea Apostolicks Decrees, which prohibited and
condemned several books of his, pretending that a condemnation of a book In
globo, that is without expressing of particular propositions signifies nothing.
Dr. Ellis himself told me that they Pope must tell them what in particular
they ought to avoid in order to Mr. Blacloes Doctrines: to which I replied,
that it did not beseem him, to reach the supreme Pastor how to proceed in his
Decrees. Besides the custom of condemning books In globo without censuring
particular propositions has examples in antiquity, as evidently proves the
Rescript of divine Constantinus Emperor sent to Bishops, and lay people of the
Empire, which is as follows.

VICTOR CONSTANTINVS MAX: AVG: EPISCOPIS, ET POPVLO. CVm Arrius scriptorum and
impiorum hominum consuetudinem imitetur, eandem cum illis ignominiae, and
turpitudinis notam merito subire debet. Quemadmodum Porphyrius capitalis
pietatis hostis, qui nefarios libros contra Religionem Catholicam seu
Christianam edebat, mercedem dignam laboribus recepit, and eiusmodi quidem, vt
apud posteriora saecula non ipse solum maximis probris vexatus fuerit, and
turpissima labe infamiae aspersus, verum etiam impia eius seripta deleta, and
penitus extincta; sic etiam visum est Arrium and eius Sectatores Porphyrianos
nuncupare, vt quorum secuti sunt mores, eorum etiam nomen habeant. Quin etiam
si quod opus ab Arrio scriptum reperiatur, illud eremandum esse. Addit: illud
etiam mandamus, vt si quis librum ab Arrio compositum occultasse deprehensus
sit, and eum non statim in medium adductum igne combusserit, morte mulctetur,
nam mox vt comprehensus fuerit, plectatur capite. And indeed the first Council
of Nice, as witnesses Nicephorus l. 8. C. 18. burnt the books of the Arrians:
Again the sixth General Council condemnd sundry books In globo that is the
whole volum's. Furthermore in Bulla coenae and in Indice librorum prohibitorum,
Regul. 2. all books written by Heretics are prohibited and condemned,
notwithstanding, that they contain several Catholic Tenets. Hereby plainly
appears how unadvisedly Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. object against me page 33.
thus. He would have us condemn them (Mr. Blacloes opinions) as he strangely
phrases it, in globulo: by which we conceive he means in the bulk, whence it
would follow that we must condemn the Tenets of the Trinity, the Incarnation
and all other Mysteries of our faith, all these being found in Mr. Blacloes
books, and going in the same Bulk or book with the rest. But how unhandsomely
have Mr. Ellis etc. set down this objection, or rather false accusation against
me: for I never propounded a condemnation; only advised a disclaim from Mr.
Blacloes pernicious books, which the Court of Rome had prohibited and
condemned. Again I never mentioned Condemn in globulo, as they strangely and
unadvisedly phrase it. For I said In globo, which signifies In the whole,
without expressing particular propositions. Furthermore Dr. Ellis etc. will not
deny, but that Caluins Institutions are condemned, and not all the Tenets of
the Trinity, the Incarnation, and other mysteries, which notwithstanding go in
the same Bulk or book: and I do not see how D. Ellis etc. can pretend
invincible ignorance for an excuse; as to this particular error. Lastly,
whosoever shall read all Mr. Blacloe's Books, will not find in them all the
Mysteries of Our faith, as they (Dr. Ellis etc.) auerre; unless by Our faith,
they mean Mr. Blacklo's new Faith.

Page 31. 32. As for Mr. Blacloes person we have known him to be ever of a most
vnble'mish't life -- His learning all grant to be eminent, which by the common
principles of Ciuility, and humanity oblige us to value him accordingly.

As to Mr. Blacloes most vnblemish't life, and vnimpeachable virtue, which be
the glorious Characters given him all a long the Encyclicall Epistle, it is
evident as to reason; that if the Testimony of Dr. Ellis etc. were built upon
truth, Mr. Blacloe would never have writ my Lord Bish. such a Letter, as is
before set down, wherein he calls a Brother equal to him self Lying and
perjured sycophant, a wret'hed sycophant etc. and brand's his Lordship's own
self with the infamous marks of Paramount Bishop, and domineering ways. Nor
is it, as to reason consonant, that my Lord Bish. a wise, and virtuous Prelate
indeed, should in his answer to Mr. Blacloe (if vnimpeachably virtuous) have
put him in mind of the solemn promise he made at his ordination to give
reverence and obedience to his Ordinary, and likewise of the Churches prayer
read in the ordination of a Bishop: Qui maledixerit tibi, sit ille maledictus,
and qui benedixerit tibi, benedictionibus repleatur; And in the close of all
wish Mr. Blacloe to call to his remembrance the words of the Apostle: Maledici
regnum Dei non consequentur. And to tell him withal, That such reproachful
words, as he used in his Letter, did beseem neither Christian nor Priest.
Whereby evidently appears, that the vnimpeachable virtue, and most vnblemish't
life, which Dr. Ellis etc. ascribe to Mr. Blacloe were not acknowledged by my
Lord Bishop his Spiritual Father, and Superior: Besides his Lordship writ unto
me about a year after (the Letter is shown unto our Seniors) in those express
words: One told me that M. Blacloe's judgment is much weakened, surely his
virtue is. Again Mr. Blacloe is had in greater detestation then even was
Calvin, as is said: and Mr. Blacloe against all equity detaines a Rent charge
piously left for the entertainment of a little community in the Town of Paris,
as is said before; wherefore he can make no good claim to an unblemished life.

As to Mr. Blacloes eminent learning in regard whereof Dr. Ellis etc. highly
value him; that alone bring's undeniable evidence against his vnimpeachable
virtue, and vnblemish't life: for indeed his learning is the Vanity of vanities
Eccle. 1o. in as much as it is built upon heathen Philosophy: and Abomination of
desolation Mar. 13. because it is destructive of Religon, and morality, as I
shall evidently prove out of a small draught or extract only, of his vain
abominable Tenets, which I have thought expedient to set down (unto a fulness of
satisfaction in order to all our Brethren, and Lay-Catholicks) which are as
fallows

Imprimis Mr. Blacloe as to his learning, is destructive of Gods omnipotency;
for in Musc. vent. 12. n. 6. he denies, that God has power to produce a fly,
that himself (Mr. Blacloe) acknowledge's Possible.

Item he is destructive of the divine providence ascribing thereto (praefa.
Chrysaspis) his gross geometticall errors, together with his other profane
novelties, insinuating to the Reader, that he received them from Heaven, as
opportune requisits to the government of the Church in the present coniuncture
of circumstances. Non a me haec hahes (says he unto the Reader) sed ah eo, qui
ex legihus prouidentiae suae ea gubernationi Ecclesiae suae in hoc rerum
articulo opportuna and fecit, and vidit. -- Quod super est, tibi consule
(lectorem alloquitur) and ostentum, a caelis ad te delapsum, ne contemnito.
From this preface arose the name given Mr. Blacloe at Rome, to wit Tremulante,
that is, Quaker: in regard he attend's, and pretend's to the Revelations of
phanatick Quakers of these days.

Item he is destructive of the necessary being of the three divine persons in
one God. for l. 1. Inst. page 200. he teaches, that God the Father did not
more necessarily beget the 2. Person of the B. Trinity, then he produce's the
most contemptible creature in consequence of which, as God might have been
without each contemptible creature, so he might have been without the 2. Divine
Person.

Item he is extremely injurious to the Holy Ghost, for T. 1. p. 278. Inst.
sac. he wantonly asserte's, that the words of the Apostles Creed, Conceived of
the holy Ghost, ought bear this interpretation to wit. Conceived of the
Father, and so excludes the Holy Ghost's concurrence, or cooperation in the
Mystery of Incarnation, and thereby depriues him of his Chief propriety or
attribute, as to that work in order to man's Redemption, notwithstanding that
scripture, Councils, and Fathers attribute the Incarnation of the son of God,
for as much as it is an Act of greatest love, unto the Holy Ghost, who is love
it self, and the fountain of all true love on earth, and in Heaven.

Item he is injurious to our souiour Christ's Humanity for Musc. vent. 15. he
teaches that it is not Ens, nor indiuiduum naturae, which is the heresy of Eut
ches.

Item he is injurious to the divine piety; because T. 2. Inst. 328. he teaches
that Christ did not die for all men, which is the Doctrine of Calvin 4. Inst.
C. 24. and condemned by Pope Innocent the 10. For temerarious, scandalous,
impious, derogating from the divine piety, and heretical. And indeed S. John
the Apostle in his first Epistle 2. Chap. evidently attestes this Catholic
truth in these words: He (Christ) is the propitiation for our sins, and not for
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world: Whence the Council of
Trent ses. 6. Cap. 3. infers that not all those for whom Christ dyed have
received the benefit of his death; not because they could not, but because they
would not cast away their transgressions; rejected the merciful grace of
Christ who will all men to be saved, and come unto the knowledge of truth,
having given himself a ransom for all men 1o. Timoth. 2.

Item his learning is injurious to Christ's Mother the Virgin Mary, and to all
the blessed Saints of God: because he teaches de med. anima statu, them. 3.
that they have need of, and that we ought to offer prayers for them; again them.
9o. he imprisonnes them all In Atrio, that is in a porch out of Heaven till the
general resurrection: which error he borrow's of ancient Heretic after the
imitation of Luther, and Calvin.

Item he is injurious to the good souls in Purgatory for as much as, De med.
sta. he peruersely, and obstinately denies their deliverance from pains till
the generall-Resurrection, which contradicts the Genesis Council of florence, the
definitive Decree of Benedictus 12. and the universal practice of the
Catholic Church, that crect's Priuileg'd Altars, offer Masses, and apply
suffrages for their speedy releasment as conform unto the said Council of
florence and definitive sentence of Benedictus 12. and the Churches practice
before.

Item he is injurious to the Church of God, for as much as he acknowledges
some errors to have crept into her, in order to the admistration of
Sacraments. And indeed he is so petulantly phanatick, that in his book
entitled Tesserae etc. he auerre's, that though the Church might fall into an
error, neuertheless so falling, and suddenly after returning to the ancient
faith the continuation of the same faith shall not be prejudiced, but receive
an increase of beauty thereby, As a black patch, or spot in venus body, or face
(that is his profane comparison) does render her more comely, and beautiful.

Item he is injurious to the Church of God; because in his Tabule suffragiales
tab. 15. he says point blank, that there neither is, nor can be, a Judge of
Controversies to determine what is, and what is not of faith.

Item he is injurious to the supreme Spiritual Governor, Christ's Vicar the
Pope; for in his Book called Sonus Buccinae Page 369. 372. he teaches his
Holiness infallibility to be an Arch-heresy, and those that assert it to commit
a greater sin, then is the burning of Churches, violating of holy Virgins upon
the Altar, trampling under foot the Br. Sacrament, or introducing the Turk or
Antichrist into Christian Countries; and to prove this his prophan Doctrine in
Tab suffrag. p. 251. after his wonted manner he cut's out of his phanatick
brain a Revelation. I did accuse (says he) that opinion (concerning the Popes
infallibility) of heretical uncleanness I could not, nor ought I do less: and
if I had not done so, I had been an Anathema from Christ. And in his Monum.
Excant. 46. He lais claim to a divine command that bid him preach so. Wherefore
Mr. Blacloe, alias white, shall not be called for the future Thomas Albiorum
Tri^obantum, but Thomas Albiorum Tremulantum: And indeed he deserue's the Title
of the most learned phanatick of his phanatick age.

Item he is most injurious to suprem temporal Governors, or civil Magistrates
in as much as he teaches in his book of Obedience and Government 1o. page
133. If a Magistrate has truly deseru^ed to be, and is dispossessed, every one
to his power is bound to resist him. Secondly page 135. If a Magistrate be
innocent, and wrongfully dispossessed -- he is obliged absolutely to renounce
all right, and claim to Government. Thirdly page 147. Any who suffered wrong
by a Monarch, when he is dispossessed -- may proceed as if there were no
commonwealth by the law, which in a wilderness vvarrant's us to kill a Tiger,
or Robber, that seek's to kill us, not pretending law for our action; but that
it is manlike, and rational.

Item he is injurious to all Bishops making nothing of essential difference
between them, and mere Priests, To. 2. Inst. l. 1. lec. 8. he teaches that
either Bishop, or Priest may exercise all Episcopal functions in Countries,
where no Ecclesiastical division is made into Bishopticks.

Item he is most injurious to the holy scripture, for he assertes that is is as
ridiculous to seek the decision of controversies from thence, at to cut with a
beetle, or knock with a straw; dial. 2.. 11. p. 309.

Item all along his works he most petulantly decryes Schoole-Diuines, whose
volum's he says are filled with, or rather the filling, and stuffing it self,
of intricate trifles, or trifling intricacies. Praefa. Inst.

Item he is injurious to the Canon law, because Monum. page 62. he scruple's
not to teach that no Canons, that concern the outward Court of the Church, and
sundry Degrees of Ecclesiastical dignities pertaining thereto, oblige in
England; and this opinion asserted by so classical an Author, as Mr. Blacloe
is, purges out the leaven of scruples as to our London Chapter-Men's
proceedings.

Item he is injurious without pity to many wretched sinners. For To. 2. Inst.
p. 357. he impiously affirm's, that their is an absolute impossibility for many
of them to avoid damnation: and indeed he denies absolutely all sufficient
grace To. 1. Inst. page 124. though sometimes he grantes it, as given only by
God, that man may bear the guilt of sin: which is that man may commit sin. And
perhaps he means by wretched sinners, which he called wretched men,
Carthusians, Capucins, and other Religious orders. 1o. because he teaches To.
2. Ins. page 207. that life to be the best requisite to blessedness which enioyes
the fulness of corporal pleasures, and that sins (in an other place) are
perfections of the soul. Secondly because in his book of Meditations he names
the vertus of Religious Orders Idioticall, and in his book of Obed. and Gou.
ground 4. he affirms that Obedience is a virtue only in case of imperfection:
as likewise teaches that to renounce our vvil, is to renounce our wits, and
manhood, and compares it to the going upon of all four like a Beast. Malitia
excaeeauit cor illius. Pro. 17.

Item he is injurious to all the Churches Sacraments instituted by Christ
himself, for as much, as Tom. 2. l. 1o. Inst. lec. 8. he names them certain
contracts only betvveen God, and man without any efficacy as to Sanctifying
man's soul. He does not believe that the Sacramental water in Baptism that
touches the body washes the soul unto Sanctification of life. Whereby he
contradictes S. Austin who says. Vnde tanta vis aquae (speaking of Baptism) vt
corpus tangat, cor vero abluat.

Item he is an enemy to the Churches Councils, for in his Tabulae suffragiales.
Tab. 22. he renders them liable to error, in as much, as they may (says he)
endeavor to make that an article of faith, which was not before, and by so
endeavoring, fall into error, and press the same error upon the whole Church.
Besides in his Muscarium, (flye-flap) he accuses the Council of Calcedon (one
of the four first general Councils, which S. Gregory reuerenc'd as the 4.
Euangils) to have erred indeed.

Item he is an enemy to young children, for as much as he teaches in his
Muscar. page 49. nu. 2. that lived faith, that is, faith working by Charity
(whereof young children are not capable) is a necessary requisite to Baptism,
which is an heresy of the Anabaptists condemned by the Council of Trent.

Item he is iniurions to Charity it self To. 1. Inst. page 89. for whereas S.
Paul affirms, that it is infused into the soul of man by the Holy Ghost, he
teaches that it is produced by our own actions.

Item he is injurious to every man for, in his book of Government, and
Obedience page 38. It follovv's not, says he, that I vvrong him (an other man)
even though I do him harm, or seek his ruin, for he is no otherwise to me,
then a piece of cloth, or vvood, which I cut and shape after my own will
fittingly for my use. They are his express words.

Item he is destructive of free will, because he teaches quest. Theolog.. 9.
that our free will is neuet more free, then when it is necessitated.

To these profane, and wicked Doctrines I should add many others, censured by
the famous ad much renowned University of Do way as heretical, erroneous,
dangerous, scandalous, and impious respectively, if the censure it self, and
its gallant vindication were not already spread in our Country: wherefore it
shall now suffice to have set down this small draught of his exotic, and
abominable Tenets, it alone giving evidence enough of the manifest weakness that
Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. have shown by their unadvised Testimony of his
Vnimpeachable virtue, and eminent Learning, and for as much as Mr. Blacloe has
published the said Testimony in the latin tongue to the sight of the world,
the Clergy of England will bear the infamous brand to all posterity of being
Mr. Blacloes Adherents, and Proselites. And whereas Dr. Ellis etc. be only 9.
Clergymen and their Testimony goes under he name of the London Clergy, it will
appear, that as the Adherents to wicleff stole the seal of the University of
Oxford, and craftily set it to the Chief Tenets of the said wicliffe, that so
the approbation of the university of Oxford might get his learning credit, and
credence abroad in Bohemia where it had taken some roott, in like manner Dr.
Ellis etc. will be thought to have stolen his Brethrens votes for the same
purpose. Our most Rd. Bishop (Cuius memoria in benedictione est) foresaw the
great scandals Mr. Blacloe would bring upon himself and his party, for in a
Letter dated 6. of Feb. 1654. which his Lordship writ to my self (and I have
shown it to our Seniors) are these express words. I have not yet seen Mr.
Blacloes last book in which as you write there are such horrid speeches against
the Popes infallibility, which if it be true, I fear Mr. Blacloe will go yet
further for such speeches show the last disposition to leave the Pope, and then
it will better appear what kind of Adversaries you and I have had.

Now I leave to the wisedom's of our Brethren to judge, out of the premises,
whether Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. their Testimony, which Mr. Blacloe in his
weak Answer to the Vinditiae, set's down in these words. De me Cleri
Londinatis Encyclica ad Fratres per Vniuersam Angliam Epistola, hoc testimonium
continet. Quantum ad Albij (Blacloi) personam attinet, nonimus eam semper vitae
irreprehensibilis and exemplaris conuictus fuisse -- scientiam ipsius esse
eminentem fatentur omnes, quae nos ex legibus naturae and Societatis humanae,
cogit ad parem illi aestimationem retribuendam. Whether I say, the said
Testimony coming to the Popes notice, his Holiness may, as to reason, be moved
to confirm their Chapter, and give them their own desires as to a Successor;
or whether they may not have a design to obstruct thereby the good intentions
of his Holiness in order to a wished setlement of Government in our Clergy,
that so they may continue as they are in authority? Or whether Dr. Ellis could
subscribe unto such a Testimony with a good conscience, since my self and
others that I can name have heard him call Mr. Blacloe an unhappy man, and
since he told a sober learned Brother of ours (whose Letter I have shown) and
another person of great quality whom I can name, that part of his learning was
Damnable. Vir duplex animo inconstans est in omnibus vijs suis. Jacob. 1. Again
whether Catholics for the future are bound to believe Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis
etc. when they hear them deny their adherence to Mr. Blacloe, and his learning;
furthermore whether they are not bound to embrace a learning which they judge
to be eminent, and know likewise the Author of it to be of an vnimpeachable
virtue, and of a most unblemished life. Furthermore whether Lay-Catholicks may
do prudently to leave the Charities they intend for the relief of the
Mother-House to be disposed according to the instructions which Dr. Ellis, Mr.
Curtis etc. suggest to our Brethren in their Encyclicall Epistle to the great
prejudice of the said Mother-House? Sed iussisti Domine, and sic est, vt paena
sua sibi sit, omnis in ordinatus animus. Aug. Confess. l. 1o. c. 12.

Page 32. And to wish and pray, that his other works, may be as serviceable to
Gods Church, as those against Heretics have been.

Here Dr. Ellis etc. prostrated, offer their humble prayers to Heaven for Mr.
Blacloes perseverance in the pursuance of his eminent learning unto serving the
Church of God, by resisting of Heretics. In this heavenly prayer they set down
a false supposall, being I am certain, they can produce no evidence to prove
that Mr. Blacloe has composed works, which have brought advantages to the
Church of God etc. yet when I use this manner of speech to any of his
principal Proselites, instantly Rushworth Dialogues are named, to which I have
and do still reply that those are no works of his; for though he bear the name
of Thomas Blacloe, Thomas White, Thomas Anglus, Thomas Albiorum Trinobantum,
and Thomas Bolton, neuertheless he was never called Mr. Rushworth. Again my
self knew very well Mr. Rushworth, and that he alone was the true undoubted
Author of those Dialogues (except only some few blasphemous and exotic
propositions respectively, inserted therein by Mr. Blacloe) To clear this
business unto giving to Mr Rushworth, what is due to Mr. Rushworth, who when I
was but a Philosopher executed the office of General Prefect in our
Mother-House, a grave, virtuous, and Religious Person, a good Divine, and much
versed in Polemicall Theology, that is In controversies, and when I was Agent
for our Clergy, he wanting a Residence, I procured one for him in the Town of
London, where he had the opportunity to converse frequently with Mr. Blacloe
(who then was in great esteem, and vogue with all our ancient Clergy) and to
communicate his conceptions, as to his Dialogues, having a great kindness for
him and an opinion of his learning; The said Mr. Rushworth not suruiuing to put
forth his Dialogues, and Mr. Blacloe who even then had conceived profane
novelties, thinking that the publishing of those Dialogues (whereof he had a
good opinion, as indeed they highly deserved) might prove a fit forerunner for
the establishing of his own nouelle Doctrines, he borrowed the Manuscript
thereof from Mr. Edward Enderby Nephew to Mr. Rushworth, who is yet alive, and
without his leave or knowledge printed it, and notwithstanding that in the
preface to the said Dialogues, when they were first printed Mr. Blacloe does
confess Mr. Rushworth to be the Author thereof, neuertheless Mr. Blacloes
friends have made him the Author unto giving credit and esteem to his other
writings, Sic vos non vobis mellificatis apes. Mr. Edward Ender by knows this
to be true; and a certain knight of great worth, and learning with whom Mr.
Rushworth communicated his said Dialogues has been heard to say (and he is
alive also) that sundry points which are in the printed Dialogues were not in
the manuscript: which shows evidently Mr. Blacloes crafty dealing, and the
false supposall of Dr. Ellis, etc. that Mr. Blacloes Works have been
serviceable to Gods Church, etc.

Page 35. As also Dr. Leyb. moved to our Dean, and writ to Rome falsely
pretending that the greater part of the Clergy would think themselves happy in
having a Vicarius Apostolicus, and that only some few of the Chapter oppose
it. Now to receive such an exterordinary Authority is both against the pleasure
of her Matie expressed in her commands to our Agent at Rome not to accept it:
against the laws of our Catholic Ancestors, against the will of our state,
and so most dangerous subiecting us to a Praemunire etc.

For the satisfaction of out Brethren in order to this accusation, they may be
pleased to know 1o. that Dr. Gage their Agent writ unto me, that he found his
Holiness willing to grant unto us a Bishop, with the Title of Vicarius
Apostolicus, and withal desired me to give my opinion and sense, as to such a
government, which I did accordingly, intimating in my Answer, that I did not
doubt, but that all our Brethren (except some Chapter-men) would think
themselves happy to be so governed; and am still of that belief being
assured, that our Clergy formerly desired nothing more of his Holiness, then to
enjoy a Spiritual Governor invested with Episcopal authority, as do the
Clergy and Catholics of Holland. Secondly what Dr. Gage, their Agent, writ
unto me, as to the matter in debate, the same also, he communicated in a Letter
to Mr. Car, as himself told me, who withal added, that he saw nothing of
reason, that should move our Clergy to reject so fair an offer: and truly I
see no reason wherefore Beggars should be so their own Caruers, as to refuse a
considerable Alms or Charity that is presented Gratis. Hereupon I writ unto
Mr. Knightly complaining, that the Chapter wronged our Clergy extremely, for
as much as they had refused so aduantageous a requisite unto making them
happy; Mr. Knightly imparted the contents of my Letter to Dr. Ellis, who to
excuse the carriage of that business, writ unto me in these words: We would be
content with any Bishop, but the Court of Rome will give us none; Whereby is
plainly euidenced, that I writ not to Rome falsely, since the venerable Dean
Dr. Ellis writes: We would be content with any Bishop etc. Whereas Dr.
Ellis etc. excep against the Title of Vicarius Apostolicus, as importing an
Ecclesiastical dignity that our most gracious Queen forebid Dr. Gage to
accept, for as much, as it is inconsistent with the laws of our Ancestors, the
will of the state, and the good of the subject, making all men liable to a
Praemunire, that adhere unto it. Now as to this point in debate I cannot be
easily induced to believe that our gracious Queen commanded Dr. Gage not to
accept of the Popes offer, as to a Vicarius Apostolicus, though there had been
just ground enough for her Matie to have interposed her authority against it; I
conceive that our said gracious Queen, for the extreme respect she has ever
shown toward the sea Apostolic, did only intimate the inconveniences, that
had been inculcated unto her craftily, as to the admitting of such a Spiritual
Governor; I say craftily, because Mr. Blacloe had persuaded his pack of
Chapter-men to except against the Title of Vicarius Apostolicus, as importing
an Authority against the ancient Statutes of our Country made about the 13. or
17. year of Richard the 2d. a Catholic Prince, and unrepealed in part, which
statutes Dr. Ellis etc. vnad uisedly call the laws of their Ancestors, saying
Our Ancestors. Also against the state, which were (when this business was moved)
Cromwell and his grand Council; likewise against the good of the subject, whom
such a power makes liable to a Praemunire according to the said ancient
statutes; This is the sum or substance of what the Chapter inculcated as I
imagine, and was pretended to our Brethren outwardly, unto hindering the making
of a Bishop with the Title of Vicarius Apostolicus; whereas, indeed, Mr.
Blacloe, and his London Chapter-men's sole motive of that their proceeding was
in regard they apprehended that his Holiness might elect a Brother to that
office, who should be an enemy to profane novelties, and consequently no
friend to their ways. Besides they knew well, that such a Bishop would bear
rule over the Chapter, and all the Priests of England, and Wales, so that the
dominion the Chapter has now, as to governing, would be made thereby to signify
nothing. This I say, was their sole motive, wherefore they excepted against a
Bishop, with the Title of Vicarius Apostolicus, and will except against any
Bishop whosoever, if they shall conceive that he is like to discountenance the
London-Chapter-men.

As to the reasons which Dr. Ellis etc. allege against a Vicarius
Apostolicus, they carry no weight with them 1o. because a mere Bishop, a
Provincial or President of an order, or any Apostolical Missionary, sent by
the Pope into England without the kings leave, is as much against the ancient
statutes of our Country, as a Vicarius Apostolicus, sent without the kings
leave also. Secondly there are no laws ancient or modern that will hang a
Bishop as Bishop, or a Vicarius Apostolicus as Vicarius Apostolicus, though
they be sent into England without the kings leave; but our modern laws will
hang each Apostolical Missionarie that is a native if convicted to be a
Priest, or to have taken orders beyond the seas, though he be but a mere
Deacon; whereby it is plain, that the exception against the Popes giving of a
Vicarius Apostolicus, might with more reason be made against his Holiness giving
Apostolical Superiors, and all Apostolical Missionaries whatsoever, because
the ancient laws of Richard the 2d. unrepealed are against these for as much
as they are sent without the kings leave: and the modern laws of Queen
Elizabeth are more severe against them in as much as they are Priests, and have
taken orders beyond the seas.

Page 38. We omit for the present to lay open at large his other manifold
wranglings, calumnies, and passionate carriages against Dr. Champney, Mr.
Hammond, Mr. Harrington, Mr. Southcot, Mr. Herbert, Mr. Gage, Mr. Peterson, Dr.
Holden, Mr. Clifford, Mr. Carre, Mr. Fitton, Mr. Manly, Dr. Blundeston, Mr.
Green.

Here Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. according to their wonted manner cast
aspersions upon me without proof, which proves themselves to be slanderers,
for as I have said before, Accusatio, quae caret probatione, calumnia est. But
unto cleareing my innocence more particularly, I profess sincerely, that as to
Dr. Champny, I ever had a great kindness for him, and a little while before my
departure out of England (in the year of Edg-Hill Battle) I procured for him
two pensions from two Rt. Hon. Ladies, one allowed him 10. l. star. per. an.
and the other 50. sh. or 3. l. per an. Besides I had done sundry other
ciuilities, and never had contest with him. Secondly as to Mr. Hammond the
aspersion is so false, that as God best knows I never gave him angry word in
all my life. Thirdly as to Mr. Harrington, he and Dr. Holden, were Mr. Blacloes
Cheifest Proselites, which was an occasion of a cold correspondence between
them, and me: but before Mr. Harrington espoused Mr. Blacloes pernicious
Doctrines, I had procured for him 300. l. star. who before was not worth 300.
groates. Fourthly, as to Mr. Herbert, I was his greatest Benefact our, and
extremely loved him upon the scoare of that friendship, which we had
contracted in our Mother-House yet told him sundry times between him, and me
that his adhering to Mr. Blacloe would be the ruin of our Clergy. And dying he
left me a legacy, and his old Mother an other. Fifthly, as to Mr. Southcot, I
had alwais a great reverence toward him as the most principal member of our
body, and if the supreme providence had preserved but his life, the scandals
which are fallen upon our Clergy had been prevented, for he was a person of great
authority with all sort of Catholics, and to my knowledge had a great dislike
of Mr. Blacloe, ever after he refused to recall the approbation before
mentioned: Sixthly as to Mr. Gage, and, Mr. Curtis to them were committed the
fruits of Mr. Southcot's and my labors, to be managed for the good of our
body; I never wronged either of them in all my life to my knowledge; I have
reprehended Mr. Gage sundry times, and gave him good Counsel, which if he had
embraced, he might have departed out of this world more with his honor then he
did. Seauenthly as to Mr. Clifford he is a person of great worth, honor, and
virtue, I appeal to him self, being he is alive, whether ever in my life I
have calumniated him, or cast upon him any one affront as Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis
etc. assert in this charge. The others before mentioned are dead save Mr.
Peterson, and therefore I cannot appeal to them, and if Mr. Peterson, alias
Mr. Curtis I have calumniated, let him prove the calumny, and I will ask him
forgiveness and make reparation to my power, in the mean time Conscientia mea
non me accusat: eighthly as to Mr. Manly who is alive I sent him a young youth
to our College at lisboa for a small sum at his Aunts Charnock's entreaty, and
I never wronged him more then speaking my mind plainly unto him, in order to
his countenancing of Mr. Blacloes pernicious learning. Ninthly as to Dr.
Blundeston, Requiescat in Pace; I never heard that he is his life time
complaind of my wronging of him: It Is true I have endeavored to draw him from
Mr. Blacloes ways of Doctrine. Tenthly as to Mr. Green he has a great kindness
for me, and this Mother-House, for which he has done more ciuilities then Dr.
Ellis, and all the other eight that call themselves unadvisedly the Church of
the English Clergy. Besides Mr. Green is my Benefactour, I have received sundry
considerable presents from him, and in his last Letter writ about 20. days
ago he signifyes that he has sent me a new present, which give evidence
enough to prove Dr. Ellis etc. their accusation to be mere calumny to render me
odious to all my Brethren. Iussisti Domine and sic est, vt paena sua sibi sit
omnis inordinatus animus.

Page 38. Nor do we at present much insist upon his (D. Leyb.) misgouernement
in the College --

We only hint the unfitness of some he has sent hither not long ago as
Missionaries; As (to omit many others) of one who in another Seminary was
denied presentation to Orders, because of his unsettled brain, and (as we are
informed) wished the next day his throat had been cut when he took Orders. Of
another, a person in a manner phreneticall, who within six or seven months at
most, was a married man, a VViddovver, a Priest and Missionary. The third, of
a vvild mad nature, for open Sedition in the house and public soliciting all
the scholars to the VVarres, was expelled the College by him; to whom yet,
after his expulsion, he sent faculties to come hither as Missionary. He has
now been half a year in England, yet never officiates not performs any duty
belonging to a Priest. We only hint these fevv of many at present; hoping
that the horror and shame expressed by all who hear of it, and reflect how
sacred the function of a Priest and Apostle is, will make him more circumspect
for the future; and that these are enough to lee our Brethren see how
necessary it is to have a Dean and Chapter, to examine who are fit, who not,
ere they admit them.

In this charge Dr. Ellis etc. to prove my misgouernment, instance in three
Missioners which not long ago I have sent into England. As to the first I
answer', if he had an unsettled brain, it was more then I knew when I presented
him to orders: I was only entreated by a worthy friend to make him Priest,
that he might be sent to Nostre Dame des Virtues, and as God best know's I was
not acquainted till after he had received orders, that he had weakened his brain
by studying too hard, or through scruples, when he lived in the College of
Rome: howeuer I gave him entertainment Gratis for about one year, and a half,
before he was presented to holy orders, during which time he performed the
exercises of our House very handsomely at which my self was present; and truly
he was esteemed a pious, and virtuous person, and although in regard of the
weakness of his head he wanted strengh to perform the many, and long exercises,
which were exacted of such, as the House of Nostre Dame of virtue admitted, and
therefore was returned unto me again, neuertheless he brought a Testimony of his
pious comportement, in so much that I employed him in teaching of Grammar, and
figures, for he was a Humanist sufficient enough, desirous to have more trial
of him before he should be sent into the mission; and truly when I was last in
England, I made diligent enquiry, as to his comportements, and I could hear
nothing reported amiss; and whereas Dr. Ellis etc. publish in print that he
wishd his throat had been cut when he took orders, it is not the part of either
Priest, or Christian to take away the good name of his Brother upon a mere As
we are informed: besides the information (which they do not produce neither) is
certainly false, as all this family belieues, having heard nothing at any time
coming from the said Brother that carried the least sound that way.
Tolerabiliores sunt fures, qui vestes, and alia bona nostra diripiunt, quam
fures qui famam nostram lacerant. S. Ambros. and indeed a man's good name is
prized above great riches. Pro. 22.

As to the second Missionary Dr. Ellis etc. style him in a manner phreneticall;
although they would not take it well, if any should call them phanatick, for as
much as they having their itching Ears, do after their own lusts adhere to a
master of new notions, which is to be phanaticks indeed, and the said
Missionary is in a manner phreneticall only as they say. It does not beseem
persons of their call, to sharpen their slandering tongues against a Brother,
that deserves great ciuilities from them for many respects: 1o. he is descended
of a noble Catholic family. Secondly he is a Priest, that is, Christ minister.
Thirdly he is a Dr. of Physic, and the scripture bid's us to do honor unto
Physicians. Eccles. 38.

Whereas Dr. Ellis etc* assert that the said Brother was within six or seven
Months at most, a married man, widdower, Priest, and Missionary. They
unadvisedly add the particles, At most. For if they will make a true
computation of the time from his wifes death, until his going into England,
they shall find the space of a whole year at least. But this matters not much,
since he was legally ordaind; and about the same time our Organist's Father
was a married man, widdower, and Priest within ten Months space. Again I did
not present the said party with design to engage him in the mission, nor
licenced him to go into his Country for longer time then might be requisite
unto dispatching his affairs, which he had left imperfect. Besides in receiving
of Orders his sole design was to avoid the tentations of the world,
contenting him self with the small Rents his elder Brother had left him in
these Countries, and settled on our Mother-House in case he should have no
issue. But the true reason wherefore Dr. Ellis etc. style him phreneticall, is
because he has signd to a disclaim from Mr. Blacloes pernicious Doctrines, and
indeed some of that pack, as it is signified to me, called that virtuous and
learned man Father Angelo Provincial of the Recollects Madman, because he had
published a command to all his Order unto the detesting of Mr. Blacloes
learning, and all the Religious orders of our Country were resolved to do the
like.

As to the third Missionary Dr. Ellis etc. call him A man of wild mad nature,
and say, that he was expelled by me for open sedition. I answer that his fault
was not of so great malice, as to deserve the brand of open sedition; being
only a scandalous disorder committed our of frailty, which was not so deadly
neither, but that I intended to pardon, and had pardoned him after a fatherly
chiding, wherein my zeal told him, that I would turn him out of the House,
to which he replied, that I durst not, which answer truly moved me to use
severity above my natural inclination, least it might appear, that I had
vnpresidented my self by yielding to a subjects menacing of me: howeuer I did
not expel him the College, but dismissed him only without faculties, and
afterward at the entreaty of all the family in a manner (which did not count
him A man of a vvild mad nature) and especially at the intercession of a Rt.
Hon. person his friend, and in regard of his own submission, I gave him
faculties; knowing well that he had good abilities. If every dismission taken
in the proper sense might be called on expulsion, Mr. John Singletons departure
from this House might be termed an expulsion, for his unquiet Spirit, which
before had rebelled against my Predecessor, Blessed Mr. Musket, constrained me
to dismis him, though I dealt more nobly with him, then he has dealt gratefully
with his old Mother. Again upon the same score Mr. Holland the now Secretary of
the Chapter his departure from the College of Lisboa might be called
expulsion, for Mr. Bradford (Gods peace be with him) and others of the said
College now alive, which I charitably entertained, told me that his President
not liking his proceedings sent him into England.

But now to come more close to Dr. Ellis in order to the charge set down
against me, I am able to object more clearly his misgouernement during his
Presidentship over Lisboa College. 10. he made Mr. Bradford Deacon, though he
told him he did did not think that he was come to years required by the
Churches Canons for the receiving of that order, and indeed he wanted a
competent age, as him self has said, and there are now some in this College
that can witness as much. Besides he dispatched him away, whence he came to this
Mother-House with intent to receive the order of Priesthood, and to complete
his studies, and I received him into our family, where he continued above 3.
years extremely grateful to me, and civil to every one, and truly he was a
young man of a singular good nature.

Secondly Dr. Ellis made one Mr. Williams Priest in his Logic, and before he
heard either Philosophy, or Divinity sent him into England, and him I received
into our House out of mere compassion, gratis: as likewise before 4. or 5.
others of the said College of Lisboa, only 50. l. star. being exacted for the
entertaining of them all, and Dr. Ellis was engaged to pay the said sum,
which notwithstanding he does not satisfy though he has been often urged to
perform his engagement, which he know's in his conscience to be a due debt.

Thirdly Dr. Ellis made Mr. Holland Priest soon after his being received into
the Church; and before he was grounded either in Scholasticall or Moral
Theology came Missionary into England, and for the great zeal he had shown at
Lisboa toward Mr. Blacloes new notions of Philosophy, and for his readiness in
writing of English (who had been scribe to the Bishop of Durham before) he (Mr.
Blacloe) cherished and employed, and finding him very nimble, wanton, and
active, as to maintaining, and spreading of his new Doctrines, preferred him to
be secretary of the Chapter, that so he alone might hold the pensill to
represent the scene of affairs to our Country Brethren as he should judge
expedient for the carrying on of Mr. Blacloes designs: and indeed all orders,
and intelligences both at home and abroad come from him. Never did our ancient
Clergy or any other commit so great an error, as to prefer a young raw
Neophite to such a Charge contrary to the express advise of the Apostle least
puffed up with pride, he fall into the judgment of the Devil. 1. Timo. 3. the
word Neophite, (which taken in the proper sense signifies such, as are newly
baptized) ancient Fathers extend to all such as be newly retired from profane
ways, (S. Hier. Ep. 83. ad Die. and Dialo. ad Lucif. C. 5.) of whom good
trial ought to be taken, before they ought to be preferred to Ecclesiastical
Charges; and either confirmed by miracle, which occasioned S. Ambrose
Ecclesiastical perferment; or by gallant writings against all profane
novelties, which caused S. Austin's preferment after his deliverance from the
Manichean Heresy; or by a virtuous and exemplar life together with competent
learning, which has exalted sundry of our Nation since the Change of Religion.
But Mr. Holland suddenly after he had abiur'd the errors in which he was bred,
embraced the profane novelties of Mr. Blacloe, whereby appears plainly, that
he has been preferred unadvisedly, and indeed, as to him the Apostles Prophetic
caution is come to pass. From the premises appears that Dr. Ellis saw a mothe
in his Brothers eye, not considering the beam that is in his own eye. Lu. 6.

Page 40. But by his (Dr. Leyb.) refusing to ioyn with us in obtaining one of
the six proposed for a Bishop, and by diverse other passages we omit, he makes
the common report, and opinion an evident truth, that he intends to make
himself our Superior. -- He intends to make himself Paramount, uncontrollable
etc.

As to my refusing to ioyn etc. perhaps Dr. Ellis etc. hint at Mr. Progers
denying to sign the Transactions of the meeting before mentioned, held 1657.
otherwise I know not what is meant hereby, for not any one of them ever
required my concurrence, as to the procuring of one or more Bishops; and
whereas Mr. Progers refused to subscribe unto the transactions of the said
meeting he had great reason to do so, since the said meeting did not proceed
according to the agreement expres'd in his Instructions; besides I gave Mr.
Progers an absolute order not to act any thing, as to that meeting, unless Mr.
Clifford were present at it, whose Counsel together with my Lord Abbot
Montague his instructions, I wishd him to observe punctually: wherefore Dr.
Ellis etc. after their wonted manner unadvisedly, have cast upon me this
particular aspersion: and whereas further they accuse me in the said charge, as
intending to make my self Superior, Paramount, Vncontrolaeble etc. they
manifest thereby an extreme perverseness in their violent ways. Because at my
last heing in London, I perceiving, that they were afraid, least I might come
to bear rule over them, I assured Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis, Mr. Manly, and others
of the Chapter, that I had no other ambition then to get them to disclaim from
Mr. Blacloes impious Doctrines, to the end our Clergy might recover the credit,
and honor which they had lost both at home, and abroad thereby, and withal
protested sincerely in the word of a Christian, and Priest, that upon this
condition of disclaiming, I would be bound to refuse whatsoever Superiority, or
Jurisdiction his Holiness might intend to confer on me in order to them Moreover
I offered with the same asseueration, that I would be obliged likewise, to
dispossess my self of my Presidentship to make room for some other deserving
member of our Clergy, that may have better abilities to bring greater
advantages to our Mother-House; and thus much I offer again (for the preserving
of our said Clergy's honor) on the condition aforementioned, and shall not
fail in the performance of my engagement, or otherwise let me fall in the
opinion of all our Brethren, and Lay-Catholicks of England. Moreover I will be
bound to leave our Mother-House in a better condition then ever it has been in
any time of my Predecessors. Thus much in Answer to the Encyclicall Epistle
(that came to my hands about a month ago) whereunto I was moved for sundry
pregnant reasons.

10. that I might heal my wounded Innocence with the evidence of truth. Qui
lapide feritur quaerit medicum: ictus autem calumniae grauius, quam lapides
feriunt. Est enim calumnia claua, and gladius, and iaculum incurabile, vt dixit
Solomon: sed his veritas mederi potest, qua ubi negligitur, vulnera accepta
acerbiora fiunt. S. Athanas. Apolog. ad Constant. Blows from slandering tongues
wound more grieousely, then stones, clubs, swords, or darts, and truth only
can cure the wounds which they inflict, in so much that truth being neglected,
the wounds grow wider.

Secondly that so I might lay open the crafty dealings, which Dr. Ellis etc.
have used to draw our Brethren unto an engagement with Mr. Blacloe and
themselves, which if espoused of necessity will bring utter ruin: his eminent
learning, and their supporting of it, tending that way.

Thirdly, for as much, as I was informd that Dr. Ellis etc. had not only
spread their Encyclicall Epistle amongst our Brethren, but even amongst
lay-Catholicks, and likewise sent it into France, and these Countries. From
Brussels a worthy person writes unto me thus. I am very sorry to see the
Clergy carried away with Mr. Blacloes unwholesome Doctrines to its great
dishonor, and that the Chapter-men in London are so factious, and disunited
from many others, as I perceive by their scandalous Epistle put out in order to
your self: This Letter I have communicated to our Seniors.

Furthly I was moved to put forth my Answer for two other reasons, which
especially prevailed with me. The one is, because I am President of the
Mother-House, so that the many great affronts, and foul aspersions which the
Encyclicall Epistle cast's upon me, of necessity must reflect, and redound upon
her at least in part; a wicked Husban is a disgrace to his wise though she be
good: and indeed my very soul would be swallowed up with grief to bear the
infamous brand to all posterity of being the first President of the said
Mother-House, that should carry the deadly guilt of ambition, faction,
sedition, and all mannet of Evils, which the Encyclicall Epistle accuses me of.

The other special reason is, because Dr. Ellis etc. in the Encyclicall
Epistle menace our Mother-House for as much as they do covertly stir up our
Brethren to deal with lay-Catholicks in manner before expres'd. Since they
conceive an impossibility of prevailing with her to deuiate from the ways of
her ancient Governors, and the general practice of Gods Church, they endeavor
craftily to make her Children dependent of them. Howeuer I doubt not, but that
the supreme providence will overthrow their inordinate design to her greater
honor and Luster; our English Catholics can never be carried away against
their own Spiritual Mother, I say their own Mother, for in Christ Jesus she
has begotten many of their Ancesters through the Gospel. This College that
was erected in Doway in the year 1568. (and consequently her year of lubily
is not far of to the comfort of all her good Children) has furnished the
Catholics of England with Priests and Pastors, which have ministered the
Sacraments, preached Christian Doctrine, and sacrificed their life's, unto
conseruing the true faith of Christ amongst them, even diverse years before any
other College or Monastery of English Missionaries was erected. So that this
Mother-House is not only a Seminary of Pastors, that has sent above a
Thousand Priests into England, but of Martyrs allo, for as much as about 140.
of her Children have shed their blood in the defense of Catholic Religion.
Besides this Mother-House has had to the number of about 40. Doctors of
Divinity as Dr. Allan the first President, afterward Cardinal, Stapleton,
Bristow Kellison, Stratford, and others, Quorum memoria in benedictione est,
which in regard of their famous writings, have brought many wandering sheep to
the fold of S. Peter. Wherefore this Mother-House being so supported with
Pastors Confessors, Martyrs and Doctors (confiding in the providence of God,
who promised protection to the City of Jerusalem for his servant David's sake
4. Reg.) shall I hope stand against all the Assaults of her Aduersaties.

Now, much honored Brethren, it is high time to end this unhappy conflict,
(wherein I had not engaged my self if it had not been to vindicate my dead
Lord our Spiritual Father, and Superior, my own, and our old Mothers honor
and innocence) only give me leave in her name, (whose speaker my office makes
me) to present unto you 4. special requests as true Testimonies of her
motherly affection, and piety.

First, that the prudent, and wise conduct which her old Children your elder
Brothers, and Predecessors have shown in the settling and governing of our
mission; may be unto you a guiding Card to steer your actions by. The learned
writings of her Doctors humbly and soberly delivered in full conformity to the
general practice of Gods Church, the extreme labors of her Pastors carefully
exercised, and valiantly endured unto converting of souls, and the bloody
sacrifices of her Martyrs piously, and clearefully offered in confirmation of
the truth has sown the seed, that has preserved, continued, and increased
Catholic Religion in our Country.

Secondly that our late blessed Bishop, Spiritual Father, and Superior his
constant peaching against profane novelties, may draw your hearts from being
carried away with every wind of Doctrine. As S. John the Evangelist
perpetually exhorted his Children unto reciprocal Charity commanding them to
love one another; so our most godly Bishop, constantly persuaded his Children
unto an abhorrence of singularity, and nouelty, telling them that these were
the marks of an Heretic. The reason that moved his Lordship to inculcate this
pastoral caution so often, was, because if Pastors entertain wicked
Doctrines, doubtless they will suffer them to take root in their Jurisdictions,
or districts in consequence of which, they shall bring many souls to
everlasting ruin.

Thirdly that you will take into your serious considerations the Religious Acts
of your two last Deans to wit, Mr. Fitton, and Dr. Daniell, both wise
experienced men, and great Lovers of Mr. Blacloe, who notwithstanding showed at
last their great dislike of his learning for Mr. Fitton upon his deaths-Bed
delivered up his books to the Inquisitor of Florence telling his Executours,
that they were already, or would be condemned: and Dr. Daniel soon after he was
elected Dean declared a necessity to disclaim from his learning, and without
doubt would have done so, if he had suruiu'd one half year longer; and indeed
he had joined with me in a Letter to our Brethren long before, that pressed them
to an unanimous disclaim both from Mr. Blacloe, and Dr. Holden's learning.

Lastly our old Mothers request is that you will be myndfull of the Counsel
which S. Gregory the great our Patron and Apostle of England often inculcated
to his flock, that is, Si obedientes fuerimus praepositis, Deus obediet
orationibus nostris. For as much as Joshua was obedient to God, God was
obedient to his prayer unto staying the sun in the mids of Heaven until the
people of Israel avenged themselves upon their enimyes: but S. Gregory means
not by the particles si obedientes fuerimus praepositis only the supreme
Superior, that is God alone, but all his vicegerents upon earth both
spiritual and civil, and our old Mothers request is that you give to all
Superiors their duty for there is no Superiority but of God, and whosoever
resists Superiority, resists the ordinance of God, and thereby shall
receive to himself damnation; wherefore you ought under pain of eternal
damnation to give to Caesar what is due to Caesar, and to the Bishop of Rome
what is due to him: these being Gods principal Vicegerents on earth and your
Chiefest Superiors; and Catholic Religion teaches that obedience of
necessity is due to each of them, to the one in order to spiritual, to the
other in order to civil Matters. He that takes from Caesar to give to the
Pope, and he that takes from the Pope to give to Caesar, they both are
abomination to God, whose will is that we give to all Superiors their duty.
Thus having presented our old Mothers Requests, I subscribe my self

Much honored Brethren Yr. most affectionat Brother in Christ Jesus. GEO.
LEYBVRN.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHEREAS I was informed, that Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. report that they have
writ sundry letters grieuousely accusing me unto the Nuncius Residing at Paris,
and the Internuncius residing at Brussels, as likewise to the Court of Rome,
whence rhey have received an Answer in these words: Ingratissimum fuisse suae
Sanctitati viri factum; and si Clerus ipsum Regis Ministris tanquam Pacis
perturbatorem tradidissent, tantum abfuturam Curiam Romanam ab ipsius
protectione, vt vltro supplicium ipsius fuisset promotura. Where is obseruable
first, that having received the forsaid information, I writ unto the
Internuncius residing at Brussels, to whose Jurisdiction I am subject, humbly
beseeching his Lordship to acquainte me in particular with the aspersions my
Adversaries had cast upon me, whereby his Lordship (imagining that I had
suspected him, by his not acquainting me with what had been writ unto him, in
order to accusing of me) answered me in these words.

Admodum Reverend Domine, Pro singulari quo D. V. prosequor studio moleste
tuli, quod ipsa iudicet me sinistrae vllius contra se impressionis capacem
esse. -- Igitur a D. V. peto vt similes suspiciones a se prorsus abijciat, nec
voeibus malignorum vllatenus moveatur, vtpote, que nequeunt offuscare plenam S.
Sedis Apostolicae de meritis and dotibus ipsius informationem. Quod addit de
exigentia alicuius Capitis pro Clero Anglicano, res pridem cordi est S. D.
nostro, nec quidquam negligitur, quod ad rens conducere possit: circumstantiae
tamen temporum successiue occurrentes suadent dilationem interponi, idque pro
meliori negotij exitu. Ipsi demum ad Ecclesiae Anglicane decus diuturnam
apprecor sospitatem. Bruxellis 5. Malj 1661.

Admodum R. D. V. Addictissimus and Officiosissimus Hierony. Abbas Montis
Regalis.


His letter alone is able to clear my innocence from the calumnies of my
Adversaries, since the Nuntius, to whom they had accused me, vindicates
clearly my integrity.

Secondly it is obseruable that Dr. Ellis, Mr. Curtis etc. Have accused me to
the Court of Rome of treason against our Soueraign Lord the King. For the words
of their letter so importe, as appears plainly by the sea Apostolick's
Answer, in Order to the fact committed; to wit, the said Answer is, that if the
Clergy had delivered me into the hands of his ma.ties Ministers as a disturber
of the peace the said Court would not only not have protected, but concurred
to the punishing of me: which indeed is an Answer worthy the sea Apostolic,
being most conform to the Tenets of Catholic Religion, which teaches, that as
Caesar's due ought not to be kept from him, so neither ought his tranquillity
and peace be disturbed, and both the ancient and modern Church has inacted
severe laws against all Disturbers of Caesar's quietness. And as to the aspersion
cast on me, if I might know, that I were accused to have acted any one thing
unto disturbing of my Caesar, it should be needless to deliver me up, for I
would present my self voluntarily to his ministers for the clearing of my
Innocence from such a deadly wickedness; and for taking away, so great a
scandal from my Religion.

In like manner Mr. Blacloe in his Fly flap accuses me of treason against the
King of Spain, saying that in the time of the wars I entertained a spy sent
from France to the ruin of Belgium, though I know him for such. This
accusation for as much as it dwell's upon general words, without producing of
particular proof's, carries the mark of a calumny. Howeuer I conceive what is
hint's at, to wit, my admitting of Dr. Talbot unto a night's lodging (who came
out of France in the time of wars between the Catholic and and most
Christian Kings, into Belgium, and profess ingeniously though he had the
protection of Count Salazar Governor of Cambray, and the Marquis of Tresegny,
Governor of Tournay, in whose House* after wards he resided, and the ciuility
of the (...) of this Town, I should not have lodged him (in re^^^^^ ^^ad
understood from his own Countrymen that he was ^^^e the Cardinal Mazarin
employed) if he had not had so near ^^^elation to that worthy Person Sr. Robert
Talbot, of whose ^^^ity toward my own King I had evidence enough, when I (...)
sent by our Queen into Ireland. But I profess as ingeniousely as before, that I
no more knew the said Dr. Talbot to be a spy, then Mr. Blacloe know's to
Sapere ad sobrietatem, and was so far from conspiring to the Prejudice of the
King of Spain, who according to his low condition gave our King entertainment
and protection, that I revealed my iealousies in Order to Dr. Talbot to all the
Seniors of the House telling them, that notwithstanding his protection from two
of the chief personages of these countries, I was afraid to lodge him, least
some suspicion of guilt might arise thereby to the disgrace of our
Mother-House; and I profess again that before I would lodge him, I consulted
the Chief Magistrate of our Town, named Monsieur Chantrain, of a noble Family*
and acquainted him, as I had done before the said Seniors of our House, and
himself will witness as much.

But I perceive by this aspersion cast upon me, how two or three of my Seniors
cast themselves into grace With our London Chapter; I will not name them. Again
I do believe that interest, not malice made them tell a story against me, which
Mr. Blacloe has Metamorphos'd into an untruth, thinking to ruin myself and
our old Mother thereby.

THE END.

