AN ANSWER TO A BOOK ENTITLED, Tractatus Theologico Politicus.

LONDON: Printed for Charles Brom, at the Gun, at the West End of St. Paul's.
1697.

To the Right Honorable, Charles Earl of Winchelsea, Viscount Maidstone, Baron
Fitz-Herbert of Eastwell, etc.
My Lord,
THIS Treatise being by me designed, for the Vindication of Revealed Religion,
against those Deistical and Skeptical Notions which are too frequent in this
Age, had there been no singular obligations to induce me, yet could I not have
found a more proper Patron than your Lordship; whom all must acknowledge to be
a Favourer and Protector of Religion, Virtue, and whatsoever is Praiseworthy
amongst men. I am very sensible, that my small Station in the Church, might
very well have excused me, from engaging in an argument which may justly
require a Person of more Dignity, Learning, and Leisure, but I am at the same
time very well satisfied, that your Lordship and all good men will not expect
much, where but little is given; and therefore in the same plainness and
sincerity wherein I at first wrote it, I presume to dedicate it to your
Lordship, as a small token, how much, I am,

Your Lordship's most Humble, and Obliged Servant, Matthias Earbery.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THough I am not of the Opinion, That whosoever writes a Book, ought to write a
Preface (for some are so good that they need none, and some so bad that they
don't deserve one) yet I think my self to lie under an obligation, to give the
World an Account of those Reasons, which induced me to Answer a Book, which if
it had its due deserts, ought to be confined to silence and darkness for ever.
1. I might here allege in the first Place, that the Tractatus
Theologico-Politicus, has not as yet the honor, to receive an entire
confutation, from any one Learned Hand, that I know in Europe. Bishop Boil in
his little Body of Divinity, and almost all our Moderns, who have wrote in
Vindication of the Scriptures, have taken notice of Diverse of its dangerous
positions, as they lie scattering up and down, in almost every page of it, from
whence I might have leave to conclude, that if those Learned men did think,
that it was necessary to Answer the chief Objections, against the Authority of
the Scriptures one by one; a Collective Answer to the whole Book, would be more
satisfactory to the world, and more beneficial to the public Good. And
therefore I was not induced to undertake this task, because I thought none
could do it better, but because none before me had began so useful a work. I
considered also in the second place, that most who have wrote upon this
Subject, have either done it in such a Philosophical manner, as is not easily
intelligible by the Vulgar, or have proceeded against him, and his Party, by
such Philological Arguments, as tho very Learned, yet at most are but
Conjectural, and therefore never can convince a stubborn Sceptist, tho they are
very pleasing to Ingenious Men. Now tho this way of Writing, is very taking,
whilst the Argument is only tossed too and fro amongst Learned Men, yet it is
not sufficient, when such Deistical Principles begin to be Popular, and seize
upon the minds of those, who though they want Reason, yet stand in need of no
Obstinacy to defend the same. And therefore since this Book has, as I am
informed, received lately some impressions in our own Language; I thought it
might not be amiss to administer the antidote, in the same vehicle, in which
the Party has presented the Poison; and waving all Conjectural Arguments that
are drawn from humane Authority, or whose force depends upon the knowledge of
Books, or are too remote from common Sense, to be understood by all Men; I have
laid down chiefly such Principles, as all may understand, and all who
understand them must needs admit to be true: And I hope that it will be
apparent from thence, That they who Renounce their Religion, into which they
are Baptized, must Renounce their Reason too, which they boast to be their only
guide. Nor am I ignorant, that the Author of this Book, was very well versed
(pardon so favorable an expression) in the Writings of Moses and the Prophets;
understood the Original Language, and had made a diligent search, to find all
weak places, wherein he might Assault and Ruin the impregnable Fortress of
Revealed Religion. Mr. Hobbs had another way of trifling with those Books of
Scripture, and wresting some particular places to his odd Opinions: But this
Author begins at the very Root and Foundation, by taking away all Divine
Authority, from Prophecy, Miracles, or Inspiration, and making all the sacred
Penmen, to be no other than either Madmen, or Impostors. Now tho such
sentiments, ought rather to be punished by the Judge, than refuted by the
Divine, yet since too much liberty has relaxed the Reins, both of Civil and
Ecclesiastic Power, it is necessary that such Weapons should be used, as are
therefore left us, because they could not easily be taken away. And I thought
it would be at least some punishment, as it were, to the very Sbades and Manes
of this Author, to show the world, that he, who so long has found a place in
the Libraries and Hands of very Learned Men, does scarce for his stupidity, and
trifling way of arguing, merit to obtain a place amongst the lowest forms of
inferior Animals: And I am sure if he could say nothing to the purpose against
Revealed Religion, his little Disciples of the Town, can say a great deal less.
But indeed the greatest motive of all, was the general disposition of men of
all Degrees and Capacities in this Age, to ridicule our Religion as much as
they can, nay, a great deal farther than their own Abilities will give them
leave. How will some Little People vent a Jest upon the Bible, or argue against
Moses, who never read a Chapter in it, with that Attention which is due to
those Sacred Writings; And never, even in their Younger Days, knew any thing
beyond a Play or a Romance. I will not say, That too much Liberty has given
Opportunity to Deism, to grow up with those other Weeds that infest this
Nation: Though if I should, it might be found to appear not very unlibely to
those who consider, that Mr. Hobbs's Leviathan, was brought forth in the like
times of Liberty, and that this Author pleads for nothing more than Liberty to
Exclude the Conscientious Fear of God out of the World: But certain it is, That
the General Corruption of Manners, Contempt of the Clergy, Bold Agitation of
the Socinian Controversy, amongst the Greatest Men of the same Church, do
render discourses of this Nature very necessary, to stop the Mouths of those
Mockers, whom St. Peter long since Prophesied should come in the last days,
saying, Where is the promise of his Coming?

For since the Fathers fell asleep, All things continue as they were, from the
beginning of the Creation. I will add but one word more, and that is, To
acquaint thee, that my design being only to Answer this Author, I have followed
him exactly ((...)) to the End of the 7th Chapter, and there left him, as being
weary of going further after a false light to no purpose. For having considered
all his Cavils, against the Prophets, Prophecy, Divine Law, Miracles, and
Interpretation of Scripture, I thought it altogether needless to proceed any
further.

And thus having given thee an Account of my design, I must leave the
performance to thy favorable censure, and wish thee a hearty Farewell.

AN ANSWER TO THE PREFACE OF Tractatus Theologico Politicus.
THere was not long since a young Gentleman, whose Name was Scepticus, who was
pleased to retire from the noise of the Town, into the more refreshing Solitude
of the healthful Country. He was of a fiery Genius, always eager after new
things, and most pleased with those Thoughts, which he thought were farthest
removed out of the Road of the Vulgar. He had began his Studies with a diligent
Perusal of the Classick Authors, from whom he received a deep impression of all
those Beauties, both of Thought and of Expression, which are so visibly Eminent
in those Ancient Writers; from thence he proceeded to the Perusal of the Moral
VVritings of the Ancient Philosophers, but presently taking a disgust at
Notions he thought too obvious and common, he flew from thence to the Atomical
Philosophy, as it stands revived by Des Carts, Gassendus and others. This
pleased him for a season extremely, because it gave no deference to Authority,
but let loose the mind of man, to enjoy its primitive liberty of Thinking, and
gave him vast Ideas of what mighty things might be done by mere Matter and
Motion. But coming abroad into the World, and finding that Religion was the
grand Theme of all Men's discourse, as well those who lived according to its
Rules, as those who did not, he resolved to apply his mind to search into its
abstrusest Mysteries. And it happening at that time the Socinian Controversy
was revived with a great deal of heat, he applied his mind very diligently to
read all the Socinian Authors. He was a long time much pleased with their
VVritings, because they seemed to Interpret Scripture with an air and freedom,
which he of all things most affected, and extoll*d Human Reason to such a
height, as was most agreeable to the Towering thoughts of his own Ambition. But
finding at last, that those VVriters had an excellent knack of making the
Scriptures speak whatsoever was agreeable to their own Sentiments; It bred in
him an Admiration of the Ingenuity of those VVriters, but a contempt of the
Scriptures themselves, which he easily perceived, had no command over these
Authors, whom he most admired. It was his misfortune at the same time to light
upon the Tractatus Theologico Politicus, of Spinosa. This turned him a perfect
Deist, he threw away his Bible, and set up this Book in the room of it. He now
thought himself to be set at liberty above the slavish condition of those, who
thought they were to be ruled by their Bibles; and so fond was he of this
Author, that every Summer, he carried him into the Fields with him in his
hands, and each Winter he wore him in his Muff. There lived in the
Neighborhood an Old Grave Divine, who, in compassion to his Youth, did often
pay this Young Man a Visit; and had often been laughed at by him in the Pulpit,
for his Zeal for Religion. He came to him one day in his Garden, as he was
reading in this Author, and seemed altogether ravished with the Entertainment;
and being well acquainted with him, was thus familiarly pleased to accost him.

Logic. Sir, you seem mightily pleased; Pray what Book is that you hug, with so
much Extacy and Rapture?

Scept. It is a Book so agreeable to my Reason, which ever since my Childhood,
struggled fot Freedom from Popular Errors, that I embrace it as my Deliverer
from the Darkness, under which I was bred, by ignorant Nurses, Tutors and
Masters; and as such I recommend it, to the perusal of all those, who rather
desire to be Men betimes, than live long, till they are overgrown Children,
with long Beards and shallow Brains, trembling at the Thoughts of Invisible
Powers.

Logic. I suppose then you are feeding upon a Limb of Hobbs's Leviathan, and
are just now returning Thanks (to the Lord knows what) for the plentiful
Collation.

Scept. Hobbs was indeed a very pretty Fellow, and not easily scared with
Religious Bugbears. But this Author deserves rather to be esteemed his Tutor
than his Scholar; He has such a Knack of Exposing all the Defects of those
Books you call the Scriptures, with that Strength of Reason, and Solidity of
Judgment, that apparently shows it to be the Work of the Incomparable Spinosa.

Logic. I suppose it is then his Tractatus Theologico Politicus. Pray what is
the Design of that Celebrated Book?

Scept. That is best known by the Preface, See the Pref. of this Author.
where he first shows, That if Men lived always in Prosperity, and by their own
good Conduct could become Masters of their most desired Events, they would
never be entangled with the vanity of Superstition. But when they are driven
into those Straits, from which they cannot expedite themselves, they are apt to
believe any thing; the Mind is tumbled up and down between Hope and Fear, and
not knowing where to rest on Earth, looks up for a support from Heaven;
Implores the Deity with Tears disgraceful to any Woman; runs after Augurs,
South-sayers, and Conjurers, and hunts for inspiration, in Fools and Madmen.
An example of which he gives us in Alexander, who had in any difficulty
recourse to his Prophers, as Servants of his Gods, but in prosperity forgot
both them and their Masters.

Logic. And what does he infer from hence?

Scept. That Men are prone to Superstition by Fear only, and not by any Innate
Sense of a Deity, as you Divines would make us believe.

Logic. But what if this Grand Supposition, That Men are only Superstitious in
Adversity, is altogether false, and to be refuted by Ten Thousand Instances,
both National and Personal, Ancient and Modern? The Jews were never more
superstitious, (if the Idolatrous Worship of the Sun, Moon and Stars, is
Superstition) than in their Highest Prosperity: For then they became ashamed as
it were of the Rites and Ceremony: taught by Moses, and grew ambitious of
rivalling their Neighboring Nations, in all the Gallantry and Pageantry of
their superstitious Worship. So that your admired Author, by poring upon
Quintus Curtius, for one single Instance, has quite forgot the numerous
Examples to the contrary, which he might have found in almost every Leaf of the
Bible, or Page of Livy's History.

Scept. Don't tell me of Jews; I believe we know little of them, but what some
Modern Impostors have conveyed to us; it is apparent to me, that all the rest
of Mankind, are driven to superstition by Fear only.

Logic. Not so neither. Pray what Nation showed less Fear, and more
Superstition than the Ancient Romans? And what Nation had ever more Victories,
and more Altars than that Famous Monarchy? Who were ever more punctual in
returning Thanks to their supposed Deities, than their Senate and Generals? And
yet I am inclined to think, that they did not much fear their Enemies, when
they returned Thanks to their Gods that they had beat 'em, and that it was
rather a sense of Gratitude than of Fear, which was the Mother of that Pompous
Devotion.

Scept. You talk of whole Nations by the Lump; can you give any Instance to the
contrary in a single Person?

Log. Yes, Sir, that I can, without tumbling over any large Volumes of History:
Nebuchadnezzar was a Fortunate Prince, and Great Conqueror; nor did I ever hear
that he was very much a Coward; and yet he kept (see Dan. 2. 2.) several
Nurseries of Magicians, Astrologers and Sorcerers, to interpret Dreams, predict
Futurities, and instruct his Court and People in the superstitious Customs of
that Age and Nation.

Scept. But tho he was secure for the present, yet perhaps his fear of future
Evils inclined him to so much Superstition.

Log. What then do you think of his Gratitude to Heaven, when he was returned
to his Reason and his Throne (Dan. 4. 27.) and no Passion but Joy could find
room in his Breast, was that also the Effect of Fear?

Scept. I am not in love with Scripture-Examples: Let us have One out of some
honest Pagan Author.

Log. Then your own admired Curtius, shall be my next Witness, even in that
very Alexander, whom with equal front and ignorance, cites to the contrary; for
no man was ever more superstitious than that Grecian Conqueror, when he was in
the midst of all his Triumphs, and as far from Fear as from Adversity; it was
then that he fancied himself to be the Son of Jupiter, an Enthusiasm not easy
to be paralleled, and impossible to be exceeded by any) and the joy of this,
joined with his other good fortune, so far transported him, that it quite
excluded all that superstitious Fear, which his Southsayers endeavored to
raise, by forbidding his entrance into the fatal City of Babylon.

Scept. Alexander, tho a Great Man, yet was but One Man: You cannot deny, that
Fear, by its natural Energy, is the only cause of Superstition, nor can you
assign any other.

Log. Yes, Hope and Love are as certain Motives to what you call Superstition,
as Fear or Sorrow. For have not Men Worshipped a Wrong Deity, or the True God
the Wrong Way, (which is the Whole of Superstition) out of hopes of being made
more Happy? Else how came the most Ancient Pagans to Deify the most benign of
their Friends and Benefactors?

Scept. I hope you will at least grant, that Superstition arises from the
Passions of Mankind, as may sufficiently be seen by its mutable Nature, and not
from any Idea of a God, that is obvious to the Reason of all Men.

Log. All Religion (which your A -- calls Superstition) does not take its
Original from the Passions, but from the Reason of Mankind. No man that is not
perfectly mad, would Love, or Fear, or Worship a God, or any Invisible Power,
unless he was first fully persuaded of the real Existence of such a Being or
Beings, that can hurt, or else relieve him: For the Passions, tho never so
violent, could never hurry on a Man to Worship a What he thought to be a
Non-ens, that had no Existence but in his own Fancy. And this is the Reason,
Why Beasts, that are capable of Hope, and Fear, and Love, (or at least
something very like those Passions) are yet strangers to all manner of
Religion, viz. because they have no praevious Notion of a Deity, to stir up
those Passions in them: Otherwise an Hare, that flies from all things, would be
as superstitious as the Alexander the Great, who made all to fly before him.

Scept. My Notion is, That it is the Fear of Mankind, vvorking violently upon
the Understanding, that created all Notion of Invisible Powers.

Log. And my Notion is, That it is the Reason of Mankind, that could not solve
the Creation of the World, and the Original of Man, but by having Recourse to
some First Cause, which ^xcited the Passions of Man to adore their C^^^tor,
and those other Invisible Powers, which they presumed did govern the World
under him.

Scept. I do not speak of Natural, but that which you Divines do call Revealed
Religion. This is that Grand Cheat that the Priests in all Ages have dressed up
in Various Habits to please the Vulgar, who are always of a mutable Temper, and
to keep them in subjection to those Monarchs who want a Bridle to restrain
unruly Subjects. But nothing is more fatal to a Commonwealth than too much of
what you call Revealed Religion, which is the Mother of Seditions and Tumults,
and a great Enemy to a free Trade. And truly, this (I hope I speak to a Friend)
makes me very much wish we could see a Commonwealth in England, that we might
enjoy the liberty of thinking and speaking of Religion as we pleased, which now
is too much restrained. And my Author tells you, That the Grand Design of his
Book was to plead for such a liberty.

Log. I can see no Reason, why Religion should not be as necessary to support a
Commonwealth as a Monarchy: For do not Commonwealths call in the help of Oaths,
to bind their Subjects to Allegiance, as well as Monarchs? And may not
Divisions about Religion, that cause Seditions, as well arise where this
Liberty is, as where there is none? For suppose One Numerous Party, not
contented with Liberty, will aim at Dominion over the other, may not Civil Wars
on this account as well rise up in a Commonwealth as in a Monarchy? In all the
Species of Government, there is some Supreme Power, either in One, or in a few,
or in a great many, which (as the Apostle teaches) ought not to be resisted,
not only for Wrath; but Conscience Sake: And if you take away Conscience from
the Subject, and leave nothing but Wrath to restrain his Rebellion, there will
be no One Form of Government in the World, that can be much more secure than
another, from private Plots and Contrivances of revolting Subjects. Besides,
your Author seems to me to be very ignorant in History, when he would confine
Religion to Monarchy, as Storks are said by Nature to be confined to a
Commonwealth. For never did Superstition flourish more than in the City of Rome
and others, whilst they were under a Republican Government; which gave occasion
to S. Paul's Reproof to the Athenians; I perceive that in all things you are too
superstitious. And yet the Subjects of both, were as glorious for Arms and
Learning, as any of our Modern Republics. I must confess, as for what you say,
that Religion is an Enemy to Free Trade, is partly true, because it takes away
from Trade, the freedom of lying, and cheating, and defrauding, which some
perhaps think essential to it: But if you Gentlemen desire a Commonwealth, that
you may barter away our Religion for a Free Trade, I say, pray God bless the
Monarchy of England.

Scep. Prithee don't think we desire to take away your Religion: Your Reason
ought to be your Only Religion, and that I am sure no man desires to take from
you. My Author's Design is only to take off those Prejudices which the Vulgar
entertain of the Scriptures, who despise Reason, and think that the Scriptures
are the Only Oracles of Truth -- In order to this my Author promises to
demonstrate, That Prophecy, or Revelation, is nothing else but strength of
Fancy. That the Ancient Prophets were only Men of a strong Imagination, and of
a weak Reason. That the Divine Law is nothing else but fatal Necessity. That
Miracles are only those Works of Nature of whose Cause we are ignorant. That
the true way of interpreting those Books you call Scriptures, does show that
they are of Humane Invention, and that every individual man has a Right and
Authority to interpret Scripture as he pleases. And that --

Log. No farther, I beseech you; this is Task enough for one time. Let us
therefore leave his Preface, and proceed to the Book it self, that we may see,

Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu. Scep. With all my heart: And
first let us begin with his Definition of Prophecy, and so orderly examine the
strength of all his Invincible Arguments.

Log. I am content; and also further promise, That if he brings any Objections
against Revealed Religion, which I cannot answer; I will then become of his
Opinion, and subscribe to whatsoever you will have me.

Scep. It is as fair as I can wish it to be -- Thus therefore he begins:

Explicit Praefatio, and incipit hoc loco primum.
DE PROPHETIA.
A. PRophecy, or Revelation, is the certain Knowledge of something (or Things)
revealed unto Men by God: How do you like this Definition?

The. Very well, provided the Author thinks as he speaks; and does not impose
upon us (as his Custom is) by ambiguous Terms.

A. Well then: Mind the Consequence: All Natural Knowledge may properly be
called Prophecy; for those things which we know by Natural Light, depend upon
the sole knowledge of God, and his Eternal Decrees: But our Mob-Divines, that
stand gazing with their Mouths open to Heaven, to catch Wonders, exclude
Natural Reason from Prophecy; as if the one descended from Heaven, and the
other sprang from Earth only: And yet humane reason is Divine, in as much as
the very faculties were by God Created; and it is only excelled by Prophecy in
two things; First, that Prophecy extends its bounds further: And Secondly, it
cannot be caused by the Laws of Nature.

The. And Pray Sir, what Charms can you see in such a Jargon of Discourse, as
should draw your minds away one step from revealed Religion? For here is a very
absurd confusion of Natural Knowledge, and that which proceeds from Divine
Revelation. No Man that apprehends the necessary Connection of two Terms, was
ever yet called a Prophet, by any but this A. -- If Natural Knowledge might
properly be called Prophesy, then every Man that by his Natural Reason, could
comprehend all the necessary Properties of a Triangle, or the undoubted
certainty of Mathematical Axioms; or those self-evident Propositions, which are
known by a bare perception of the Terms, would be a Prophet; and so not only ()
all the Lord's People would be Prophets, but all the Devil's People too; for as
much as some Propositions, by the sole Light of Reason, are evident to all
Mankind.

A. You mistake my Author; for he tells you, page 2. That tho Natural Knowledge
is Divine, yet the Teachers of it cannot be called Prophets: Because whatever
they Teach, others (without the help of Faith or Credulity) may know as well as
themselves.

T. This only shows with how much Confidence and Stupidity your Infallible
Author contradicts himself; for p. 1. he asserts, Ex tradita definitione
sequitur cognitionem naturalem Prophetiam vocari posse -- What more evident,
than that he may be called a Prophet, who is endowed with natural Knowledge, if
natural Knowledge may be called Prophecy?

A. That is but a small mistake: His true meaning is, That Reason is not less
certain and Divine than Revelation its self.

T. Natural Things are called Divine upon a Threefold Account; as they are the
Workmanship of God; and in this sense all things that have a real Subsistence,
may be called Divine, as they are the Works of God: But the word (Divine) is
not frequently used in this signification, because it is too general, and
comprehends so much, that it determines too little. Or, 2. Things are more
frequently called Divine, that for their Excellence seem to have some
resemblance of the very Nature and Perfections of God: This Homer styles his
Hero, (...). and (...): and Grace is called (...), by the Apostle: And indeed
in this Sense, the rational Faculties of the Soul may not be improperly called
Divine, forasmuch as they were not only given us by God, but do still bear his
Image and Inscription upon them. But (3dly, and lastly), Those things are most
properly styled Divine, which are immediately produced by the Power of God, not
according to the regular Laws of Nature, but in a manner altogether superior to
them: And in this most proper signification, Creation, Prophecy and Miracles
are the Works of God, and bear all the Characters of Divinity upon them;
because the First Cause is only concerned in the Production of them, without
the Concurrent Efficacy of Inferior Agents. Hence it is that the Evangelist,
reckoning up the Genealogy of our Blessed Savior, names the other Patriarchs
as Sons of Men, because they came into the World, according to the usual manner
of Generation; But Adam he calls the Son of God; for tho his Body was out of
preceding matter, yet it was formed by the immediate Power of God, without
Observation of the regular Course of Nature. The very Magicians could say, when
they saw Lice miraculously produced by Aaron's Rod, That this was the very
Finger of God; because they knew it was not within the Bounds of the Power of
Nature, and that it could not be done by those Inferior Invisible Powers, which
they invoked. And the Prophets call their inspired Writings, The Word of the
Lord, because not deduced from the settled Course and Order of things, but
delivered to them immediately by God himself; in respect to which it is called
by St. Peter, the Sure Word of Prophecy.

A. What do you infer from hence?

T. That your Author trifles, when he equals Humane Reason to Divine
Inspiration, saying very boldly, That (Aequali jure, ac alia (cognitio)
quaecunque illa sit, divina vocari potest) when it is evident, That the one is
founded on the Natural Order of things, and therefore subject to those
Imperfections, which are common to all the Works of Nature: The other comes
immediately from God, and has no imperfection in it. Our Reason, tho first
given us by God, yet is corrupted by our selves: The Idolatry and Superstition
of the first Ages of the World, do abundantly show how much Natural Reason is
subject to be led aside into Error, by Sense, Passion, Interest and Example, in
the things that belong unto God: There is a Light of Nature, but it is no more
than a glimmering Light, which discovers some, but not all things, that are
necessary to be known, so clearly and distinctly as may make it completely
beneficial to Mankind. Besides, it is often darkened by Inadvertency, Lust, and
Male-Organization of the Body, and a thousand other Impediments: But Revelation
is such an impression upon the Mind of the Prophets, as gives a discovery of
something unknown before; for to reveal, is to detect something that before was
covered, and always creates a threefold certainty in all inspired Authors: 1.
It renders them sure that it is God who speaks to them; 2dly, That they rightly
apprehend what he means: 3dly, That whatever he reveals, is infallibly sure;
For that God will not deceive, is the very Basis of all Humane, and of all
Divine Knowledge. Your Author therefore very truly asserts, That Revelation
exceeds the Bounds of Humane Reason, because it extends it self to the hidden
things of God, viz. The Knowledge of a future Happiness, and the ways and means
by which we may gain the same; as also, because it cannot be caused by the
regular Order of Nature, but must proceed immediately from God; but then he
very absurdly endeavors to equal Humane Reason to it, when in the same breath
he confessed, that it is exceeded by Divine Revelation.

A. You talk of Certainty in Divine Revelation; but for my part, I have no
Idea, how a Mortal Man can be certain what or when God speaks to him.

T. Prophecy being ^ complex Idea, as signifying the discovery of something
made unto Man, by the immediate Power of God, we can have no distinct Knowledge
of its manner of producing Certainty in the Mind of Man, unless all the simple
Idea's, which compound the same, extend into our Understanding, by our Senses,
or were obvious to it by a simple intuition: But the Manner of God's speaking
to Man by Revelation, being altogether Supernatural, it cannot be completely
understood by those, who have had only Experience of the use of Natural
Faculties. Suppose a Man born into the World with a Sixth Sense, whereby he
could discern the Properties and Differences of External things, it would not
follow, that because other men had not a complete Idea, how he perceived the
differences of things, that therefore he had no perception at all. A man so
framed by God, might have clear and distinct perception, and yet not be able by
any force of Words, to make his Neighbors understand the manner of it. For the
Words that now are, do signify some Idea's which have already been common to
Mankind; but where the thing it self was always unknown, there Words, whose
signification extends no further than to things that are already known, can
never explain them to us. A man that never had the Experience of the
Illumination of a Prophetic Spirit, can no more have a complete Idea of what
it is, than a blind man can have of Colors; he may be taught by rote to give
definitions, but all the definitions that can be given, will never give him the
true Idea of Light or Color.

A. Then Prophetical Light is something, but you don't know what.

T. Yes, We know as much of the Nature of Divine Revelation, as is necessary
for us to know; and he that enquires after more, ought not to be gratified in
his needless curiosity. We know from the Nature of God, and the Constitutiou of
our own Souls, that it is not impossible for God to communicate his Will and
Pleasure to whomsoever he pleases; for it would be strange indeed, if God, who
made the Soul capable of understanding every thing else, should not be able to
make it capable of understanding himself, whenever he should vouchsase to speak
to it. For why should not Man be as capable of knowing when God speaks to him
in a supernatural way, as when his Neighbor speaks to him, according to the
usual course of Custom and Nature. All things are possible with God, that do
not imply a contradiction in the Terms, or are not directly repugnant to the
essential Purity of the Divine Nature; but it is no more a contradiction (tho
more unusual) for God to speak to Man, than it is for one Man to speak to
another; nor is it repugnant to the Divine Purity, to teach Man his Will, to
obey which is Man's utmost perfection. We also know, from as Authentic Records
of Antiquity, as any are now extant, That some Men, Eminent for Wisdom,
Learning and Virtue, have affirmed, That God has spoken to them; and we have
Reason enough to believe that they were certain of it, because they exposed
their Lives and Fortunes, and all that is dear to Flesh and Blood, in
compliance to the Doctrines they received from God: and that no room might be
left for doubt, the same God that thus spoke to them, gave them power to do
such things, as quite surpassed the power of Nature, and to foretell such
Events, as were not possible to be guessed at by any humane Understanding. If
therefore we, who by Faith believe the Doctrines taught by these inspired
Authors, are deceived, we are deceived by God himself, who alone could give
such Gifts of Prophecy and Miracles to the Sons of Men: And if our Faith is
deceived by God, we know not but that our Reason is deceived too: For if God
can deceive in one, why may we not think he may do it in the other? And then
our A -- is so far from being certain to get the Victory, by such Disputes,
over Revealed Religion, that he cannot be certain that he disputes at all.

A. What Mathematical Certainty have you, that the Records of these men's
Prophesies are true?

T. Matters of Fact are never the less true, for not being capable of
Mathematical Demonstration. It is as true, that Julius Caesar came into
England, as it is that the whole is equal to all its parts, tho the Truth of
his coming hither, cannot be demonstrated by any Problem in Euclid.

A. I have heard, with great patience, your long discourse of God's speaking
unto Men, and the wonderful and unintelligible Certainty from thence arising.
But what (as our Author tells you) if this Notion of God's speaking unto Men,
prove a mere Fancy, proceeding from a mistaken Hebraism; I hope you will be
judged by the Scriptures themselves.

T. Yes, upon these Conditions: 1. That the Authority of Scriptures may be as
well urged for as against themselves. 2. That every difficulty in those Sacred
Writings, shall not presently be judged a Falsehood, till there be some further
demonstration of its absurdity. 3. That you allow the same liberty of deducing
Consequences from Texts of Scripture, a^ you take to your selves. 4. Then that
due regard be had to the Writings of the New, as well as of the Old.

A. With all my heart. 1st. Then God revealed the Law to Moses by a true Voice,
as we are told, Exodus 25. 22. but this was the only true Voice from God that
ever was heard. The words of the Decalogue, according to some Men, were not
spoken; they only heard a confused Noise, and so perceived the Law as then
written in their Hearts; tho, in truth, those Notions of Good and Evil were
engrafted there long before. Nay, it is evident, that what you call Revelation,
was only the Appearance of some Images to the sight, or Phantacy of the
Prophet. See Chron. 22. how God showed David his Anger, by an Angel holding a
Sword in his hand; and the same happened to Balaam. By Images not real, but
depending upon the Phantacy of the Prophet, God revealed to Joseph, that he
should have the Dominion over all his Brethren. Observe Numb. 12. 6, 7. and you
will see what slight assurance was given to the other Prophets -- If there be a
Prophet amongst you, I the Lord will make my self known unto him in a Vision,
and will speak unto him in a Dream.

T. Confident Assertions, without Equivalent Strength of Reason, impose upon
none but those that are willing to be cheated. It is spoken without Authority
of Scripture, that God pronounced the Law only with a true and real Voice; All
that we can learn from Exodus 25. 22. is, That God promised to be ready to
communicate his Will to Moses, from above the Mercy-seat, and from between the
two Cherubims: But that place of Scripture does not explain the manner of that
Communication, so as to determine it to a real Voice; much less does it exclude
all former Revelations from that privilege. Nay, nothing is more evident, than
that other Revelations were made by a real Voice, before the delivery of the
Law of Moses. Immediately after the Fall (Genesis 9. 10.) we read, that God called
unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou? And he said, I heard thy Voice in
the Garden, and I was afraid. Or if our bold Author will turn this into Figure
(as indeed he ventures to turn so whatsoever he pleases) yet in the 18th of
Genesis, we read of a Revelation made by a real Voice, or there is no
description of a real Voice in rerum natur^^; For the three Angels that
appeared as Men to Abraham, and eat as Men, without doubt spoke as Men, when
the promise was made to Abraham, that Sarah should bring forth a Son. When God
was about to destroy the Old World, Genesis 6. he foretold that dismal Execution
of Vengeance to his Servant Noah; and if you will stick to the Words of the
Scripture, according to our first agreement, gave him a punctual description of
the Ark he should make, and the Persons and Living Creatures, that should enter
into it, which it is hard to imagine could be done without a real Voice; Or at
least, it is as rational to suppose one here, as in the place cited out of Genesis
25. 22. But your Author is still more Quod Revelatioper solas imagines
continget patet ex primo paralip. Chapter 22. v. p. 5. v. p. 3.
impudent or unwary, when he tells us it is evident from Chron. 22. that
Revelation is sometimes made by Images only, and that none are capable of
receiving the revealed Will of God, but only by the help of Imagination; and
that the Words or Figures were sometimes real, that is, existing without the
mind of the Prophet; and sometimes imaginary, that is, framed by the mind of
the Prophet himself. From whence he infers, That the Certainty of Prophecy is
not Mathematical, but only Moral; or rather, according to those Principles,
nothing but a Fanciful Whimsey, that may as well be false or true. Now by this
Author's leave, no such conclusion; nor indeed can any conclusion at all be
drawn from the Mediums of Divine Revelation, that concern the Certainty or
Fallibility of it: For all the Mediums of Revelation being supernatural, we may
call 'em by what Names we please; yet still we must borrow those Names from
some Natural Things, because of those only we have complete Idea's. He that is
a Prophet, must be certain it is God who speaks to him, but the bare hearing of
a Voice, or the seeing of an Image, will not create this Certainty, according
to the Laws of Nature: For Voices and Words may be framed by other invisible
Powers; and therefore we are not so foolish as to conclude that Moses was a
Prophet of God, because he heard a Voice, or saw a Figure, but because he was
enabled to show forth sensible Demonstrations, that the power of God was with
him. But tho we do not conclude the certainty of Revelation from the Mediums of
Revelation, so is it the greatest madness in the World, to infer from thence
the Uncertainty of it: For we who have not seen those Figures, nor heard those
Words, nor felt those Divine Impressions, can frame no complete Idea's of them.
And your bold Author draws Conclusions from such Premises, which it is plain he
could never understand, unless he can pretend that himself has been inspired.
Supposing it therefore true, that Preter haec nulla alia singenda, etc. p. 7.
the Scripture made mention of no other Mediums of Revelation than Signs, or
Figures, and Words, yet cannot he from thence infer any Necessity of the
Uncertainty of Divine Revelation, unless he could give us complete Idea's of
what manner of Impressions those Words, or Signs, made upon the Minds of the
Prophets; Which is a matter impossible for him to teach, or us to learn. One
Man can inform another of his Mind, by Words and Figures, and why must God be
excluded from that power which he gives his Creature? But after all, it is not
true, that Words and Figures are the only Mediums of Divine Revelation, which
the Scriptures mention. There is a Communication of the Spirit of God,
immediately infusing Knowledge into the Mind, without any Organs of Speech, or
Corporeal Representations; which yet is as infallible as the other. Joh. 16.
17. Our Savior promises his Disciples, That the Spirit of Truth should lead
them into all Truth: And this Communication of the Spirit we call Inspiration,
using a Metaphorical Word to express a Notion, which we cannot possibly receive
from the bare knowledge of Nature. And tho this Spirit appeared to the
Apostles, (Acts 2.) in the shape of Cloven Tongues, yet we read it bestowed
upon them, and upon others in the Primitive Times, the Gift of Drivers
Languages, before utterly unknown unto them, by a secret and invisible
Operation. If therefore the Spirit of God can reveal to the Mind of Man,
without the help of those Mediums, the signification of Words; why may it not
also, after the same, or any other manner, communicate the certain knowledge of
Things, which is all we contend for.

A. I wonder you will mention the Spirit of God, which our Author shows, is a
Word of Various, and consequently dubious signification. The Scripture Phrase,
That the Spirit of God is in the Prophets; That Men are filled with the Spirit
of God; and the like, does signify no more, than that the Prophets were good
Men, and that they perceived the Will of God, as all Men (tho perhaps in a less
degree, must needs do by the Light of Nature.) But all this is but the
Imagination of the Prophet, considered with relation to the Apprehensions of
the Vulgar: And pray, Sir, what certainty is there in bare Imagination?

T. If by Imagination you understand the Power of the Mind, to receive, retain,
or frame the Images of External Objects, it may be considered with relation to
things present, past, or to come. External Objects, when present, impress such
Vivid Images upon the Brain, as will not suffer the Mind to doubt of their real
Existence. The same Certainty (tho something short of Infallibility,) is left
upon the Mind, by Objects represented to the Senses, when the Objects
themselves are past and gone. He that sees an Horse or Elephant present, by the
Images impressed on the Brain, knows that they are present, and by reflecting
on the same Images the next day, he knows that they were present: And thus far
Imagination is a certain Repository of Knowledge; though not altogether
infallible, because through defect of the Organs, (as in Mad Men) the Images
framed by the Mind it self, are apprehended as existing without it; but those
who are in their Wits, are never imposed upon by their Imaginations after that
manner, as to think they hear Voices, when they hear none; or see Images of
things, that are not near them. Men thus deluded by Imagination, always show
signs of the Distemper, in inconsistency of Thought, and wild Rovings of
Expression, which I defy any man to observe in the Writings of Moses and the
Prophets, tho some things therein are hard to be understood, and may seem
uncouth to us, by reason of long distance of Times, Ignorance of the Customs,
Histories and Language of those Times, and many other Reasons, which I forbear
to mention, as obvious enough without it. In short, either God did send
Messages to his Servants the Prophets, by the visible appearance of Angels, and
spoke to them in Voices, or their Imaginations framed all these Appearances to
it self, from the shattered Images of other External Objects. If the first of
these is true, your Author very impertinently concludes the Uncertainty of
Prophecy from the Uncertainty of Imagination; for that Faculty does faithfully
enough receive and preserve the Images of things really presented to it; and
herein the Certainty of Imagination differs not from the Certainty of our
Senses. If he means the latter, the Prophets then were no better than Pious Mad
Men, and all the Sacred Writings are mere Fictions of the Mind, which owe all
the little Truth that is in them, to mere Chance, which I perceive, however
disguised, is the genuine meaning of your admired Author. But if Moses and the
other Prophets, were distempered by a less Imagination, how comes it to pass,
that they are all so constant in the Doctrine of Piety? For I am sure our
Modern Mad Men (who are never consistent with themselves, or one another,) are
very much different from his description of the Ancients: Or how come their
Predictions to be verified by the Event? Or how come the whole Nation of the
Jews to be such Fools as to follow Mad Men? Or how did such a Mad Man as Moses,
attain the power of working Miracles, and of leading the Children of Israel
through the Wilderness, and governing them with Prudence and Moderation? But if
God himself made these Revelations to them, it is nonsense to infer any
uncertainty for the Mediums God uses for the Work; For it is in his Power to
create Certainty of Divine Revelation, without the help of Mediums, as in the
case of Inspiration, or by whatsoever means he pleases, as those of Words of
Figures.

A. You know very well, that the Mind can compound various Images, and thence
conclude more Propositions than can be known by deductions from the sole Light
of Reason; and thence it is the Prophets teach more of Religion than can be
known by Nature only.

T. The true Reason is this: God knows more than Man, what is necessary to make
him happy; and therefore those who are taught by God, can declare more
concerning the means of Salvation, than those who are guided by the sole Light
of Nature.

A. Well, still I have some Reason to think, that Prophecy was the pure Work of
the Imagination. 1. The Prophets perceived and uttered all things by Parables
and Riddles, expressing Spiritual things after a Corporal manner. 2. It was, as
Imagination always is, very inconstant, not adhering to the Prophet, but coming
by fits and starts, according to the unsteddy leaps of Fancy.

T. But I have better Reasons to persuade me, that your Author is in a most
egregious error for futurities; i. e. things which neither are, nor have been,
cannot make impression upon the Fancy, according to the Laws of Nature, which
may produce any tolerable degree of Certainty; and therefore when Futurities
are foretold, which depend not upon any necessary connection of natural causes,
it must be asserted by the supernatural Power of God. The Mind may indeed be
imposed upon by help of the Imagination, several ways, in respect to things to
come; as when from the remembrance of what is past, it concludes that the same
will happen again, tho there be no necessary connection between the Cause and
the Effect: Or, (2.) When from its vast Magazine of Images, it chooses out, and
joins those together, which ought not to be joined, and concludes their future
Existence, from an ill conceived Notion of their bare possibility of Being. And
herein the Mind frequently imposes upon its self, by its own Passions and
Desires, concluding such things will be, which it most desires should come to
pass hereafter. But such possible and impossible compositions of the Fancy, or
conclusion of the deluded Reason of Mankind, are of so vast a number, that it
is impossible all, or any great number of them should prove true, without the
Predictions were made by God himself. How could Imagination, out of thousands
of possible Circumstances of our Savior's Birth, pick out all those by the
Prophets, which would certainly come to pass, as we can easily prove from the
holy Scriptures? or how could it avoid predicting something that was false, if
it had only probability to work upon, which is the only Object of Fancy, in
regard to future Events, which never made any impression upon it? We therefore
conclude the certainty of Prophecy, not from the Nature of Imagination, but
from the knowledge and power that God has, to make whatsoever impressions he
pleases upon it. And tho the Prophets frequently did perceive and speak by
corporal representations of spiritual matters, that might very well be presumed
to be done, in compliance to the apprehensions of the people, who at that time
were very ignorant, standing more in need of Milk than of robuster diet. And
tho God did declare his mind, as one man may to another, by Hieroglyphick
Representations, yet those never disturbed the Reason of the Prophet, nor
caused him to entertain gross conceptions of God. Fancy let loose, makes such a
Medly of Religion, as may be found in the Metamorphosis of Ovid, or the Iliads
of Homer, or the Remains of Orpheus; but it cannor produce such a regular
Structure of Divine Doctrine, and so agreeable to Natural Religion, as is
contained in the Law of Moses, and the Gospel of our blessed Savior.

A. But why did they not prophecy always?

T. Why does not one man always speak to another?

A. Because Man is a free Agent, and can speak to his Neighbor when he
pleases, or can let it alone.

T. And so is God, who does not send all men to be Messengers of his Will, but
some only, chosen out of Mankind for so great a work. Nor does he choose to
speak always to them, but at such times and seasons as pleases him.

A. What then do you conclude from this long discourse?

T. I conclude, that since no Man can frame a complete Idea of Prophetic Dream,
or Vision, or Inspiration, who is not himself a Prophet, no Man can conclude
any incertainty in Prophecy, from the mention the Scripture makes of those
Mediums of Divine Revelation.

A. I will consider what you say, and tell you my Opinion at our next meeting.
Farewell.

Conference II.
T. SIR, You seem very much pleased: I hope you received some satisfaction by
my last discourse.

A. It bore some Face of Reason at first appearance, but my Author has
furnished me with some New Objections, which I fear, with all your
Priestcraft, you will never be able to answer. You talk of Prophets, as p. 15.
Great Men inspired by God, when it is evident, that their Minds were as far
inferior to other Men's, as Reason is superior to Fancy. Solomon was a wise man,
but no Prophet. We must not therefore seek the knowledge either of human or
divine things from the Writings of Prophets, i. e. of Men led by Fancy, but
Philosophers, who are guided by Reason.

T. That is, from Men taught by themselves, and not taught by God.

A. If a man was sure that these Prophets were taught by God, he would desire
to have no better Masters: But alas! they were not certain of their own
Inspiration, by the Revelation it self, but some other little sign, adapted to
their human Education, Opinion, or pre-conceiv'd knowledge.

T. If they perceived the Will of God by Imagination (which are the words of
your Author), and yet remained doubtful of it, then it follows either that God
was not willing, or not able to give them assurance that himself spoke to them.
If you say, he was not willing, you contradict the Testimonies of Scripture, by
which you pretend at first you would be judged, and you subvert all
Fundamentals of Natural Religion, which teaches nothing more plainly, than that
God cannot deceive. If you say, he was willing, but not able, you must deny him
to have that power, which is not only contained in the Idea of a Deity, but
manifested in the other works of his hands. The Prophets therefore doubted not
but it was God who spoke to them, tho they sometimes required a sign, to
confirm the truth of some Promise made to their Posterity; as Genesis 15. 8. where
Abraham required not a sign, that he might be certain it was God that spoke to
him (for if he had not been well assured Act. 7. 3.
of that, we cannot think he would have left his Father's house, to sojourn in
Canaan, in Obedience to a Divine Command, as we read in the 12th Chap.) but
that he might thereby assure his Posterity of the Promise, to engage them to a
nearer and stricter Covenant with their God. Or perhaps Abraham was desirous by
some farther Revelation, accompanied by a sign, to know something more
particular concerning the Time, and other Circumstances, of his Posterity's
Conquest of the Land of Canaan, which God vouchsafed to give him, as we read in
the latter part of the same chap. But your Author trifles, when he infers from
this 15th chapter of Genesis that the Patriarch required a sign, that he might be
certain the Promise was made by God himself; since it is evident from v. 6.
that he believed in God, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness,
before the sign there mentioned was given to him. As for Judges 6. we read,
that Gideon was informed by an Angel, in the shape of a Man, that he should
free Israel from the Midianitish slavery, of which at first he doubted; but
after the consumption of the food he brought by fire, and the disappearance of
the heavenly Minister, he perceived it was an Angel of God. But what is this to
your Author's purpose? Suppose the certainty of one or two Revelations depended
upon a sign, does it thence follow, as he wildly concludes, that no Prophet
could he sure of a Divine Revelation without a sign? Do we not read of many
Divine Revelations, of the truth of which the Prophets never doubted, wherein
there was no sign given, but the certainty arose from the perspicuity of the
Revelation it self. God does not confine himself to any one way of speaking to
Mankind, but (Heb. 1. 1.) in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets. Sometimes indeed, as in this instance of Gideon, the
person to whom God by his Angel appeared, was not at first certain that it was
God, till by further illumination, and repeated signs and wonders, he was
suffered no longer to doubt of it. When Numb. 3. Act. 7. 30.
Moses first saw the Bush burning with fire, and the Bush not consumed, he
turned aside to behold it, as a strange sight; and when God sent his Angels to
Abraham, he took them at first sight for Men, and made accordingly provision
for their reception; and when God called twice unto Samuel, he supposed it was
the voice of Ely: And yet he made afterward such manifestation of himself, to
Moses, and those See Exodus 4. 2, 8, 9, 14. ver.
other good men, that they wanted no sign to be themselves assured of his
presence, but rather to convict others, that they were sent by God. We don't
say, that God, by every appearance of an Angel to the Sons of Men, darted an
infallible certainty into their Minds, that left no room for suspicion, but
that he could do so whenever he pleased, as is evident by Reason; and that he
did frequently do so, as is no less plain from the Scriptures; and that he
added sometimes Signs, for the satisfaction of those to whom the Revelations
were made, (for, with the Jews, we will not call them all Prophets), and
sometimes he added none, when the perception was clear enough without it.

A. Is not Natural Reason superior then to Revelation, since that is supported
by Signs, and the other perspicuous enough without it?

T. The consequence is vain and fallacious. The substance of the Decalogue is
plainly true by the light of Nature, yet it was confirmed to the Jews by Signs
and Wonders, at its most remarkable promulgation, Exodus 20. God therefore by
confirming Natural Light by Signs and Wonders, according to your Author, did
that which was superfluous, As if the unlearned, obstinate, or unthinking part
of the people of Israel, stood in no need of being roused up as it were to
Natural Duties, by Supernatural Signs and Wonders: Or as if the Decalogue, by
addition of Miracles, became inferior to the very same Laws, without any such
addition, which is altogether as true as that 4 and 2 is less than 4. As for
Duties which are known by Revelation only, (such as Circumcision, Baptism and
Supper of our Lord) when once they are made known, by supernatural methods,
they no ways give place to the unwritten Law of Nature, because they become
branches of that general Obedience to God, which is the adequate Law of human
Nature. When God bid Abraham sacrifice his Son, he was as much obliged to kill
him, as he was obliged before that Command to preserve his Life.

S. I will not dispute with you about small matters, but this is evident, that
Signs were p. 18.
given to the Prophets, according to their pre-conceiv'd Opinions, and their
different Capacities: so that the same sign which rendered one Prophet certain
of divine Revelation, would have wrought no such effect upon another. If their
Temper was sanguine, they fancied nothing but Triumphs, Victories, Messiahs,
Peace and Plenty: If their blood was vitiated with melancholy humors, they
dreamed of Wars, Tumults, Blood and Devastations.

L. The sign was, for the most part, the power of working some supernatural
effect, given to the Prophet, to convince rather others, than himself, that he
was sent by God, and delivered his Message to the people; and because all
Mankind have not the same temperature of body, nor labor under the same
prejudices of Education, nothing can be a sufficient sign, but what is so far
above the ordinary works of Nature, that Men of all Temperatures, and all
Opinions too, if they are in their Senses, must needs confess, that it is the
immediate work of a superior invisible power. Upon this Foundation we raise the
certainty of the Mosaic, and of the Christian Religion; Let any man, of what
Temperature, and possessed with what Prejudices you please, provided he be not
stark mad, (for Bethlem is to be excluded from all Disputations) consider what
Moses did in the sight of all the Egyptians, and the people of Israel, and what
our Savior did in all parts of Judea, and let him then persuade himself, or
others, that all this was done, or possible to be done, by the ordinary course
and power of Nature. If he can do that, we will yield our Cause, and confess
our Religion was never confirmed by Signs from Heaven; for Effects that may be,
or may not be Natural, may be some Indications, but no Demonstrations of a
superior invisible power. The truth is, the Sparks of your Principles, were
never, I believe, so mad as to confess the truth of all those mighty works,
recorded to have been done by Moses and the Prophets, or our Savior himself,
and yet doubt of their divine Mission; for I presume every man who believes our
Savior to have raised himself, or others from the Grave, must necessarily
believe his divine Mission: And as for the minor Prophets, their Messages being
of less extent, and less consequence to mankind, there was no necessity that
all of them should have their Commission signed from Heaven, and recorded to
posterity, by the same number and perspicuity of supernatural Wonders, as was
that of Moses, and of our blessed Savior. Your Author therefore very
impudently, and ignorantly too, asserts, that the Sign was adapted to the
Temperature, or Opinion, or Imagination of the Prophet; when it was always some
supernatural work, adapted to convince the Reason of all Mankind, and
impossible to be gain-say'd by any.

S. Did not Elisha call for a Musical Instrument, p. 19.
before he could foretell joyful things to Jehoram, and his two Confederates?
which he could not do before, because he was angry at him, 2 King. 3. 15.
Ezekiel being impatient of Life, was enabled to foretell dreadful tidings to the
Jewish Nation, Ez. 3. 14. Jeremiah was a melancholy, and consequently a
continual Messenger of Evil to his brethren: Micah troubled with the same
disease, always prophesied dreadful Events to Ahab; which plainly shows, that
Prophecy did much depend upon the natural Temperature of the body.

L. No more than my sending a merrily disposed Servant upon an Errand, does
show that my Errand was an effect of the sanguine complexion of my Servant's
Body. God, who knows the Disposition and Temperature of all human Bodies, may
choose those that are best adapted for each particular Message he sends to
Mankind; but that is no Argument, that the Message it self is any effect of
their natural disposition. For we are not so mad as to believe these Men were
inspired, because they spoke of things agreeable to their own humors, but
things above the reach of humane knowledge. Elisha might dispel some melancholy
Fumes, by the harmony of Music, but I would feign know the Name of that
Musical Instrument, which could inspire his mind with the knowledge of those
two futurities. 1. That the ditches should be filled with water, without any
preceding rain. 2. That Vid. ver. 17, 18.
the Israelites should overcome their Enemies. Moses was angry with Pharaoh,
when he foretold the destruction of all the first born of Egypt, but it was not
his Anger, but God himself, or one of his Angels, that at midnight smote all
the first born of the land of Egypt, Ex. 12. 20. Micah always prophesied Evil
to Ahab, because Ahab always was an ill man, and there was evil decreed against
him by God, which accordingly came to pass, not by Micah's indignation, but by
the just Judgment of God. If these men's predictions had been an effect of
bodily temper, (and if your Author says not that, he says not one word to the
purpose) they must frequently have been proved false by the Event: For Truth is
seldom seen, much less foreseen, by those who speak and act according to the
unsteady motions of bodily temper. Besides, it is clearer than the Light, that
these inspired Authors did not prophecy, as your Author insinuates, according
to their own Inclinations, but according to what they received from the Spirit
of God. The Scriptures bear witness, that Moses was a very meek man; and
therefore, according to your Author's silly Hypothesis, all Revelations
proceeding through him, should have been full of nothing but Meekness and
Gentleness, and the Sanctions should have consisted chiefly of alluring
promises; and yet we Read in Exodus 20. That the Law of Moses was delivered in a
terrible manner, by Thunder and Lightning in the Mount. And Deuteronomy. 28. 15. Moses
utters so many Curses against the transgressor of the Law, as must needs
proceed from something very much different from the description he gives of his
own meek and gentle Spirit. Elijah will be allowed by your Author, to have been
a person of a fierce disposition, as may be seen by his calling for Fire down
from Heaven, upon the Captains of Fifties, and killing the Worshippers of Baal;
and from our Savior's rebuke to his Disciples, when they would have had him
call down for Fire from Heaven, after Elijah's Example, Ye know not what manner
of spirit ye are of: and yet not only so, but he was incensed against Ahab, by
provocations of the highest Nature, because by his and Jezebels command, (1
King. 19. 14.) The Children of Israel had forsaken the Covenant of his God,
thrown down his Altars, and Slain his Prophets with the Sword, and he only was
left, and they sought his Life also. Nay, Ahab had made up the measure of his
iniquity, by depriving Naboth of his Vineyard, and his Life, yet when the word
of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite, he became the Messenger of good News
to Ahab, 1 King. 21. 29. See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me?
because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the Evil in his Days.
Isaiah was undoubtedly a Person of a very Sweet and Aimable temper, of a Noble
Family, and well practiced in all the Arts and Language of a flourishing Court,
as this A -- well enough observes from that flowing vein of Eloquence which
runs through all his Writings; and his Prophecy is so full of Promises of good
things to the Church, that he is styled, the Evangelical Prophet; and yet he
was sent by God as a Messenger of ill News, even to the good Hezekiah. Is. 39.
6. Behold the days come, when all that is in thy house, and that which thy
Fathers laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon, nothing
shall be left, says the Lord. And if any man read chapter 53. of his Prophecy, he
will find such a description Isa. 53.
of a suffering Messiah, as could not have entered into the Head of such an
accomplished Courtier, without the assistance of divine Inspiration. Jeremiah
was a man of sorrow, and yet your Author cannot say, that none but Revelation
of sorrowful things were made to him, for he foretold the Restoration of the
Jews, and the precise time of it, which certainly was no very sorrowful matter.
I could heap up innumerable instances of the same Nature, to show your Authors
Foundation he would build upon, (Viz. That Prophecy was adapted, to the
Natural temper of the Prophet, from whence he would undoubtedly insinuate, it
was only an effect of it) is false, and repugnant to the United Testimonies of
the Holy Scriptures. Besides, who could inform this Temerarious Author of the
Natural Constitution of the Bodies of the Ancient Prophets? Who knows not that
the humors of the Body, are much altered, both for the better and the worse,
by External accidents, whether sad, or joyful. What wonder then that those
Prophets who lived in the Peaceable and Flourishing State of the Church, as
Isaiah did for some time, and to whom joyful things were for the most part
revealed, should be of a joyful Spirit, and the contrary be recorded of these,
who were sent upon sad and mournful Messages? Which is most likely, that the
message should be cause of the Joy? Or the Joy be the cause of the message?

S. To me, the Scales seem to hang even.

L. But then, are those predictions, whether Joyous, or Mournful, Proved always
to be true by the event? I hope that is enough to turn the Scale on the
Prophets side.

S. You may say what you please, but still you shall never make me believe, but
that if God spoke to Man, he would always speak in the same Style, and that
Style would be the most elegant and florid of any other. But if you compare the
first of Isaiah from Ver. 11. to 20. with the 5th of Amos, from 21 to 24 ver.
etc. You will find that the Style of the Prophets is not always the same, but
according to their several capacities; it is sometimes brief, and sometimes
long; sometimes elegant, and sometimes rude; in some places very plain, and in
others full of obscurity.

L. Difference of Style is no Argument of difference in things, nor is the
Elegance, or Rudeness of a Language, essential to the conveyance of Truth. The
History of Salust is as true as that of Livy; for he wrote of things done in
his own time; whereas Livy is full of fabulous Relations; and yet I never p. 20.
heard any Critic affirm, That his Style is as complete and elegant. It is
enough for us to believe, that God revealed his Will to the Prophets, and other
inspired Authors, but left the Narration to the natural Abilities of the
Prophets, whose Style might vary, but not their conceptions of the will of God.

S. But why then did he not always choose Men of the most elegant Style to be
his Prophets.

L. Because it being intended for the good of all Mankind, it ought to be
adapted to the meanest Capacities. As men of great, natural and acquired
Abilities, were fittest to stand before Kings and Princes, so were Rusticks and
illiterate persons most fit to speak to the capacity of the Vulgar.

S. Well, I will grant, that difference of Style is no very material Objection;
but what if the Hierogliphicks, and Prophetical Representations were various
also? Did not Isaiah see God sitting upon a Throne high and lifted up, and his
Train filled the Temple, Is. 6. But Ezekiel beheld him as a fire, of the color
of Amber. Is it not plain, that both saw God in the same manner, as their
respective imagination did before the Vision represent him to them?

L. Not in the least: All that the Scripture says, is, That God made himself
known by those different Representations to Isaiah and Ezekiel; does it
therefore follow, that they made these Representations to themselves, out of
their own Fancy? If these Hieroglyphics were really represented to them by
God, what necessity was there, that they should be adapted to erroneous
prejudices of the Prophet? Such Revelations would be productive of Error, and
God would thereby become the Author, Abetter, and Confirmer of Falsehood in the
World; which none will affirm, but those who think God to be nothing else but
the settled course of dull and stupid matter. If the heat of their own
Imagination coined these Images to its self, then Isaiah and Ezekiel were
perfectly mad men, and their writings no more worthy to be preserved, than the
rambling discourses of the Inhabitants of Bedlam. Nay, admitting this, they
must be presumed to have been the greatest Fools of all the Jewish Nation. For,
how could men instructed in the Mosaic Law, which forbids all corporal
Representations of God, because they saw no similitude of him in the Mount,
frame such gross conceptions of God, as of a King sitting upon a Throne, or a
flaming fire? Or if they used to fancy God after that manner, how does it come
to pass their writings are not tarnished by such gross conceptions, but that in
them we find clear Notions of his spiritual and incomprehensible Nature?

S. Ay, but the Revelations to the Prophets did vary not only in the manner,
but in the perspicuity of the Revelation its self. Those made to Zachariah were
so obscure, that without an Explication they could not be understood by that
very Prophet. And Daniel could not understand his, when they were explained by
an Angel to him. Why therefore should we trouble our Heads with the Writings of
those Men, who scarce knew what they wrote themselves?

L. He is a Prophet that certainly knows that God speaks to him in a
supernatural manner: of this Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, nor any of those doubted,
whom the Jewish Church received as Prophets. As for the Subject Matter of their
Prophecy, it was not necessary p 20.
that the Prophet should understand all that was enclosed in that, much less
that he should perceive it by the first View of the Hieroglyphical
Representations, till informed of the matter by an Angel sent from God: For he
being only a Messenger from God, it is necessary he should be certain that it
is God that sends him; but it is not equally necessary that he should always
understand the whole Subject Matter of his Message. For even Temporal Monarchs
send enclosed Instructions by their Ambassadors; and since the Message it self
did not so much concern the Prophet, as some part or Age of the Catholic
Church; and therefore it was enough for him to deliver the Message faithfully,
as he received it, without Explaining all that is hard to be understood
therein: And yet after all, the Scripture only says, That the Angel explained
the Hieroglyphics to Daniel, and that Daniel fainted and was sick, Dan. 7. 28.
and 8. 27.
and his thoughts much troubled him, perhaps by contemplation of those many
Evils that were to befall his people.

S. O you mistake the matter; for we read, chapter 11. 14. That the Angel came on
purpose to make Daniel understand what should befall his people in the latter
days -- And the matter still remained obscure, because none at Chap. 21.
that time had strength enough to imagine such a wonderful business.

L. This seems to me to be one of the most absurdest assertions that ever dropped
from the Pen of an Author pretending to Reason. For, 1. It sets bounds to the
power of God, as if he was willing, but not able to declare his mind to Daniel,
nor to any of that are, with plainness and perspicuity suitable to the Subject.
2. It supposes strength of Imagination to hear a real voice, which is a new
stroke of Philosophy. 3. It supposes Daniel able to hear some words of the
Angel, but not all that concerned his people, as if the Angel was so
short-breathed, as not to be able to tell out all the story, or Daniel so weak
in his capacity, that it was beyond the power of God himself to enable him to
understand the matter.

S. I cannot conceive, but that if the Prophets had been taught of God, they
must have known all things; but we see the Author of Joshua's History
Erroneously apprehended the Sun to turn round the Earth; whereas all modern
Virtuoso's agree, that the Earth turns round the Sun. Solomon understood not
the true proportion between the Periphery, and Diametre of the Circle. Nay, I
can show you, from the testimonies of the very Scriptures, That the Prophets
had very vulgar and erroneous Apprehensions of God himself.

L. If you can make out that last thing, I will acknowledge you speak much to
the purpose.

S. Adam apprehended God as ignorant of what he had done, and hid himself from
him; which shows, he had no other Notion of him, than his being the Creator of
the World. In the same manner was God revealed to Cain and Lamech, as ignorant
of Humane Affairs. And it appears from Genesis 18. 4. Abraham knew not that God
was an Omnipresent and Omniscient Being.

L. Did God tell Adam, or Cain, or Lamech, that he was only the Maker of the
World, but ignorant of Humane Affairs.

S. No.

L. How then can God be said to be revealed as thus ignorant, unto them, when
it is Evident their ignorance preceeded the Divine Revelation, and was not
occasioned by it? We do not say, that inspired Authors knew all things; for
Omniscience is an incommunicable Attribute of God; much less, that they knew
all things before God was pleased to reveal his mind unto them; but, that they
had an infallible certainty, that God did speak to 'em, and that whatsoever he
said was true. As for your Supposition, That Adam knew God only as the Creator
of the World; it is almost as much as to say, Adam knew God only, as he knew
all that is to be known of him. For the visible things of the Creation, make
known an invisible power of Godhead. We cannot suppose Adam could know, that
himself and the whole world was made by a superior Being, and yet at the same
time not know, that this superior Being was endued with Wisdom, Goodness and
Power. Nay, so far is it from Truth, that Adam, when he hid himself in the
Garden, only knew God as Maker of the World; that he had received a Command
from him as Lawgiuer, at the very moment, for ought we know, of his Creation,
Genesis 2. 16, 17. And the Lord commanded the man, saying, Of every Tree of the
Garden thou may freely eat -- But of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and
Evil, tho^ shall not eat of it; for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
surely die. If therefore Adam apprehended not God as Omniscient and
Omnipresent, he needed not have hid himself from him; for he was pretty sure,
that God did not with bodily Eyes behold him taking the Forbidden Fruit; but
his Fear, Amazement and Confession, without doubt, arose from the Notion he had
of his invisible Power and Godhead. For Omniscience and Omnipresence are
inseperably intervoven into the very Notion of a God, as he is Creator of the
World. For the First Cause must be united to every Effect; otherwise there
would be an Effect without a Cause; and this First Cause must know this Union;
otherwise it would act by chance; from whence it unavoidably follows, That if
the first Cause know any thing, it must know all things, since all things have
a like dependence upon it. Tho the Scripture therefore represents God, as
walking in the Garden, etc. Yet this may well be understood of some Angel sent
by God upon that message, it being familiar with the Scriptures to ascribe some
things to God, which were apparently done by the Ministry of his Holy Angels --
Nor does it follow, that Adam thought God to be ignorant of humane Affairs,
because he endeavored to hide himself from him; For all Fear, and especially
that which has Guilt for its Parent, is apt in its own Nature, to disorder Men's
Reason, and to make them do absurd things, for which no sufficient Reason can
be given. If a man for Fear, whether real or imaginary, should, to avoid the
Sword of his Enemy, throw himself down a precipitating Rock, into the Waves of
the Sea, or run into the Flames of a devouring Fire, it does not follow, that
this man thought that the Water could not drown, nor the Fire burn, nor the
Rock dash him to pieces; but we may rather conclude, that the imagination of
some impending danger, made such violent impressions upon his Brain, as for the
present drove thence the use of clear and impartial Reason. Adam was sensible
of Guilt, and the Fear of Punishment threw him into absurd and ridiculous
measures to escape it; but we must not ascribe that to his Reason, which was
manifestly an Effect of his Fear and Terror. Besides, whatever your Author
observes of the Ignorance of Adam, or Cain, etc. reflects nor Diminution upon
revealed Light, but rather upon his adored Light of Nature. For if Adam thought
God was not Omniscient or Omnipresent, it was because the Light of Reason gave
him no truer a Notion of a God. Your Author indeed would insinuate, That God
was revealed to him as ignorant of Humane Affairs; but then it must be in some
Bible that lies under the Author's sole possession; for no such thing is
mentioned in any of those which I have hitherto seen in the World.

S. But was not God revealed as ignorant of Humane Affairs to Cain, when he
asked him, (Genesis 10. 8.) Where is Abel thy brother?

L. No: the direct contrary is more apparent: for when Cain denied the Murder,
in a very surly Dialect, viz. Am I my Brother's Keeper? He was made to
understand, that tho his Murder was hid perhaps from Man, it was open to the
sight of God.

S. But does not his Question suppose he thought otherwise?

L. Wicked Men may think as they please; but their thoughts throw less
Aspersion upon revealed Light, than they do upon the Light of Nature. Cain
committed Murder upon Abel, will your Author therefore conclude, that God was
revealed to Cain as approving Murder? or that Murder is agreeable to the
Light of Nature? And yet Cain's speaking against Natural Light, in seeming to
disown the Omniscience of God, is no more an Argument, that he thought God not
to be Omniscient, than the killing his brother, was an Argument, that he
thought God to be a lover of Injustice, or an approver of the shedding of
innocent blood. Wicked men will corrupt their natural Notions of moral good and
evil, as well as the more speculative Idea's of the Attributes of God; but all
that we can conclude from thence, is the necessity of Divine Revelation, to
prevent Atheism, Deism and Idolatry, or Polytheism; and to ensure the most
binding Sanctions of Rewards and Punishments, upon the immutable Laws of Nature.

S. Some Men will deny Motion, when their Tongues are running so fast, that no
Man can be heard but themselves. Was not Abraham ignorant, that God was
Omnipresent and Omniscient, when he begged of him not to execute his Sentence
of Vengeance, till he knew whether all were worthy of that punishment, or no?
And does not God himself speak thus (at least in the Imagination of Abraham,)
Genesis 18. 20. Because the Cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their
sin is very grievous, I will go down and see whether they have done altogether
according to the Cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I shall know.

L. Abraham's words to God, viz. Peradventure there be Fifty righteous in the
City, contain no more than a Petition, that God would spare a great number of
wicked persons, for the sake of a few righteous therein; He does not presume
that God did not know how many righteous there were there, but he prays, that
if Fifty were found, all the wicked might for their sakes escape their intended
destruction. In v. 20. we have an Assertion, That God had knowledge of the sin
of Sodom, for the Cry was great before him. And what we read, v. 20. of God's
descending to know whether it was so or no, is but the continuation of a
Metaphor drawn from the like Actions in Men; a Figure used in most Authors, and
not unfrequent in the holy Scriptures; where we often read of his Hand, his
Arm, or his Eyes; and yet the Jews were never so stupid as to worship God under
the Sculpture of any such Corporeal Representations.

S. If you would read the 3d and 4th Chapters of Exodus impartially, you would
find, that Moses himself had no adequate Notion of a God: For God was revealed
to him, as ignorant of humane Actions. For tho God told him, Chap. 3. v. 28.
That the People of Israel would hearken to his Voice; Moses, Chap. 4. v. 1.
Answered, Behold they will not believe me, nor hearken to my Voice, for they
will say, the Lord has not appeared unto thee.

L. Believing, being an Act of the understanding and the will, jointly
cooperating together, none but God can foresee, which way the will of Man,
when left to its Native liberty, will incline it self. As for Men, they can
only make probable Conjectures of it, from reason and experience in humane
Affairs: But Moses could not conceive from either of these, how it was likely,
or possible, that the children of Israel should believe him upon his bare word,
that he was sent by God to deliver them from Egyptian Slavery; his assertion
therefore, Behold they will not believe me, proceeded not from his ignorance of
the Nature of God, but from his knowledge of the manners of Men, and especially
the children of Israel, who, he easily conjectured, would not believe him,
without a Miracle, nor indeed, was it at all reasonable that they should have
been so Prodigal of their assent, to one that had no Commission signed from
Heaven, by the Power of working Signs and Wonders. But how does his suing for
the Power of Miracles, at all argue that he had no true Notion of God? Or how
do errors (provided they were such, tho indeed they were not) occasioned by the
deficiency of Natural Light, reflect any Aspersion upon the plenitude of Divine
Revelation? For whatever Moses might say to God, we don't read that God ever
said unto Moses, that he was ignorant of humane Actions. Some Divines indeed,
who with your Author pretend to the highest adoration of humane reason, have
asserted, that God is ignorant of those future contingents, which depend upon
the free will of Man, and if this be true, Moses, interpreted by your Author,
had as true a Notion of God, as many of the Ancient Philosophers, or some of
the Modern Arminians, Socinians, and Priests themselves, tho it is clear by the
Holy Scriptures, that God by his Prophets has foretold those Actions, which
depend upon the free will of Man.

S. And is this all you have to say?

L. No, I will add, that tho God had told Moses, ver. 18. of the 3d Chapter,
That the Children of Israel would hearken to his Voice, Yet at the same time,
he informed him, ver. 20. That he would stretch out his Arm, and Smite Egypt
with all his Wonders. The Words therefore of Moses, Behold they will not
believe me, nor hearken to my Voice, imply no contradiction to those words of
God himself, v. 18. Chap. 3. Because they relate to a different time. It was
true, what God told Moses, that the children of Israel would hearken to his
Voice, when it was confirmed by Signs and Wonders, which were wrought in the
Land of Egypt, and it was true, what Moses said to God, that they would not
believe him, nor hearken to his Voice, before those Signs and Wonders were
wrought before them. It does not appear from hence, that Moses doubted of the
Knowledge of God, but only longed for that assistance of his Power, by which
God had told him, he would free the Israelites from the slavery of Bondage and
Error. Besides, (Ex. 4. 8.) God was revealed to Moses, as foreknowing, that tho
the Israelites might at first despise, yet at last they would hearken to the
voice of Moses.

S. All this seems to me to be nothing but Evasion Moses himself had wrong
Notions of the Nature of God. He looked upon him as a Being, that always was,
is, and ever shall be, and for that reason called him Jehovah, but he taught
nothing of his Nature, but that he was Merciful, Living, and very Jealous of
Tranferring his Honor p. 24.
to another.

L. If Moses conceived no right notion of a God, Pray let us know your Authors
Opinion upon that Subject.

S. My Author gives no Definitions, but it is plain from the 26th page, that he
looks upon Moses Conceptions of Love, and Mercy, and Jealousy, (which are
humane passions) when ascribed to God, to be very erroneous, mean, and vulgar.

L. They cannot be conceived erroneous, unless you can prove, that Moses
thereby ascribes something to God, that is imperfect, or vicious in its own
Nature, which I presume you will never be able to do. Love, as it is a humane
passion, may be vicious when placed upon a wrong object, as when we love those
things which are forbidden, or when it is too remiss, or too vehement, in
respect of those objects upon which it is placed: But as it is a Principle of
doing Good, and Fruitful of Beneficial Emanations to Men and Angels, it is the
Perfection and Glory of the Divine Nature, in so much that the Apostle is not
afraid to say, that God is Love it self.

S. But what think you of Pity, Mercy, Jealousy, are those passions worthily
ascribed unto God?

L. Yes, very worthily, provided you remove from thence those imperfections,
which unavoidably arise from the Nature of a humane Soul, and the contexture of
a humane body. All our Affections are accompanied with some violent
perturbation of the body, which cannot be in God, who is an incorporeal Being.
Wherefore tho Pity, Jealousy and Anger be attributed to God, for want of proper
and intelligible Names to express something that is like them in the Divine
Nature; yet we cannot conceive Moses so stupid, as to think that God felt the
same perturbations that Men are sensible of in their afflictions. The Scripture
represents God as resolved to punish unrepenting sinners; and this Resolution
it calls his Anger; and it shows us, that God is ready to succor the
afflicted, and to extend his Pardon to some, who according to strict Justice
are unworthy of it; and his Propensity to those voluntary Favors Moses calls
by the Name of Mercy: and his Eternal Decree, That his Honor should not be
given to his Creatures, by an easy Metaphor is styled Jealousy. But all this
includes no Erroneous Apprehensions of God, it only expresses these attributes
which are known by the light of Nature, in such words as are most intelligible
to all the different Degrees of Men in the World.

S. You may fancy what Figures you please, but can you show any good reason,
why Moses must be understood to speak in a Figurative sense?

L. Because in this Life we all see God, darkly, as through a glass, and
therefore cannot in all things speak properly of him as he is, but must be
compelled by necessity to transfer some words from those things we more
perfectly understand, to signfie those Perfections in God, which are less
perfectly understood by us.

S. I wonder you will deny, That the Revelation was adapted to the Capacity of
the Prophet, when so many Instances of it are brought by this Author, extracted
from your very Bibles. Moses thought God was in a peculiar manner, Governor of
the Jews, but that the Government of other Countries was left to inferior
Deities, who were called, the Gods of other Nations. See for this, Exodus 15.
11. and 2 Chronicles. 32. 19. He also absurdly dreamed, That God, who is every
where, was confined to live in Heaven. For this, see Deuteronomy. 33. 27. Jonas
presumed himself able to fly from the very presence of God. Solomon dispis'd
all the Laws prescribed to a King, tho he was esteemed the wisest of all the
Jewish Nation. The Doctrine of Ezekiel, is directly opposite to the Doctrine
taught by Moses; as you will find, if you compare his 18 Chap. with the 7th.
Ver. of the 31 of Exodus or the 18th. of the 22d. of Jeremiah. Samuel believed,
that God never repented of his Decree, See 15. Sam. ver. 29. Jeremiah taught,
that God, upon condition of Repentance, did reverse his Decree of Judgment
against notorious Sinners. It appears from Genesis 4. v. 7. That Man has power to
resist Temptation; but St. Paul teaches, That Man has no Government over his
own Thoughts, or Actions, but by the singular Calling and Grace of God. See the
9th. to the Romans. And when he ascribes Justice to God, he Corrects himself,
by saying, He spoke after the manner of Men. From whence it is as clear to me
as the Sun, that what you call Divine Revelation, or Divine Inspiration, never
made any man wiser than he was before, but either left him, or confirmed him,
in those very Prejudices of Opinion, in which at first it found him: Unless in
matters of Morality, for therein the Prophets were guided by known, and
undeniable Maxims.

L. You muster up the whole strength of your Author's Forces, which consists
more in number, than in true Worth and Dignity. We do not deny that God
condescends in the manifestations of his Will, to accommodate himself to the
weak capacities of his Creature Man, but that does no ways incline us to
believe, that he ever reveals to Man any thing that is false, or that he
confirms him in his preconceived Errors, or that whenever he is pleased to
reveal himself in a Supernatural manner, he cannot, or does not do it with the
same degree of Perspicuity, as one man can tell his Thoughts to another. God
indeed, has declared more to one Prophet than to another, but since he never
speaks any thing but truth to any, this is so sar from being an Argument
against reading any of the Prophets, (for so I call all Inspired Authors) that
it is a strong inducement to peruse them all, that so what we miss in one, we
may readily find in another. If Revelation discovered nothing new to Mankind,
nor confirmed truths of an eternal verity, it would be altogether needless, and
if it by being adapted to Men's erroneous Prejudices, confirm them in the same,
it would be pernicious, and God himself would be the Author, Abettor, and
Divulger of Falsehood in the world, which I would have all young Men seriously
to consider, who are addicted to these Deistical Notions. Epicurus, who removed
the Deity from all thoughts of humane Affairs, pays more honor to the Divine
Nature, than those who with your Author, suppose him to meddle therein, only to
confound natural Light, and to contradict himself, and to send his Servants to
plant, and propagate Falsehood in the World.

S. You seem now to be very hot, but* can you disprove the Author, whom you
rashly Condemn, because he speaks truth more freely than is consistent with the
Interest, or Humor of the Clergy?

L. I desire to be believed no farther than as you find what I say is agreeable
to the Testimony of Scriptures, by which it will appear, that God has Revealed
nothing to Inspired Authors, that any man can condemn of Error. Secondly, That
he has declared to them such truths, as were directly repugnant to their
Preconceived, Erroneous Opinions. And Thirdly, I will show you, that the places
of Scripture used by your A --, are no ways Subservient to his present design,
and purpose. If your Author would Argue fairly against the Authority of the
Holy Scriptures, he should have produced such places in them, which he could
easily and plainly convince of Error in matters that belong to the Happiness of
Mankind. But how much he fails in this, will appear by a Discussion of these
Instances, which are alleged by him. Moses taught the Jews, that that very
God, who made the Heaven and the Earth, was their God, who was revealed to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and who then by Signs and Wonders, had brought them
out of the Land of Egypt; which plainly shows that he had right Conceptions of
the Unity of the Divine Nature, as the first, and only cause of all things. But
at the same time he knew, that the Heathens worshipped other created, invisible
Powers, which they called Gods, tho unlike unto the true God, in all the
Glorious Attributes of the Divine Nature; and this is all that can be gathered
from the 11th. ver. of the 15th. Chap. of Exodus, Who is like unto thee, O
Lord, amongst the Gods? Moses does not here assert, that there are more Gods
than one, but only intimates, that there were more Beings than one, which were
(tho falsely and equivocally) called Gods by the deluded Pagans. But why do we
wonder, that invisible Powers in compliance to the common Dialect at that time
in the World, are styled Gods, when Magistrates themselves, by no improper
Figure are dignified with the same honorable Appellation, Ps. 6th. and 7th. I
have said you are Gods, and all of you the Children of the most High, but ye
shall dye like men, and fall like one of the Princes. Will any be so absurd to
conclude from hence, that the Psalmist thought, that there was little or no
difference between God and Man? Nor does it at all appear from the 19th. ver.
of the 32d. Chap. of the Chron. That the Jews thought, that God left other
Nations, to the Government of other Gods, substituted by him; the words are
these, And they spoke against the God of Jerusalem, as against the Gods of the
People of the Earth, which were the work of the hands of men. It was not the
Besieged Jews, but the Besieging Pagans, who called those inferior Beings, by
the name of Gods, which were worshipped by the deluded Pagans; the Jews
acknowledged them only as the work of the hands of men. In the 17 Chap. of the
2d. of Kings, gives only an Historical Account of the Sentiments of those
Pagans, who were translated into the Regions of Israel, from remoter Nations;
they indeed had the same Apprehensions of the God of Jerusalem, as others had
of their Topical Deitys, who were confined to the Government of certain Places,
Persons, Arts, or Sciences, according to the Opinion of the Ancients, and
therefore mingled some Ceremonies of the true, with all the Superstitions of a
false Religion. But the Author of this History, is so far from approving, that
he utterly condemns, as well their Notions, as their Practices. In the 23d.
ver. -- They fear not the Lord, neither do they after his Statutes, or after
their Ordinances, or after the Law and Commandment, which the Lord commanded
the Children of Jacob, whom he named Israel.

S. Why then does the Scriptures call them Gods?

L. Because an Historian relating what others have said, or are wont to say,
must speak in the same Dialect, if he will keep exactly to the truth; nor is
any Author obliged to speak always properly, when he may be better understood
by a Figure. -- The Apostle speaks of some, whose God was their Belly, and
tells us, that Covetousness is Idolatry, and yet I never read of the God (...)
or Venture, that were worshipped by the Ancient Greeks, or Romans. Persius makes
him at most but a Master of Arts. --

Magister Artium ingeniique;
Largitur Venture.
And Money it self was not Invested with Divine Honors in Juvenals time, if
you will believe the Poet.

-- Nullas numorum ereximus aras. I wonder your A -- should forget one place of
Scripture more conduceing to his purpose than any he has hitherto Cited, in the
4th. ver. of the 4th. Chap. of the 2d. to the Corinthians; Satan is styled, the
God of this World, how plainly might he infer from thence, that Satan was
revealed to the Apostle, as the God of this World.

S. But what say you to Moses's Opinion, That God lived in Heaven, is not that
an Error unworthy of a Philosopher? And altogether Pagan?

L. If Moses had taught, that God was so confined to Heaven, as to be excluded
from the Earth, or from any part of the Universe or from the Knowledge and
Government of Humane Affairs, it might have given this A -- some very specious
pretense to cavil; but all that Moses says, in the 26th. ver. of the 33d. of
Deuteronomy. is, -- viz. There is none like unto the God of Jesurun, who rides on the
Heavens in thy help, and in his excellency on the Sky. -- God is every where,
but his goodness, and power streams forth more upon one place of the Universe,
than another, for even as the Apostle observes in inanimate Beings, There is
one Glory of the Sun, and another Glory of the Moon, another of the Stars, for
one Star differs from another Star in Glory. So much more may we apprehend
that God bestows a greater Degree of his Glory upon those places that are
receptacles of the blessed Saints and Angels, than upon those which are
designed to the use of sinful men. And God is said, Emphatically, to be there,
where he displays the strongest Influences of his Grace and Glory! Your Author
therefore very absurdly endeavors to disparage Revelation, as adapted to
Erroneous Opinions of the Prophet, when hitherto he has given no Instance of
one Error in them.

S. What do you think of Moses's desire to see God?

L. I think seeing God in Scripture language, implys no more than a mere exact
knowledge of him, than we usually have in this present Life; for so speaks our
Savior, Blessed are the pure in Spirit, for they shall see God. And the
Apostles speaking of a future State, assures us, That then we shall see him as
he is.

S. But Moses, Exodus 33d. 18th. desired to see God with his Bodily Eyes.

L. Then God should have been revealed unto him under a Bodily Shape, if your
Author's Hypothesis was true, that God was always revealed to his Prophets,
according to their Conceptions of him. But your A -- confesses that Moses,
nullam Dei, imaginemi n cerebro Formaverat, had formed no Image of God in his
Brain, and therefore that God appeared under no Image to him. If therefore
Moses had formed no Image of God in his Brain, he did not apprehend him as
Corporeal; for we always think of Bodies under some Image or another, framing,
or compounding Images of Bodies that we have not seen, from the Images of those
Bodies which have been seen by us; nor could he desire, that God should appear
in any Corporeal shape to him; and then his desire of seeing God, can signify
no more, than knowing something more exactly of his Spiritual Nature.

S. My Author says plainly, it implys a contradiction, for a man to see God;
but because Moses believed God to be visible, God gave this Reason as
consentaneous to Moses erroneous Opinion, -- There shall no man see me and live.

L. And yet the true meaning of those words, according to a known Hebraism, is
no more than this, That no living man shall see God, which is a Revelation
directly contrary to the Apprehensions of Moses, as he is represented by your A
--

S. My Author tells me, that that signifies no more than, that God is not to be
seen, by reason of Humane imbecility, and that God would not add the other
Reason, viz. That it was repugnant to the very Essence of God to be visible,
because that was above the Apprehensions of his Servant Moses.

L. Your A -- makes Moses think whatever he pleases; in the 24th. Page, he will
have him think that God could not be expressed by the Image of any thing that
has been seen, tho he was visible, in the Apprehension of Moses; but in the
26th. Page, he asserts, That Moses formed no Image of God in his Brain, and
that therefore God appeared not in any Image to him, tho other Prophets affirm
they saw God: But if Moses thought God to be visible, he must needs form some
Image, tho perhaps no true one, of God in his mind, because we think of all
Corporeal Beings under some Figure or another, and if so, your A -- most
grossly contradicts himself; and if you consult the Text it self, you will see
nothing in it, from whence you can conclude, that Moses thought God to be
visible. -- For we read ver. 18. that he said, Show me, I beseech thee, thy
Glory; which implys no more than a desire to see, not the Divine Majesty its
self, but some Created Being, that might sustain some very visible Signatures
of the Glory of God -- for whatever Glory God communicates to any Creature, as
representative as it were of himself, may very properly be called the Glory of
God. What is Recorded of Moses's seeing the back parts of God, implys no more
than this, viz. That God is seen in the Effects of Revealed Beings, but is not
visible to us in the Act of Conversation.

S. I cannot deny, but that seeing in Scripture, signifies no more than
knowing, or perceiving, and therefore I am not unwilling to understand this
place, as speaking only of a clear and distinct perception.

L. I will not stand to confute some other ridiculous questions of your Author,
Viz. Where he says, That God threatened (Exodus 33. 2, 3.) to send his Angel
only to drive off the Hittites, etc. In compliance to Moses Erroneous Opinion,
that other Nations were Governed by other Deities: When himself before had
owned, that Moses taught, that God whom the Jews Worshipped, was the same that
was from all Eternity, and made both the Heaven and the Earth: And therefore it
could not be an Error in Moses, to think, that God made use of Angels in
Governing the World, when at the same time, he taught, that no other Being was
to be Worshipped, but the Lord Jehovah. His Observation, that Moses ascended
the Mount to speak with God, because, conceiving God to dwell in Heaven, he
could not so well imagine him (as he terms it) in any other place, is
ridiculous to the highest Degree of Extravagance. What is more unphilosophical,
than to confine imagination to a Mounr, which runs beyond the very bounds of
the Universe, into imaginary Spaces, as far as it can have any Notion of
possible existence. As if a Man could never Pray to God whom he believes to be
in Heaven, unless he raised his imagination, by ascending into the upper Room
of his House, or clamber'd up all the Stairs of the Monument. Nor is he much
more successful in his other instances, upon which he endeavors to lay his
rotten and deceitful Foundation. He tells us, That Jonas thought he could fly
from the presence of God, and go into Regions, subjected to other Powers, which
were created by the supreme God: But if this Jonas 1.
was so, Jonas must have very odd Notions, of those Beings, who were
substituted by God to govern other Nations; he must think that they were blind,
and socould not see him come into their Territories, (and yet Angels are styled
Watchmen in the Holy Scriptures) or that they were negligent, and would give no
Account of him, to their supreme Lord and Master, and that reflects much upon
Him, who made, or employed them, or as Traitors to their Lord, who would
willingly conceal a Rebel, which is altogether as absurd, as any of the
preceding suppositions. But Pray, why does flying from the presence of God,
necessarily imply a design to avoid his knowledge, as confined to the Land of
Canaan? Is not Cain (Genesis 4. 16.) said to have gone out from the presence of
the Lord, and dwelt in the band of Nob, before ever God had given the Land of
Canaan to the Children of Israel. From whence it is to me evident, that to go
from the presence of the Lord, signifies no more than removing from that place,
where the Revelation of the presence of God is made, to some remoter Region.
And Jonas fled to Tarshish, not thinking to avoid the sight of God, but rather
fearing Man, more than God; he would not by proclaiming Destruction to Nineveh,
draw upon himself the rage and tumult of a Popular Fury. Solomon acted contrary
to the Law prescribed by Moses to a King of Israel, by multiplying Horses, and
Wives, and Chariots, but it does not follow, that therefore God was revealed to
him, as approving that in one place, which he condemned in another: For
Transgression of a Law, does not argue Error in Judgment, but rather strength
of Appetite in most Criminals, few of which there are but can say, -- Video
meliora, proboque,
Deteriora sequor.
The same Solomon, persuaded by his Wives in his latter Days, went to the
Temples of strange Gods, (I presume rather in compliance to their desires, than
to any inclination of his own.) Will your A -- hence conclude, according to his
way of Arguing, that Solomon was taught by Inspiration, the Adoration of a
plurality of Deitys, when it is as contrary to Scriptures, as it is to Reason
it self. As for his imagination, that the 18th. Chap. of Ezekiel, is repugnant
to the 7th. ver. of the 34th. of Exodus and to the 18th. ver. of the 32d. of
Jeremiah, it is not much more hard to be confuted than any of the other. God is
declared in the 7th. of the 34th. As visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon
the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation. And this is a truth, which
all Men must observe, whether they will or no, it being interwoven into that
constant order of things, which God has settled in the World. If God takes away
an Estate from a wicked Father, the Son, tho pious, becomes the poorer for it,
and the innocent Babe often expires by a Disease, that is gotten by the vicious
Intemperance of a guilty Parent. For God, as Sovereign of the World, may by
virtue of his indisputable Prerogative, inflict whatever temporal Evils he
pleases, upon the most innocent Person, without Injustice, either by his
Fathers Sins, or any other means whatsoever, because he can recompense his
light sufferings here with an eternal weight of Glory hereafter. Nor does
Ezekiel deny this truth, in the 18th. of Ezekiel, but only affirms, That the
Son shall not be punished eternally for the sin of his Father: For that Ezekiel
speaks of eternal Punishments, which are always afflicted according to Merit,
seems to me evident from the 26th. ver. When the Righteous Man turns away
from his Righteousness, and commits Iniquity, and dies in them; for the
Iniquity that he has done, shall he dye. Where a distinction is manifestly
made between Dying in Iniquity, which is the case of every Sinner, who dies
without Repentance; and dying for Iniquity, which must note futute Punishments
in the World to come, which are called in Scriptures a second Death.

S. Ezekiel seems to me rather in this Chap. to speak of God's distribution of
Temporal Punishments. For the Jews had taken up the Proverb, The Fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on edge. Because the
Fathers had committed many grand Transgressions, and the Children were led into
Captivity for them.

L. And no doubt, but the Children also had filled up the measure of their
Fathers Iniquity; but admitting even this, which yet ought not to be admitted,
there is nothing like a contradiction in these two places, when the Son does
suffer for the Father, if he himself is innocent, it is not to him a
Punishment, nor always a misfortune, and God does not visit his Trangressions
upon him, because nothing but wilful Sin is the Object of the Divine Anger. For
external Evils, they may be turned to our Spiritual advantage, and therefore
Ezekiel truly affirms, That the Son shall not dye (i. e. be punished in anger
with an utter excision) for the sin of the Father. And yet the Son, by the vice
and folly of the Father, may fall into very great poverty and afflictions, and
by aiding, assisting, and consenting to his Fathers Crimes, may make himself
partaker of the guilt, and then is as obvious to Experience, as to Reason, that
God does visit the Iniquity of the Fathers, upon the Children, to the third and
fourth Generation. His other instance of Samuel's telling Saul, (1 Samuel 15.
29.) The strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent; for he is not a Man, that
he should repent; is no contradiction to what Jeremiah says, 18. 7. At what
Instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck
up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that Nation against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil, which I thought to
do unto them. Repentance in God can signify no more than his not inflicting
those punishments, which he has threatened by his Prophets: But it does not
follow, because God would not release the punishment of Saul, (which is all
that can be gathered from the words of Samuel,) that therefore God would not
avert his threatened punishment from any other repenting Sinner: For God is not
a Man, (as the Text says,) that he should mistake feigned, for a real
repentance. There are some appearances of contradiction in the most elaborate
Authors, that ever yet wrote in this World, and the Commentators upon Aristotle
himself, are as hard put to it to reconcile some places that look like
contradiction, as any of those who have wrote upon the Text of the Old and the
New Testament.

S. Whatever you may say to the contrary, Revelation was always adapted to the
capacity of those to whom it was made; which makes me think there was nothing
Supernatural in that which is so called.

L. I will then desire you to tell me, what you think of the Revelation made to
Noah, that the World should be drowned with water. What natural capacity was
there in Noah to conceive a thing so improbable, as such a Deluge, when the
greatest Wits in these days, who believe it was done, are so much puzzled to
find out the manner of its doing.

S. Perhaps being well skilled in Astronomy, he might from the Stars be
informed of some strange alteration in the Weather.

L. And perhaps he might not, nay, it is certain he could not, nor are there
any natural means to be conceived, whereby he could be informed of that
impending danger; and unless you can conceive that Noah was so stark mad as to
build an Ark, and take all manner of Beasts and Fouls into it, out of a
fantastical Fear, that he should be drowned upon the dry-land; you must
confess, he did it by virtue of a Supernatural Revelation,

S. Have you any other instance of the like nature?

L. Yes, more than I shall at present take pains to enumerate; but however, I
will gratify your curiosity with two or three, which will abundantly show the
falsity of your A -- s so much boasted Proposition. We read in the 18th. Chap.
of Genesis that Sarah was informed by the Angels, (10th. ver.) That she should
have a Son. But who, except Spinosa will say, that this Prediction was
accomodated to the capacity of Sarah, (or her Lord Abraham) when Moses tells us
in the 11 th. and 12 th. ver. That Abraham and Sarah were old, and well
stricken in age, and it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of Women.
Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old, shall I
have pleasure, my Lord being old also.

S. A Woman might easily imagine what she earnestly desired.

L. If you except against a Woman, let us consider the Revelation made unto
Moses, which you will find to be directly contrary to the Apprehensions, and
above the Natural Conceptions of that mighty Prophet. I would feign learn how
it was at all agreeable to the natural Conception of Moses, that the lifting up
his Rod should be able to work all those Signs, and Wonders, which it did in
the Land of Egypt.

S. Tho it was not a Conception agreeable to reason, yet it might be to his
Fancy, and we all know the strength of Fancy in producing wonders.

L. Imagination, without doubt, has very great force upon the imagining Person,
but that it should be able to have force upon Objects placed without him, so as
to work any visible effect upon them, is to me, till I am better informed, a
very absurd supposition. I know some of the Ancients have been possessed with
an Opinion, that the very Eyes of an Envious Person, do dart a Kind of Poison
upon those who are in a Great Station. And the Poets presumed they had the
same, or like effect upon other Animals.

Nescio quis Teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos. And my Lord Bacon says
something to solve this Phenomenon, by the Effluviums of the Animal Spirits:
And if the matter of it were true, which I do very much question, his Lordships
solution of it, would be the best that could be given. But supposing it true
yet such weak Effluvia's as are engendered by the strength of imagination,
whatever impression they can make on the tender parts of humane Bodies, yet you
cannot without Madness suppose them able to turn Aarons Rod into a Serpent, (or
to make it more like a Living Creature) or turn a whole River into Blood, to
divide the Red Sea, slay all the first Born of Egypt, and do works of the like
stupendous Nature.

S. Did not Pharaohs Magicians do something very like it?

L. All you can infer from thence is only this, viz. that they were assisted by
some invisible Powers, which is more than Men of your Principles are willing to
grant, who deny their existence, or at least their intermedling with humane
Affairs.

S. But suppose, such things done (as you Divines call it) by invisible Powers,
how shall a Man know whether those Powers are Good, or Evil.

L. God being the Fountain of all Goodness, no Revelation is made, or confirmed
by him, that is repugnant to the immutable Law of Nature, which consists in
unfeigned Love to God, and to our Neighbor. The Pagan Priests made great
pretenses to Prophecy and Miracles, but it was to confirm a superstition,
contrary to Natural Light, and therefore those seeming Signs and Wonders, are
justly ascribed to the Operation of Lying and Deceitful Spirits. For these are
known Maxims, that Good cannot proceed from Evil, and that a Kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand, and we may as well conceive that light can be the
Fruitful Mother of Darkness, as that Satan can be the Author, Abetter, or
Confirmer, of the Precepts of the Decalogue, or the most Holy Rules of Practice
delivered by our Blessed Savior.

S. Does not your own Apostle say, that Satan can transform himself into an
Angel of Light?

L. We don't say, that Evil Spirits do never Encourage a seeming Sanctity, that
is gross Wickedness in a Religious dress, but that they cannot be Abetters, or
Promulgers, of that real and genuine Sanctity, which is prescribed by the
Mosaic and Christian Religion, and of the excellence of which we have as clear
Perception, as we have of the Truth of any Mathematical Proposition. But to
pass by Moses, and descend to the other Prophets. What Pre-conception by Nature
could Isaiah have, that Cyrus should be King of Persia, that Jerusalem should
be destroyed by the Chaldeans, and that that very Cyrus, (See Isa. 44. 28.)
Should rebuild the Temple, saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to the
Temple, thy Foundation shall be laid. If Revelation was adapted only to the
Capacity of the Prophet, certainly, Isaiah was a Person of the largest Natural
Capacity, that ever yet was Born into the World, or, as I believe, ever will be
Born hereafter.

S. You keep to instances in the Old Testament, it would be more to my
satisfaction, to hear something of this Nature to be alleged out of the New.

L. What think you of the Doctrine of the Incarnation of the Son of God; and of
the Holy Trinity, which are founded upon Divine Revelation? These could not be
adapted to the Capacity, or Opinions of any one inspired Author, since they are
above the conception of all Mankind.

S. I fear you mistake this Author. His meaning is not, that nothing is taught
in Scripture, which exceeds humane conception, for (as he shows, p. 28.) The
Prophets were ignorant of speculative things, and were of contrary Opinions
amongst themselves, and therefore they might give Vent to some odd Opinions,
which are altogether irreconcilable to the reasonable conceptions of other Men.

L. I have already examined all those places of Scripture, upon which he would
ground this wild assertion, and I hope, have plainly showed, that no such thing
can be deduced from them. But to come closer to the purpose. Your Author must
Acknowledge, either that the Prophets (as he calls all Divinely inspired
Authors) were assisted and taught by God, or that they were guided by their
Natural Fancy, Reason, and Judgment. If Prophecy does come from God, and if it
be according to his own Definition, in the very first Words of his Book, the
certain Knowledge of some things revealed to Men by God, he cannot overthrow
the certainty of it, in Speculations as well as Practicks, until he can
destroy the very Idea, which all rational Men do entertain of God. He must
suppose him either to be nothing else, but the settled course and order of
Nature, and then he, and his Disciples must quit the Name of Deists, and set up
in the open Defense of Atheism: Or, he must bring upon the Stage an unthinking,
ignorant, or deceitful Deity, that told his Servants a parcel of Idle,
Contradictory, and Lying Stories, to amuse the world with a Noise of Divine
Truths, whereas they were in reality nothing else, but the Erroneous
conceptions of fanciful Men. But if on the other hand, he Acknowledge nothing
at all of Divinity, in those whom we receive as inspired Authors, he must then
show his Reader, how the Prophesies and Miracles of those Men, are reconcilable
with the ordinary Course and Power of Nature.

S. He does show you, in his 4th Chapter, that there neither is, nor can be any
such thing as a Miracle.

L. We will discourse that point more narrowly some other time, but at present,
I will only urge one instance more, that utterly overthrows your Authors sandy
Foundation. We read, in the 2d Chapter of the Acts, that when the Apostles were
all with one accord in one place, there appeared unto them Cloven Tongues, and
sat upon each of them, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began
to speak with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. Now I would
feign learn from your Author, who some say was a School Master, and therefore
ought to be well versed in the Didacticks, whether there be any way in Nature,
to teach any one Man, much less a Number of Men, the Words, and Idioms of many
Foreign and unknown Languages, in a moment, or instant of time?

S. I must confess, I cannot well conceive how such a thing could be done,
without the assistance of some invisible Power; but still this only proves an
infused knowledge of words, but not of things.

L. If you grant an infused knowledge of words, it is the greatest Folly in the
World to deny the possibility of an infused knowledge of things. For it is much
more easy to conceive, that God can declare his will to some chosen Persons,
and leave the manner of expressing it to their natural and acquired Abilities;
than that he should infuse, simul and semel, in one instant of time, the
knowledge of several Languages into the minds of unlearned Men.

S. I for my part, am resolved never to be a Bigot in speculative Matters, and
since he speaks so much for Morality in all parts of his Book, I cannot choose
but have a good Opinion of him.

L. Morality, and Mathematical Demonstration, serve many times for canting
terms, to be specious covers to Wickedness and Nonsense. He grants, the
Prophets had clear Perceptions of Morality, for so may all Mankind besides, but
that we are not bound to believe them in any thing that is speculative; that
is, we may Lawfully reject all the Credenda of the Mosaic, or the Christian
Religion. As for Example, according to his way of arguing, when the Scripture
tells, You must Love the Lord your God, with all your Heart, with all your
Soul, It only teaches you, that you should be Pious; but you are not bound to
believe from thence, that there is a God, or that he Governs the World, or that
he alone is to be Worshipped, for these, according to his Hypothesis, are
speculative Opinions, concerning which the Prophets had contrary and repugnant
Notions: And thus your Author would plant abundance of Piety, but not one grain
of the Knowledge of God in the World. After the same manner, when the Apostle
says, 2 These. 1. 7. That the Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed from Heaven,
with his mighty Angels, v. 8. in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, v. 9. Who
shall be punished with Everlasting Destruction, from the presence of the Lord,
and from the Glory of his Power. We are to Learn, that we are to obey the
Gospel in being Just and Charitable, but we must not thence, infer, that those
who are unjust and uncharitable, Shall certainly be Punished with Flaming Fire,
or with an Everlasting Destruction from the Face of the Lord; And I will now
leave it to your Judgment what Friend he can be to Piety, Justice, or Charity,
who divests them of the certainty of a future reward, and leaves them no other
Encouragement, than what arises from the Government of the passions in this
Life, which tho it be a considerable part, yet it cannot be the whole of humane
Happiness. Or, whether he is not an Encourager of Impiety, Injustice, and
Oppression, and all manner of known and unknown Vices, who takes away from
wicked Men, the Terror of being tormented with the Devil and his Angels. For
tho our Savior says, Mat. 12. 16. If Satan cast out Satan, he is divided
against himself, his Kingdom cannot stand. He will have this Argument only
adapted to the Opinion of the Pharisees, but no proof that there is a Devil, or
any Kingdom of malicious Spirits, and so good night to your Author's Morality.

S. When you read his 4th. Chap. you will see how earnestly he Pleads for
Virtue.

L. If you will bring me what he says, another time, I will gladly admit all
that is true, and oppose nothing but notorious Falsehoods.

Conference III.
S. WEll, Sir, according to my promise, I have read over the 4th. Chap. of my
Author, (passing by his third, because it chiefly concerns the Jews,) wherein,
I find him to be a very zealous Advocate of true Virtue and Goodness, which I
value more than any Speculative Opinion, so much contended for by the Sons of
the Clergy.

L. If obedience and submission to God, is the principal Law of Nature, then it
is as much our Duty, to believe a Truth when revealed, as it is to obey a
Commandment when it is promulged, and then it follows, that what he calls
Speculation, is neither more nor less than a practical, necessary Duty.

S. Your error proceeds from your false Apprehensions of a true notion of a
Law. He shows you in his 43d. Page, that the word Law, absolutely taken,
signifies that, according to which every individual, or some of the same
species, do all, or some one thing, by a certain and determinate Reason; and
that it depends either upon the necessity of Nature, or the consent, or
authority of Men.

L. Then farewell at once to all Divine Laws, but those which he fancys depend
upon the necessary motions of matter, or are confined by the Authority of the
Civil Magistrate, or receive their strength from the mutual consent of some
determinate Society of Men.

S. I hope you will not deny, that Corporeal Necessity is a Law, when all
Authors speak in the same Dialect; does not Carts make mention of the Laws of
Motion?

L. Carts, and other Philosophers, have the liberty to Transfer words from
their proper Signification, to denote such things as are best understood by a
metaphorical Expression. And hence it is, that those Observations, which
ingenious Men make of the necessary rest of motion of matter, are called (but
figuratively) by the name of Laws; but your A -- shows no Legis nomen absolute
sumptum, etc.
small plenty of ignorance, when he would have the word Law, to signify,
absolutely, corporeal necessity of Nature, which properly speaking is not
capable of receiving Nomen Legis per Translationemadres Naturales
applicatumvidetur.
a Law. Nay, he seems to contradict himself, for he says in the 44th. Page,
that the word Law, seems to be applied to natural things, by Translation, and
if by Translation, then not absolutely, or properly, as in this place he so
boldly affirms.

S. But what need this strife about words, if we are agreed upon the thing it
self? Why may not my Author claim the same liberty of Speech, as is allowed to
Des Carts, Gassendus, or others of our modern Virtuoso's?

L. Because he designs thereby to establish a fatal necessity in the very minds
of Men, which renders them incapable of receiving a Law, properly so called,
which always supposes a liberty of choice, and is attended with the Sanctions
of Rewards and Punishments; for tho in the 44th. Page he tells us, That some
Laws depend upon the free Arbitration of Men, yet he adds, That he must needs
grant, that all things are determined by the universal Laws of Nature, both to
Operate, and to Exist, in a certain, and unavoidably manner; and indeed if all
things that are, are material, and the Soul its self nothing but a particle of
rarefied matter, and all matter is bound by the necessity of nature, to such
and such particular Rules; it follows, those Laws of Men which seem most
Arbitrary, are as much subject to fatal necessity, as any other operation of
dull, and unthinking matter. All the difference is, that in the descending of a
Stone, or the ascending of the Fire, we can see and understand the
Concatenation, and Co-ordination of necessary causes, but this Chain is less
visible in the determinations of the Will, to what we call Moral Good or Evil.
But still there is a Chain, that binds a Man as strongly, as if its
invincibility was manifest to the Eyes of all Men: and if so, then he that
kills his Father, or Mother, acts by the same necessary Laws of Nature, as he
that Honors and Obeys them. And this is the best, and truest account, that I
can give of your Author's Scheme of Morality.

S. You must needs mistake him, for he has these words,

Dico tamen has leges, ex placito Hominum pendere. L. That is, because your A
-- would Monopolize the liberty of contradicting his own Assertions, but
observe his caution, he does not say absolutely, that these, or any Laws do
depend upon the free will of Man, but that they may be said to do so. First,
Because Man being a part of Nature, whatsoever is done by the necessity of
Humane Nature, tho it be done by the general, and irresistible force of Nature,
yet because they proceed immediately from Humane Power, therefore the Sanctions
of those Laws may be said to proceed from the will of Man. But what is this to
the purpose? If there be a general force of Nature, which determines all things
even the very Soul and Will of Man, to make Laws whether it will or no, then
the making these Laws, or the paying Obedience to them, are no free, but
necessary Acts, and Men are morally good or evil, not by free choice, but by a
necessary compulsion: And this he plainly acknowledges in his second reason,
and only adds, that the Universal consideration of fate, and concatenation of
causes, cannot serve us, to form right conceptions of Law, and that therefore
tho all Actions are predetermin'd by fate, yet it is better to talk of them as
Free and Arbitrary.

S. Let us not quarrel about words, but come to the Definition of the thing, he
tells you, that a Law is a Manner of Living, which a Man prescribes to himself,
or to others, for some End, best known to himself. How do you like this
Definition? p. 44.


L. I should rather have approved of it, if he had defined it a Manner of
Living, prescribed by a Superior to an Inferior, and always attended with the
Sanction of Rewards and Punishments.

S. Every Man Loves the Product of his own Brains; but Pray, why is your
Definition to be preferred before my Author's?

L. For several Reasons. First, because it does not exclude God from the
Legislative Power, which is most slily done in your Author's Definition. A Law
is a Rule, or Manner of Living, or Acting, that is supposed to proceed from
some Rational, Intelligent, or thinking Being. And if your Author believes that
any such Being, is really existant, why must he be excluded from the
Legislative Power, and his Creature, Man, only Entitled to it?

S. Does not my Author expressly say, (p. 45.) That the Law is to be
Distinguished into Divine and Humane?

L. Yes: But he tells you, that by a humane Law, he means such a manner of
Living, as is conducive to preserve our lives, or the common wealth, and by a
Divine Law he intends no more than a Law made, that has respect to the true
Knowledge and Love of God. So that a Law made by God, to preserve a
Commonwealth, or the Life of Man, according to his Notion, is a humane Law,
and a Law made by Man, which is referred to the Love and Knowledge of God,
becomes a Divine Law. God is therefore absolutely excluded by him, from any, so
much as Vote, or share of the Legislative Power.

S. Well, what is your next Exception?

L. I think in the 2d place, that he does not accurately enough define a Law,
by a manner of Living prescribed by a Man to himself. For Law implies
Superiority in the very essential Notion of it. If a Man prescribes a certain
way of Living, or Acting to himself, it is at most but a resolution, which may,
upon alteration of circumstances, be revoked without a Sin. If indeed, he calls
God as a Witness to such a resolution, it becomes a Vow, and has in Lawful
matters, all the Force and Virtue of a Law; but that force arises from the
Superiority of the Person, Viz. God himself, unto whom that Vow is made.

S. Do not Senators make Laws, that bind themselves?

L. Yes, and very justly too. For the Authority of a Collective Body of Men, is
Superior to the Authority of any one Member of it, and he, or they that offend
against it, in all Democratick Governments, are to be looked upon, out of the
Senate, but as Subjects to that Superior Power which is in the collected Body.

S. This at most, is but a vain Logomachy; Pray, what have you more than this,
to object against this Definition?

L. I say, Thirdly, that he very unskilfully leaves out the Sanction of Rewards
and Punishments, which are essential to a Law.

S. Cannot a Superior prescribe a Rule to an Inferior, without adding threats,
or promises?

L. Yes, he may: But then the obligation to obedience arises from the Good,
that may be gained by that Obedience, or by the Evil, that may be avoided by
it. If a Superior, by which I understand one that has Power and Right over me,
command me to do a thing, it follows, that my disobedience must needs expose me
to the dire Effects of his Displeasure, and that is a sufficient Sanction to
constitute a Law, without any express threatening of any one particular
punishment, the Power of Inflicting, which is supposed as essentially inherent
in the Superior Person. And the same is to be said of promises.

S. I think my Author shows very well, that cunning Lawgivers allure the vulgar
to obedience, to wholesome Laws, by propounding to them a quite different end,
from that which is essential to the Law its self. For my part, I am willing to
be Virtuous, for the reward, that by the necessity of Nature, must needs Spring
from Virtue its self; but I have no great Opinion of other Allurements, by
which you Divines would entice Men to follow your own Direction.

L. I easily grant you, that there is a pleasure of mind, arising from all Acts
of Genuine Virtue, as there is a regret and torment, that attends upon Vice:
And that the certain pain, or pleasure, which Accompanies these, with the
addition of what probably may be farther expected from God, are the very
Sanctions of the Law of Nature. But if there were no pain, or pleasure, that
followed any Action, either by necessity of Nature, or free will of God, I
cannot conceive how there could be any such thing as a Law. For to what purpose
is a Law, when the Transgression brings no Inconvenience, nor the performance
of any pleasure, or profit to the Subject?

S. How many Laws are daily Transgressed, and yet no Punishment inflicted on
the offenders? Do they therefore cease to be Laws?

L. No. Because tho punishment is not actually inflicted upon all that offend,
yet it is threatened to all, and the very danger of incurring the penalty, is a
sufficient Sanction. But in a penal Law, if all possibility of offending God,
or Man, or our selves, were taken away, it would then lose the very Nature of
Law, and revolt again into its first State of Indi^^erency. To gain therefore
Good, and to avoid Evil, is the true Ends of all Laws; and your Author very
much mistakes the point, when he represents rewards and punishments, as adapted
only to govern the vulgar, who know not the true End of Laws, and have not
Learned the great Art of being Virtuous for Virtues sake. For rewards and
punishments, are adapted to work upon the will and affections of all mankind,
even the Author himself, who would not have ventured to write such a Book, if
he had lived in a Country, where he had been sure to have been punished as he
deserves for it. He that Loves Virtue, or hates vice, must do it either for
some Good, or Evil, essentially inherent, or accidentally annexed to them, and
if God by Moses and our Savior did explain, confirm and enlarge these
Sanctions, or adapt them in some cases to the apprehensions of the vulgar, it
does not follow, that obedience to these Laws is servile, but rather that it is
a reasonable service.

S. Is he a just Man, that forbears to steal for fear of hanging?

L. No: but yet he may be a just Man, who forbears to steal, for fear of
running into that Evil, which reason shows is intrinsically inherent in it, or
which God by his Prophets has threatened, as consequential to it. And therefore
to dissuade Men from having any regard to rewards, or punishments, is the same
thing as to dissuade them from Acting like Men, or choosing what is best, like
unto rational Creatures.

S. Notwithstanding your Pulpit-Cants, my Author gives you a more noble Scheme
of Virtue. He shows you, that our understanding being our best part, our
chiefest happiness consists in the perfection of that most excellent faculty.
That all certain knowledge we can have, depends upon the knowledge which we
have of God, because nothing can exist, or be conceived without God, as also
because we may doubt of all things, whilst we have no clear conception of God:
Hence he tells you it follows, that all things which are in Nature, according
to the manner of their Existence, or Perfection, do involve, or express our
conception of God, and that therefore by how much the more we know Natural
things, so much the more we acquire a more perfect conception of God, or may be
said to know the very essence of God. And he is most happy, who loves the
intellectual Knowledge of God above all things, and is most delighted with it.
And these mediums of this knowledge, as far as conducive to this End, may be
called the Laws of God.

L. Perfection of the understanding, cannot render a Man completely happy,
unless he can prove that there is no other faculty in the mind of Man, but that
of understanding only. For suppose, a Man has a good understanding, but an
irregular Will and Affections, that Man cannot be said to be completely happy.
For happiness being a full Enjoyment of all good things, it must be equally
extended to all the faculties of the mind, or it ceases to be true happiness.
Our Savior speaks more emphatically to the purpose, Ye know these things,
happy are ye, if ye do them. His Reason, why all the certainty can be had by
Man, depends upon his right Knowledge of God, is very false and deceitful, Viz.
Because nothing can be, or be conceived without God. By which obscure
Circumlocution he means no more, in plain terms, than that there is no other
God than the Universe, and that all things that are in Nature, as he says, do
involve a conception of God, and that by knowing natural things, we know the
very Essence of God. For if God himself is not matter, an accurate knowledge of
matter, cannot give us entrance into a more accurate Knowledge of God. The Romans
1. 20.
Invisible things of God from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead; says the Apostle St. Paul. That is, Our Knowledge, that some visible
things are made, which could not make themselves, leads Man to an
Acknowledgment, that they were made by the Eternal, Invisible Power of the
Godhead. But this Knowledge arises not from an accurate discussion of all the
properties of matter, since it may be deduced from the knowledge of its bare
Existence. For the very Creation of Matter, shows the Invisible Power of God,
tho his wisdom is more visibly seen in the various Modification of it. But
still it does not follow, that they who best know Natural things, do best know
the very Essence of God, unless God himself be nothing else but the matter of
the Universe. Suppose, a Man should be a great Virtuoso, and very ingenious in
rendering an Account of the concatenation of secondary causes, and yet should
deny the invisible Power of God, would you say, that by how much the more
perfectly he knew natural things* so much more perfectly, he knew the very
Essence of God.

S. Will you deny what he so zealously asserts, That the knowledge and love of
God is the happiness of Man, the very end and scope of all humane Actions, and
the chiefest Good that can be attained by us. Is it not nobly said by him, That
we are to love God as our chiefest Good, not for fear of any punishment, nor
for love of any thing with which we are delighted, but merely for himself.

L. If your Author, who so often makes mention of the word God, would have told
us distinctly what he meant by it, this 46th page would have seemed to have had
something like Natural Religion in it. But if you reflect upon the preceding
words, and the whole scope of his book, you will find, that God signifies no
more in him, than the whole Compages of Nature, and that he who knows Natural
Things, knows the very Essence of God; and then to know God, and to love God,
tho splendid Terms, yet in reality signify no more than to turn Virtuoso, and
study the Works of Nature, and to love the World, and hug its Enjoyments as
your whole happiness, without troubling your head with the thoughts of the Joys
of Heaven, or the fear of Hell, which your Author rejects, as conceptions
unworthy of a true Philosopher.

S. I, for my part, own an incorporeal Deity, tho I don't believe all the
Stories you Parsons tell us of him; and I believe my Author is of the same mind.

L. I do not find it appear in any part of his Writings But this I observe,
that by God he understands a Being, that cannot speak intelligibly to mankind,
but by the fixed course of Nature, and that suffers us to be abused by Juggling
Tricks and Impostures, that Vaunt themselves as Divine Revelations, and that
cannot work a miracle, unless your Author gives him leave, and from whom you
are to expect no Good, and to fear no Evil. So that all his morality, is
reduced to the Love and Knowledge of God, and that is either the Universe, or
an otiose, unactive Being, which is next to nothing.

S. Some men are resolved to approve of nothing. Pray, what can you say,
concerning those consequences, which he draws from his Notion of the Law of
Nature?

L. If you tell me what they are, I will give you my impartial opinion of them.

S. He says, reason is universal, Revelation limited.

L. That the Law of Nature, rightly understood, is Universal; will easily be
granted by those who understand what humane Nature is. But your Author cannot
infer from hence, that it is a greater Good to mankind than Divine Revelation,
because it is a more general good. For tho a diffusive Good in respect of its
diffusive Nature, is to be preferred before that which is restrained and
confined, coeteris paribus, yet it is not to be so absolutely, or without
exception. Virtue is a greater Good than the light of the Sun, even in your
Authors Opinion, who calls it the chiefest Good of man, and yet more men
receive benefit from the Light of the Sun, than from Genuine Virtue, if you
will believe the Greek Proverb,

(...). S. Ay, but this is the great advantage of reason above Revelation, that
it does not require an Historical belief, which can never work in us the Love
of God; for that is only to be deduced from such common Notions, as carry
their own certainty along with them.

L. The great defects of History, are uncertainty, deficiency, superfluity and
impertinency; when these are absent, History is very completive of the
intellectual faculties of man. For History is nothing else, as my Lord Bacon
well observes, but a Narration of the various Operations of Individuals
circumscribed to Time and Place, and its chief end is to advance memory, which
is as it were the great Storehouse, or Magazine of Knowledge. Uncertain
History is a Narration of such things, as either never were done, or have not
been well attested, so as to leave no room for doubt. And this defect in
History destroys the very end of it, which is to give us a certain account of
what has been done already, that so we may know how to Act our selves for the
future. Deficient History, is an imperfect collection of remarkable
Occurrences, wherein many things are omitted, which are worthy a wise Man's
observation. And tho this destroys not the End of History, which is certainty
of knowledge, yet it Answers not the Expectations of a Thirsty Soul.
Impertinent, or Superfluous History, is a Narration of such Actions, or
Circumstances of Action, as for their turpitude, or meaness, deserve not to be
recorded. And this is a defect, which can no other ways be supplied, than by a
total abolition of those trifling Authors.

S. What is it you would infer from hence?

L. That Faith grounded upon true and useful History, may give us a right
knowledge, and due love of God.

S. How can Faith, that rests upon humane Authority, contend for certainty with
Reason, that proceeds by such common Notions, which are admitted as true by all
men.

L. Natural Reason does enable men to understand, that God ought to be loved,
as the first cause of all those good things, which his Creature Man does enjoy.
But then there is a certainty in Sense, as well as in Reason, tho after another
manner: And therefore, if the Senses of some Men have been rationally
convinced, that God has bestowed other Benefits upon them, than those that were
bestowed at their Creation, or conveyed by the invisible Hand of his
Providence: Why should not such a knowledge excite them to all imaginable Love,
and Gratitude to their great Benefactor? The certainty of a Benefit received,
is all that every good Man requires, in order to be Grateful; and whether that
certainty is grounded upon abstracted Reason, or a true, faithful Narrative of
a mattter of Fact, is not much to the purpose -- So absurdly does your A --
asserts, Nec fides Historiarum quantumvis certa, Dei cognitionem, and
consequenter, nec etiam Dei amorem vobis da^e potest.

S. He does not deny that it cannot give us Motives to love God, but it cannot
work in us the love of God, whether we will or no.

L. No more can his adored Reason; for many of the greatest pretenders to
Reason, have been the most impious Men in the World.

S. You Divines represent God to the Vulgar, as a Lawgiver, and his Commands
you call his Laws; but alas, you mistake the point. For Eternal Verities are
the only Laws of God, who Acts by the necessity of his own Nature: For the
Affirmations, and Negations of God, do always involve an Eternal verity and
necessity in themselves. If God had said to Adam, Thou shall not Eat of the
Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, it would imply a contradiction to say,
that he did Eat of it.

L. Does not your Author in some places say, That to know and to Love God is
the Divine Law?

S. Yet I think, he does.

L. Then according to his way of arguing, all men (even the Author himself) do
know and Love God, and must do so whether they will or no, to the End of the
World: And then there is no difference between Virtue and Vice, for both are
done according to God's Will, according to your Authors sentiments, for both
are the Effects of an Eternal necessity, of causes linkt together. The Apostle
says, This is the Will of God, even your Sanctification: Therefore all men are
actually sanctified, God bid Abraham Sacrifice his Son, therefore he was
Sacrificed; is not this a pretty way of arguing, to make sport for Children and
Fools?

S. Moral Propositions in themselves, are nothing but Eternal Verities, and it
was the Prophets only, who were led by fancy, and the Vulgar who are guided by
sense, who apprehend them as Laws given by God, The Lawgiver, whom they look
upon as a just and merciful Prince, setting upon a Throne, and distributing
rewards and punishments, to all his Subjects.

L. Your Author must either grant, that God is a wise and understanding Being,
and a free Agent, or nothing else but the Mass of Dull and unthinking matter.
If he embrace the latter, he should be Master of so much courage as to tell us,
and not to play always in the dark, with his two ambiguous Terms of God and
Nature. If he will allow, that God is a wise Being, and a free Agent, I cannot
conceive any reason, why he should deny him to be a Lawgiver, since Wisdom,
Power, and Authority, are inseparably interwoven into the very Notion of a God,
without any gross conceptions of his setting upon a Throne, like an Earthly
Monarch. And if there is an Eternal reason, why God should be Loved, and
Innocence Protected, etc. Which every Man is conscious to himself, that he can
do, or let it alone; and besides, If God shows Man by Divine Revelation, what
he would have done, and promises Rewards and Punishments, why must these
Dictates of God and Nature be denied to be Laws, and I know not what Eternal
Verities shuffled into their Room?

S. Because my Author shows, that all Moral Propositions are so.

L. Your Author shows nothing but mere Leger-de-main. It is an Eternal Verity
that God is to be Worshipped, but it is no Eternal Verity that he is so. A
Moral Proposition is a Divine Law, and an Eternal Verity in respect to that
Goodness, which is Essential to it; but not for any Active necessity that
attends the fame. For if the Will and Understanding be the same Thing in God,
Then God Wills all the Treasons, Marthers, and Adulteries, which he understands
have been committed in the World.

S. Since you despise my Author's Scheme of Morality, Pray, let us hear one of
your own drawing up.

L. I will refer that to Dr. Cumberland's excellent Treatise of the Law of
Nature, where he proves by reason equivalent unto, if not surpassing
Mathematical Demonstration, that the Law of God, and the whole rational
universe, is the whole of the Law of Nature, and attended with sufficient
Sanctions of Rewards and Punishments, that are by God inseparably interwoven
into the Nature of things.

S. You do not hear me speak against the Natural Law.

L. But by embracing unsound Principles, you utterly destroy the whole Force
and Efficacy of it. Your Piety terminates in the adoration of such a Piety, as
tamely suffers the World to be abused into a belief of Miracles and Prophecy,
and Inspiration, without any rational possibility of a redress, and Acts by the
inflexible necessity of his own Nature, so that all our Prayers, can make no
more an impression upon him, than upon a Stone-Wall. Your Justice has no
Prospect of a future reward, and so in private is left at liberty, to Act what
is most conducive to the preservation of life and limb. And your Temperance has
no other restraint, nor so much neither, than what Nature has given to those
Beasts that Perish. Thus your Deism begins with a fair pretense to Moral
Philosophy, but the End thereof is nothing else but a licentious Liberty and
Corruption of Manners.

S. I must confess, If there were rewards in Heaven, and Punishments in Hell,
they would be great Encouragements to Virtue, and Suitable determents from
Vice. But you ground your hopes upon inspired Authors, and they pretend to
prove their Divine Mission by Miracles, whereas my Author proves, that there
never was, nor can be such a thing as a true Miracle, wrought in the Universe.

L. Then I will Discourse that point with you, at our next Meeting, for I am
loath to tire you with too long a Discourse.

S. With all my Heart. For if I was well satisfied in that point, I should be
better affected to the Christian Religion.

Conference IV. OF MIRACLES.
S. SIR, you are well met: I remember, at our last Conference, you often
appealed to Miracles, as the greatest Confirmations of revealed Religion. But I
have since that time carefully perused the Sixth Chapter of my very Ingenious
Author, wherein I find such Arguments against Miracles, as make me very much
doubt, whether there ever was, or can be such a thing as a Miracle, done in the
World.

L. I desire not to hear your Opinions, but would gladly be a Partaker of your
Reasons.

S. My Author very Judiciously observes, p. 67.
that it is, and always was the Mob of mankind, that are and were the great
Miracle-Hunters, and Miracle-Makers. It is they, who think nothing to be the
Work of God, that is done according to the usual Course of Nature, but feign
and believe Wonders, on purpose, that they may be thought the very Darlings of
Heaven, And that the Universe was made for the sake of Man, one of the most
inconsiderable Creatures in it.

L. Our belief of Miracles, is grounded upon that reason, which is common unto
all Mankind, not only the Unlearned Vulgar, but also the most sublime
Philosophers, who must needs Acknowledge, that if matter was at first Created
by a Spiritual Being out of nothing, and received from it those Determinations
of rest, or motion, which we call its Laws, it may be again produced, or
altered by the very self same Power, which is all that is necessary to
constitute a Miracle. The possibility therefore of a Miracle, is as evident to
all Learned men, who have not said in their Hearts, that there is no God, as
any one proposition in Enclid, and is as deducible from the true Idea of a God,
as any of the most Legitimate Conclusions, that can be deduced from clear and
undoubted premises. Your Author therefore with as much Haughtiness as
Falsehood, pretends to throw the belief of Miracles upon the Vulgar only; as if
all the Jewish and Christian Kings and Emperors; all the Greek and Roman
Philosphers, by Miracles converted to the Christian Faith; all the Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, that were, or ever shall be in the Church of God; were no
better than an ignorant and unlearned Mob, in respect to himself, and two or
three upstart Philosophers, who value themselves upon the opposition they
endeavor to make, against the most common Notions of all mankind.

S. You begin to be too warm; Pray, let us debate this matter; with more Reason
and less Passion. My Author rerefers you to his Fourth Chapter of the Divine
Law, where he has largely proved, That whatsoever God determines, does involve
p. 68.
an Eternal necessity, because the understanding of God, is not really
distinguished from his Will. And since nothing is necessarily done, but by
Virtue of a Divine decree, it clearly follows, That the Universal Laws of
Nature, are the only Decrees of God. If therefore any thing should happen in
Nature, that is repugnant to her Universal Laws, the same thing would be
repugnant to the Divine Nature, decree, and understanding.

L. Your Authors affected obscurity in this Paragraph, is a sign of want of
Judgment, or else want of Courage, to speak what he really thinks. He that
would destroy the possibility of Miracles, must prove that there is no God, who
has the same liberty of will, which we experience to be in our selves. And then
indeed it would clearly follow, that if there was no God, nor no free Invisible
Agents, there could be no such thing as a Miracle performed in the World. But
Pray, how does your Author prove this Grand Assertion?

S. Oh, Sir, very Mathematically. He See p. 49.
does it by the properties of a Triangle. For it is the same thing to say, that
God understands that the 3 Angles of a Triangle are equal to 2 Right ones, as
it is to say, that he wills it should be so. For the truth of that proposition,
depends not upon the Nature of a Triangle, but the very Nature of God, in whom
will and understanding are the same things.

L. That a Triangle must needs have 3 Angles, equal to two Right ones, depends
upon that Eternal truth in things, which is antecedent even to the Divine
volition. Because it implies a contradiction in the very Terms, to deny the
same; and it is no limitation of the Power, or Will of God, to say he cannot
will, or do these things, which imply a Contradiction in the very Terms. Gods
understanding, or will, no more alters the essential Properties of a Triangle,
than the understanding of a man, because they flow from the very Idea of it.
But is there the same necessity, that matter should be always tied to the same
Rules of Motion, as there is, that the 3 Angles of a Triangle, should be equal
to two Right ones? Does it imply a contradiction in the very Terms, that matter
should be created by a Spiritual Being, or receive its Laws of Motion from him,
or have those Laws controlled, or suspended by the same Power that made them.
If Nature be nothing indeed but matter and motion, and God be nothing else but
Nature, then there can be no Miracles; not because the understanding, or Will
of God are the same, but because, according to this Hypothesis, there can be no
such thing as Will, or Understanding in God. Your Author in his Annotations
tells us, that by Nature he understands not only matter, but alia infinita; but
Pray, what alia infinita are these, that are comprehended under the word
Nature? If a Spiritual and Intelligent Being, let him show reason, why he
cannot as well alter the course of the World, as he could at first Create it?

S. Because it would argue mutability in God, which all sound Philosophers do
acknowledge to be an Imperfection, that is unworthy of the Divine Nature.

L. This cannot be owned by those Philosophers, who believe that the world was
not ab aeterno, but Created by God. For there is more of Mutability in Creation
of the whole Universe, than in the additional Creation of some parts of it
only, which is all that we can understand by the word Miracle. I grant, indeed,
that the Universal Laws of Motion, which God has given to the Universe, are
sufficient, to preserve the World in that Beauty and Order, wherein we now both
see and enjoy it; and that we may from thence Learn the great Wisdom of our
Heavenly Father, who could settle such a course and order of things, by
Chaining each effect to its most immediate cause, as might be sufficient to
support the World to all Ages, without the frequent interposition of a
Miraculous Power, to alter, or to amend, as it were, the work of his Hands. For
if this settled course and order of things, did not give us a right Notion of
the Wisdom, Goodness, Power, and other Glorious Attributes of our great
Creator, the Love of God could not be any Branch of the Law of Nature, which
yet in words, at least is more than once acknowledged by your own Author.
Miracles, therefore, as your Author well enough observes, are not at all
necessary to sustain, or preserve the Universe, since that may be, and is done
by the settled and ordinary course of Nature. But yet there are other reasons,
which render Miracles highly necessary to mankind, at some times, and upon some
signal occasions, so that without them, we should be the most miserable
Creatures of the whole Universe.

S. I would gladly hear what those reasons are.

L. When Revelation is necessary to show men the way to Happiness, then
Miracles are equally necessary to show men, that such Beneficial Revelations do
come from God. All men desire Happiness, and are conscious to themselves, that
it is not in their own Power, but in the Gift of God. But they never can come
to a certainty, either what Degree of Happiness God will bestow, nor upon what
conditions, nor what Atonement will be accepted for Sin, without the Benefit
of Divine Revelation, and such Revelation cannot be made evident, without the
rational Demonstration of a Miraculous Power. For either God must make this
Revelation to all mankind, which would disorder, in a manner, the whole Course
of Nature, by changing the Natural Faculties of the mind, into Supernatural
Endowments, or he must bestow a Divine Power upon those few, to whom he
immediately reveals his Will, whereby they may be known to be sent by God.

S. Will you pretend then, that Gods readiness to confer Happiness, and to
forgive Sins, are not known by the Light of Nature?

L. I grant, that the Great Benignity of the Divine Nature, is easily deducible
from all the Works of his Hands, by all the Rules of unerring Reason: And if we
were Conscious to our selves of no Sin, we might be certain that we should
receive no Evil from him. But supposing our selves innocent (which yet is a
very wild supposition) we cannot from the good things we enjoy by the Divine
Bounty in this Life, absolutely conclude what Good Things we shall enjoy in a
futute State. And much less, since we are guilty of known Breaches of the
Divine Laws, can we be sure of the Remission of Sins, and the Donation of
Eternal Happiness, since it depends upon the free Goodness of God, which is not
determined by any necessary Rule of Action. A Deist therefore expects Pardon
from God, just so as a Condemned Criminal hopes Forgiveness, from a mild and
gracious Prince. He has some General Notion, of the Goodnature of his
Sovereign, and therefore has some hopes it may be extended to him, as well as
to others. But a Christian has the same assurance of a conditional Forgiveness
of Sins, as a Malefactor has, that Sees and Reads a Proclamation of Pardon,
under the broad Seal of his offended Prince. Tho Miracles therefore are not
necessary to support material Beings, yet they are to assure mankind, of its
Happiness, and which do you think is of greatest moment? The Stateliness of the
Habitation, or the felicity of those Rational Creatures that inhabit in it?

S. If Miracles were necessary to promote the Happiness of all mankind, why are
not all men made Partakers of their Beneficial influence? Why must Miracles be
wrought only in some Ages of the World, and in the sight too of only one
Nation, not very Famous for War, or Learning? Why must all the Gentiles Perish,
because they knew not a matter of Fact, that never was made known unto them?
These are prejudices against your revealed Religion, which I can never conquer,
and am therefore forced to fly from that confined Light, to the more diffusive
Light of Nature.

L. Whilst man kept that integrity, wherein he was at first Created, there was
no absolute necessity of Miracles to make him happy, who was happy enough
before in the Enjoyment of his own Innocence. Nor was there any great need of
Miracles, whilst a traditionary knowledge of the Decree of God, to save
mankind, was kept alive in the World, by the long Lives of the Ante-diluvian
Patriarchs. But when all Flesh had Corrupted their ways before God, and the
Knowledge of one supreme Deity, which some will have to be a Connate Notion,
was almost totally eraced out of the minds of all mankind, as is evident from
humane, as well as Divine Historians, then it was very expedient that God
should make a farther Revelation of himself, confirmed by Miracles, without
which it could not have had the force of a rational Evidence, To save mankind
from utter perdition. And therefore, God first called upon the World by Noah,
the 8th Preacher of Righteousness, and then called Abraham out of his Fathers
Idolatrous House, and made a Covenant with him, that he and his Seed, should
serve him. And when the State of the World required, that a manner of adoring
God should be settled in it, tho not absolutely best in its own Nature, yet
most suitable to the Genius of the Jews, and that posture of affairs, which was
then Predominant in the World; the Wickedness and Folly of Man, in abusing the
Light of Nature, rendered it necessary, That Moses should be sent to the
Israelites, to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, with Signs, and Wonders,
and show them after what manner God would then be Worshipped. So that Miracles
are necessary, first, when a new manner of Worship is to be planted in the
World: And therefore Moses was endued with the Power of Working Miracles, to
convince the Israelites, that the Ceremonial Law was Divine, tho additional to
the Law of Nature. Or Secondly, When the true manner of worship is in danger of
being lost, And therefore Elijah and Elisha in the Time of Ahab, when Idolatry
made its greatest encroachment upon the true Religion, by Diverse Signs and
Wonders from Heaven, called back the Israelites, to the true Worship of the
only God. Or Thirdly, When a manner of worship, that is of Divine institution
is to be altered, or disannulled, as was the Ceremonial Law by the coming of
our Savior.

S. But what must become of those, who never saw nor heard of these Miraculous
Revelations?

L. They have the Light of Nature, Let them use that well, and leave themselves
to the Mercy of God. The Scriptures no where say, That all those who have not
seen nor heard of a Miracle, shall be Damned, tho it teaches, that if they be
saved, it must be by Virtue of the Name of Jesus. And therefore the strength of
your argument is quite lost, unless you can prove that wild assertion. Besides,
the knowledge of revealed Religion, is not put up in so narrow a corner of the
World, as men of your persuasion do seem to imagine. For there is no Nation,
but what may embrace the Gospel, if they please to listen to its rational
evidence, and I would feign know what injustice it is in God, to suffer them to
Perish, who either knowing nothing of the Miraculous Demonstration of the
Gospel, make an ill use of the Light of Nature, or those who hearing its
rational evidence, abuse their reason in not consenting to it?

S. But still you do not clear the main difficulty, objected by my Author, that
the Power of Nature, is the very Power of God. How then can a Miracle be done
by Natural Power?

S. Your Author first begs his Question, and then very boldly Triumphs in the
Victory, as if extorted by force of reason. He presumes it granted as a first
Principle, That there is no other God but Nature, and that this Nature is fixed
and immutable, not a free Agent, but a perpetual slave to fatal necessity. And
thence strongly concludes, That if there be no Power but that of Nature, then
there can be (oh, wonderful demonstration!) no supernatural Power. But we, on
the other hand, proceed by a more plain and intelligible way of reasoning. We
suppose, That since Matter is a dull, unactive Principle, it could not make it
self, nor reduce it self into that decent and useful order, in which now we see
it. 2d. That it was created by a Superior Being: That that Superior Being must
be endued with all manner of Perfections, as being the first Cause of all
Perfections in the Creature. 3. That Wisdom, Understanding and Liberty are
Perfections, and therefore consequently must be in the highest degree in him,
who is the first Cause of them. And Lastly, That his Wisdom is seen in all the
works of his hands. If therefore your Author would argue fairly against us, let
him attack boldly any one of these Propositions, concerning the Nature of God;
and if we cannot defend them, we will become Worshippers of the great Goddess
Nature -- But if God is an Understanding Being, he must be a free Agent: And if
he be a powerful and free Agent, what should hinder his stopping, or
disordering the regular course of Nature, when the doing so is conducive to his
own Glory, and the general Benefit of all Mankind? Unless you can prove by
Scripture, that he has sworn by himself, he would never do it.

S. Does not my Author tell you, That it is a foolish thing to limit the power
of Nature, and to say, her Laws extend to some things only, and not to all?

L. Your Author speaks herein, as little like a good Philosopher, as a good
Jew, or a good Christian. If the Laws of Nature are fixed and immovable, they
may be observed; and the Observation of them, we call, the study of Natural
Philosophy. To say therefore with your Author, That the Course of Nature is
fixed and immutable, and yet that her power extends to all things; Potentiam
Naturae infinitam esse omnino credendum est.
is a contradiction in the very Terms: for if she could do all things, she
could alter her settled Course, and move in an Order quite contrary to what now
she steers. Nor does he mend the matter, by asserting in the same page, That
the (fixed) Laws of Nature, extend to all things that are comprehended in the
Divine Understanding. For the Divine Understanding must needs comprehend as
well what is impossible as what is possible to be done; and the Mutability, as
well as the Fixation of the Rules of Motion in material Bodies: into such
notorious Absurdities does your Author run, whilst he endeavors to destroy the
credibility of Miracles, by jumbling together the Names of God and Nature.

S. If there be a fixed Course of Nature, how can there be a Miracle, which is
neither more nor less than an interruption of it?

L. Because it is fixed by a Superior Intelligent Being, who can unfix the
same, when it is for his own Glory, or the General Benefit of Mankind. If
Nature did not keep, for the most part, a settled Course, we could have no
distinct Notion of a Miracle; but she is so steady, that she gives us time to
view her, and from that view to frame such Axioms of Possibility and
Impossibility, as are as evident to our Reason, as any of those principles,
which some (tho I fear not truly) do style Innate Notions.

S. I am still of my Author's mind, That we call those works Miracles, whose
natural Causes we do not understand.

L. No: We rather call that work a Miracle, which we know is done, not by a
Natural, but by the immediate Energy of some Supernatural Power. For the Course
of Nature being steady, nothing is more easy than to observe, when her Course
is broken; i. e. when something is done, that we are sure is repugnant to those
fixed Rules which she is bound to observe in all other cases.

S. Prithee what are those Rules? How do you know that they have ever been
broken?

L. The first Rule, Ex nihilo, nihil fit; Out of nothing, there can come
nothing; is as clear by its own light, as any One Proposition we can easily
frame unto our selves. Either therefore Matter made it self; that is, it was a
Cause before it did exist, which is a Wild Absurdity, or it was made by a
Superior Being, and its very Production the beginning of Miracles. We all know
that mutations of bodies may be made by the regular Laws of motion; but that
Matter should make it self, or be produced out of nothing by her own Laws of
motion, is repugnant to the common sense of mankind. If Matter therefore was
made, there was a time when it did not exist, and therefore its motion from non
existence to existence, could not be according to any fixed Rule of Nature,
which had then no being, and consequently God did not always work by fixed and
unalterable Rules, to which the very Notion of Creation is directly repugnant.

S. You ramble too wide from our present purpose: Can you prove that any thing
yet was ever done, since the Creation, that was certainly repugnant to any One
fixed Law of Nature? which may be a sufficient Testimonial to a man, that he is
sent from God.

L. It is a Maxim in Reason, That one body acts upon another by Contaction or
Protrusion only. If two bodies were placed never so near, and no contiguous
body between, they might remain to all Eternity in that posture, without
affecting each other, or producing any alteration in them. If therefore any man
can produce an alteration in bodies, by the sole word of his mouth, all men
will conclude this man does act by virtue of a Supernatural Power. When
therefore the Children of Israel saw Moses turning water into blood, or
bringing Lice and Frogs, etc. upon the Land of Egypt, by the lifting up his
Rod; or our Savior curing diseases by the word of his mouth, or raising men
from the dead, etc. they must conclude that this was done by a spiritual, and
not by a material power, which can cause no alteration on another body, but by
Contraction, or Emission of minute Particles, the secret Operations of which,
do constitute the whole body of Natural Magic. Now if the moving of the Wand,
or speaking a few words, did produce the wondrous Effects but now mentioned, in
the production, or alteration of bodies, by the sole force of Nature, they
would do it always, when uttered or applied after the same manner; because the
Laws of Nature are fixed and immovable. But since we see they have done it, but
cannot do the same thing again, we very rationally conclude, that these
alterations were made in Bodies by a Spiritual and a Superior Power. Your
Author therefore must not think to sham us off with a Wild Pretense, That what
we call Miracles, were some strange works of Nature, so called with respect to
the ignorance of the Vulgar: For we are willing the Miracles upon which our
Religion is grounded, should be tried by the most known Axioms of Natural
Philosophy, and challenge the whole Race of Epicurean Atomists, to show how
they could be done, according to any Hypothesis that ever yet was framed, of
the Mechanical Laws of Motion.

S. Does not my Author clearly demonstrate, That the Sun's stopping his course,
of which we read in the Book of Joshua, was nothing else but a refraction of
Light, the Sky being then full of Hail? And the like may be said of the Dial of
Ahaz.

L. Your Author boldly says much; but he proves nothing. The standing still of
the Sun, or the prolongation of Light by any other means, whether Natural or
Miracu lous, would have been equally beneficial to the Israelites, in affording
them time to slay their Enemies. But because it would be greater Encouragements
to the Israelites, to see God himself assisting them in a miraculous manner,
and the Scriptures do relate this as a Miracle; and since no sufficient Reason
can be given, why the Sun should stop his Course, (or the Earth stand still,
which in the Effects is the same thing) unless by the immediate Power of God,
we have more Reason to believe the Scripture-Narrative, than the improbable
Conjecture of your daring Author. For why must we needs conclude, That because
it was possible the Children of Israel might be deceived, that therefore they
certainly were so? Or how is it probable, that the Air being full of Hail,
should make a whole Nation believe that the day was longer than it ought to be?

S. Supp^se the Earth did stand still, does it therefore follow it must be a
Miracle? Might there not be a Concourse of grosser Particles of Matter, in the
Liquid Either, that might stop its Course for a Season, without the
interposition of a miraculous Power?

L. Since we have no infallible Knowledge of all the possible motions that may
happen in the Celestial matter, we cannot conclude that New alterations
therein, are the immediate effects of a supernatural Power. But since we are
sure, that one body works upon another, by contaction only we are sure that
Joshua's Prayer could by no force of Nature, cause the continuance of the Sun
upon the Horizon, beyond the usual time. But alas, we do not seek for Miracles
in the Heavens above, nor in the Seas beneath, most Fruitful of amazing
Prodigies. We appeal to the most approved Axioms of Natural Philosophy, as the
Tests of the truth of those Miracles, upon which our Religion is grounded. He
that admits the Historical part of Revealed Religion to be true, as your Author
does more than once, can never pretend to solve all that is therein recorded,
by Natural causes, without running into absurdities of the grossest Nature. In
compliance to his own Hypothesis, he must believe that the Course of Nature is
settled* and yet in compliance to the Historical Account of the Scriptures, he
must believe that words can cure Diseases, and raise the Dead, etc. And yet
that the same words, spoken by another Person, cannot do it, i. e. That the
Course of Nature is settled, and that it is not settled, but moves at random.
He must admit that one inanimate Body, Acts upon another only by contaction;
And he must admit, that words have made alteration in inanimate Bodies, which
yet can cause no other contaction, than what arises from the modulation of the
Air. He must believe it to be a Law of Nature, That the Dead cannot be raised
up to Life, because that is known to be above her usual Course, and he must
believe that the Dead have been restored to Life, by Virtue of a Divine
Command. In short, your Authors endeavor to solve Miracles by Natural causes,
is ridiculous to the highest Degree, for he attacks revealed Religion in that
place, which is of all others most impregnable; if the Sparks of your
Principles, did believe that Moses and the Prophets, and our Savior, did
really do all those mighty things recorded of them, by a due application of
Natural causes, why do not they attempt to do the same? Or why do they laugh at
all others who do attempt it, as Fools and Madmen? And how does it happen, that
no such things were ever well attested to have been done by other Persons, who
have made Experimental Philosophy their study, with good success? And how comes
it to pass, that they are repugnant and irreconcilable to all the Axioms of
Philosophy, that hitherto have been Written, that the more any Learned Man
considers them, the more he finds of a Natural impossibility in them? And why
cannot your Author find out as easy and probable a solution, of all the Signs
and Wonders, wrought by our Savior, as of the standing still of the Sun, or
the Passage of the Children of Israel over the Red Sea?

S. My Author is a wiser Man, than to believe all the strange Stories to be
literally true, which you read in your Bibles. He tells you, that whatsoever is
there reported to be done, which cannot possibly be ascribed to Natural causes,
is to be presumed as thrust in by malicious designing men. And that in telling
Wonders, the Scriptures speak to the Fancy, but not to the Reason of mankind.

L. Nothing speaks less to the fancy, than the Christian Religion, which in its
Doctrines and Precepts too, is altogether perfective of humane reason. But if
your Author denies his assent to the Historical part of the Bible, and only in
some places pretends to give it, to please the States of Holland, why does he
give no reason for his dissent? For one substantial reason, would be sufficient
in this case, to overthrow the whole bulk of revealed Religion? Why does he not
show, that no man can have any certainty of any matter of Fact, unless he see
it done with his own Eyes? Why does he not prove that Number, and probity of
Witnesses are no sufficient motives to assent? Why does he not produce some
Testimonies of Witnesses, that may invalidate the credit of these, who have
recorded the Miracles of our B. S. or of his Apostles? There is certainly no
more obvious way of ruining revealed Religion, than the disproving those
relations of Miracles, upon which its rational Evidence, is most strongly
grounded. Either therefore your Author could find nothing to say on this
topic, or else through inadvertency, he has omitted those Arguments, which are
most conducive to support so bad a cause.

S. It is enough that he demonstrated before, that the Power of God and Nature
being the same, there can be no such thing as a Miracle.

L. An Historical Account, is to be refuted in an Historical manner, not by
Foreign Arguments, which have no force to refute a matter of Fact. We urge the
Testimony of a sufficient Number of highly creditable Witnesses, that Miracles
have been done; your Author denis all, because according to his reason, it is
impossible any such thing should be. This is just as if a blind man should
endeavor to confute all those who testify there is such a thing as light, by
giving his reasons that oblige him to think, that there can be no such thing.
When a thing is well attested to have been done, it is a vain attempt to make
men Renounce their senses, in compliance to his reason.

S. You think you have gained a great point, when you have brought a man to
acknowledge, the reality of your boasted Miracles; But alas, you fight for that
which can do you no good when you have gained it. For Miracles can never make
us understand, either the Essence or Existence, or Providence of God.

L. According to my Notion of a Miracle, it is a work that is done by the
immediate Finger of God, and that a work we know to be done by God alone,
should not so much as render us certain of the Existence of a God, is to me an
unaccountable Riddle. Again, a Miracle is a work that we know cannot be done,
according to the Mechanical Laws of matter and motion, but is therefore
ascribed to a free, Spiritual and Powerful Agent, and yet that all this should
be no demonstration of the Spirituality, Freedom, and Power of the Divine
Nature, is to me the 2d part of the same Riddle. Again, a miracle is a work
that is wrought, to give some men a Testimonial, that they are sent on some
errand by God, to his Creature man, and yet that this should be no Argument of
Gods Providence, nor at all prove that he takes any care of mankind, is the
third and last part of the Riddle, which I humbly beg you would be pleased to
unfold to me.

S. That I will, and very briefly too. We gather the Existence of God, from
known and received Notions, but if there were any superior Power, that could
alter these Notions, it must necessarily destroy the very knowledge of a God,
or at least compel us to doubt of his Existence.

L. It is not by Miracles, but by the very light of Nature that we understand,
that there is a Being, superior to our Faculties, who can alter them for the
better or the worse, according as he pleases. But then the same reason tells
us, that Truth is one of his most adorable perfections, and from thence we
conclude, that he has given us right Faculties, and will not become the Author
of deceit. But it seems, your Author thinks, that he can never be secure of the
Truth of his Faculties, if he should once believe that there is a God, who is a
Powerful and Voluntary Agent.

S. No, there is a further reason, for if any thing be repugnant to Nature, it
is repugnant to those first Principles, from whence we conclude the Existence
of Nature it self. And what certainty is there, if you destroy first Principles?

L. A Miracle is so far from being repugnant to first Principles, that it is
altogether declarative of them. Is it not to be admitted as a first Principle
in reason, That there is a God who made the World?

S. Heavens forbid I should deny it.

L. And that can annihilate the World?

S. I see no reason to deny it.

L. If then alteration of some part of the Universe, be less than annihilation,
you must grant it possible, and what then is there in a Miracle, that is
repugnant to the first and most obvious Principles of Reason?

S. But he tells you, that whether a Miracle be a work, either which proceeds
from Natural causes, which cannot be explained, or has no other cause than the
immediate Will of God, yet still it exceeds the reach of humane understanding,
and we can understand nothing from that, which exceeds the very Standard of our
Faculties.

L. There is nothing in a Miracle, that exceeds the bounds of humane
understanding, but only the manner of the Divine Operation in the Production of
it. Our senses bear Witness that the work is done, and our reason concludes,
that none but God could do it. But we do not know the manner of the Divine
Operation: Nor no more do we comprehend the manner of the Divine Operation in
the Creation of the World; but does it therefore follow, that Creation, because
it exceeds the bounds of humane understanding, can give us no true knowledge of
the Essence, Existence, or Providence of God?

S. I cannot well answer your last Argument; but in the 72d page, I think my
Author argues very well; viz. That if any thing was done, above the power of
Nature, or contrary to Nature, it would be repugnant to that Order, which God
has appointed by universal Laws to be eternal; and the belief of such a thing
would make us doubt of all things, and bring us at last to Atheism.

L. And pray why so? What do you understand by Nature, but those Laws of Motion
by which God does preserve the Universe in that Beauty and Order wherein we now
enjoy it? These we acknowledge to be sufficient to give us knowledge of the
Existence and Wisdom of God, which would be known by the Work of his hands,
tho there were no such thing as a Miracle. Nor do we say, That a Miracle is
absolutely necessary to punish ill men, or to reward the good; God can do that
by his Providence, and the settled Course and Order of things: And though God
does it by Miracles sometimes, yet that is not for want of Power to do it
otherwise, but only that these Miracles may the more be considered as
Testimonials of a Divine Mission. Tho therefore the frequent interruption of
the settled Course of Nature, would render the Endeavors of those Vain, who
gave their minds to the study of Natural Philosophy; yet the interruption of it
at some certain Times and Seasons, when God is pleased to communicate some
particular message to mankind, is no obstruction to the study of Nature, and is
a great and necessary introduction to a compleater knowledge of the Will of
God. For what proportion of time is there between the Miraculous Ages of Moses
and our Savior, and the duration of the World? And how small is the Number of
well attested Miracles, in respect to all the other works of Nature?

S. Suppose there were real Miracles, yet my Author proves from Scripture, that
they can lead us into no true Knowledge of God. For a Prophet of the false
Gods, might work Signs, and Wonders, and yet deserve to be Stoned for his
pains. See Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. Verses.

L. A Miracle is an appeal to our senses, that what is done, is not done by any
Visible or Material Being. But because there are Bad, as well as Good Invisible
Agents, we are to Judge of the reality of a Miracle, by the Good or ill
Doctrines, which it is alleged to support. The Magicians of Pharaoh, and the
Pagan Priests in all Ages, alleged Miracles, to destroy the true Notion of a
God, and to loosen all the sacred Bonds of Morality, but neither were these
Miracles well attested, nor were they to be regarded, because they tended only
to destroy and corrupt Natural Religion, and Natural honesty too. And indeed
the Pagan Superstition, seems to me to have been nothing else but a Diabolical
Revelation of certain Names of Deities, Rites, and Ceremonies, as might keep
men furthest from God, and corrupt that Idea of him, which is easy enough to be
deduced from the Light of Nature. It is very plain, that they knew not the
Original of their own Religious Rites and Ceremonies, for so says Antigone in
Sophocles.

(...).
(...).
(...) Sophoc in Antigone.

(...).
Why should a Mortal break immortal Laws,
Not made by Man, but by the Gods themselves?
That ever must remain, tho none can know
The Fountain whence those lasting Rivulets flow.
Nor indeed, is it any wonder that they should not know the Original of those
Rites and Ceremonies; which have no Foundation in Nature, nor were so much as
of humane institution, but shuffled into the world by the Tricks and Impostures
of Evil Spirits. But tho Evil Spirits may be Authors of some things that look
like Prophesies, Miracle, or Inspiration, yet they never can nor will do any
thing to establish a Religion, that gives a true Notion of God, and Teaches a
rational worship of him, and tends to the good and benefit of mankind. If
therefore we have distinct Notions of Moral Good and Evil, and of Natural
Religion, we must have distinct Notions of the usual Effects of Good and of
Evil Spirits. The Jews were very sensible, that one Evil Spirit might by
Collusion give place, or at least seem to give place to another; and thence
maliciously concluded, That our Savior cast out Devils by Beelzebub, the Prince
of Devils. But our Saviors Answer is sufficient, Viz. If Satan be divided
against himself, how shall Mat. 4.
his Kingdom stand, because ye say, that I cast out Devils by Beelzebub? i. e.
If I, who teach the true Worship of the true God, cast out Devils by Satan,
then Satan is his own Enemy, and Industriously destroys his own Idolatrous
Kingdom, which with so much pains he has planted in the World.

S. If there was so much force in Miracles, p. 73.
as you do pretend, methinks, the Miraculous Age of Moses, should have been
most Religious of all others, but your own Bibles show, That the Israelites
fell immediately into the Idolatrous Worship of the Golden Calf,
Notwithstanding the Number of Moses' s pretended Miracles.

L. The Jews living in the midst of Idolatrous Nations, and Newly Emancipated
from Egyptian Slavery, might be tempted to Act contrary to their reason, in
compliance to the corrupt customs of those who lived round about them. But I
do not think, that thereby they thought to relinquish the Worship of the true
God, but rather to change the manner of it: Or if they did, yet they were
quickly recalled by Moses to the true Worship of God. And this must be granted
by your Author, to be very much for the honor of Revealed Religion, That the
Worship of one God, was not the Legal Religion of any one Nation, but that of
the Jews only.

S. I still fear, that the Scriptures, by Gods doing a thing, do mean no more,
than his permitting it to be done by the ordinary Course of Nature. For (Sam.
1. 9. Chap. 15. 16. verses). God is said to tell Samuel in his Ear, that he
would send Saul unto him, and yet it appears, that Saul came to him, as led by
Natural Motives, Viz. to seek his Fathers Asses. In the 105 Ps. 24th Verse. It
is said, God turned the hearts of the Egyptians, to hate his People; in the
first of Exodus, a Natural cause is rendered of that aversion. p. 75.


L. Suppose you should hear a poor man, that has received an Alms of a
stranger, say to himself, God has sent me relief; Could you from hence
conclude, that this Poor Man believed, That God never was the Author of a
Miracle, but always wrought by Natural causes?

S. I must confess, I see no reason for such a conclusion.

L. No more ought your Author ridiculously to conclude, that because the
Scripture speaks of some Natural things, as done by God, therefore God never
works in a Supernatural manner. For tho Saul seems to be led to Samuel by
Natural causes, yet the prediction to Samuel, that Saul should certainly come
to him, that he should be King of Israel, must needs be ascribed to a
Supernatural Power. The Heart of the Egyptians was turned against the Children
of Israel, because they feared their Numbers; But Exodus 1.
what natural reason can be given of all those other Signs and Wonders, which
are reckoned up in the same Psalm?

S. I must confess ingenuously, that if all things were done by Moses and our
Savior, in that exact manner, according to which they are related, it is
impossible to give a solution of them by Natural causes, especially, if Natural
causes do always work in a fixed and unmovable order. But my Author very
judiciously shows, that there are many Circumstances in a Miracle, which the
Scriptures do omit, especially, when they are Sung in a Poetic Style, which if
they were expressed, would plainly show, that what we now admire as
Supernatural, was only an effect of Natural causes: And not only so, but many
Circumstances of the Miracles recorded, do show that they required Natural
causes, to bring them to perfection. See Exodus 9. v. 10. Moses could not bring
boyls upon the Egyptians, without first throwing up Ashes in the Air. And Exodus
14. 21. We read, That the Red Sea was divided by a strong East Wind. Elisha lay
upon the Child, that was supposed to be Dead, and so revived him by the heat of
his Body. In short, if any thing is reported in Scripture, that is directly
repugnant to the Laws of Nature, or cannot follow from them, my Authors opinion
is, that it is added by some Sacrilegious Persons, who designed to impose a
Fable upon the World.

L. A tedious relation of impertinent Circumstances, is avoided by all
Judicious, and Faithful Historians. But to omit Circumstances that are
material, and the Knowledge of which alters the very Nature and Denomination of
an Action, is a Trick only of knaves and impostors. If therefore Moses and the
Evangelists, in those Books which are plainly Historical, did designedly omit
those Circumstances of Action, which would have convinced the world, that those
were only the Works of Nature, which they would make the world believe were the
very immediate Works of God, whatever credit their Writings might have met with
in After-Ages, they could have found none in their own. For the Jews that saw
what was done by Moses, would have known by the Circumstances of the Actions,
that were designedly omitted, that whatever he might pretend, there was nothing
in them, but what was effected by the sole Power of Nature: And how then could
he have persuaded the Jews of his own Age, that he was sent from God? Or how
could he have made so many false Revelations public, in the sight of the whole
Nation? And why should they be such Fools, as to erect a Government in Church
and State, upon a Foundation, which they of that Age must needs have known to
be too weak to support it? With what Face could our Savior, tell the Jews of
his Age, that his works testified of him, if there was nothing in them
Miraculous, but what was made so to appear by the partial and the unfaithful
Relation of his own Friends and Disciples. It is a false Insinuation of your
Author, that Miracles are for the most part Sung in a Poetic manner; for they
are historically related, as motives to the credibility of revealed Religion;
and tho some of them are recited in the Psalms, yet the very Poetic Style of
David, does not render them more wonderful, than the plain Historical Account
of Moses. But with what impudence, if not affected ignorance, does your Author
Affirm, that the Circumstances of some Actions, recorded as Miracles in
Scripture, do show that they were effected by Natural Causes. When Moses
brought a Boil upon the Egyptians, by throwing up Ashes into the Air, the
Action was as Miraculous, as if without throwing up the Ashes, he had only in
the Name of God, commanded the Boil to seize upon the Bodies of the Egyptians.
Exodus 9. 10. v.
Unless your Author can Philosophically prove, that according to the settled
Course and Order of Nature, of which he prates so much, one man by scattering a
little Dust or Ashes in the Air, might bring Scabs and Boyls to infest a whole
Nation, We read, That the Locusts came upon the Land of Egypt with a strong
Eastwind, and were driven away with a Westwind, Exodus 10. v. 14. v. 19.
both were done at the lifting up of the Rod, and the entreaty of Moses, which
we all know, are no Natural means of bringing up, or driving away the Locusts,
but such as rendered the Action as Miraculous, as if God had Created Locusts,
in the sight of the Egyptians to plague them. The like is to be said of our
Saviors curing the blind man, by anointing his Eye^ with Clay made of his
Spittle, which the Jews acknowledged to be a Miracle, and so must your Author
too, unless he will undertake to cure blindness by application of the same
remedy. But your Author is now come to his last remedy, Viz. To deny the whole
History of Moses and the Prophets, and our S. where it does at all oppose his
Doctrine of Material, or Corporeal necessity; and therefore since he alleges
no reasons for his dissent, I shall allege none to refute him, but refer you
for satisfaction to those many Excellent Treatises, that have been wrote upon
that Subject.

S. My Author shows, that your own Bibles do assert, that the Course of Nature
is fixed and immutable. So you read in the 148th Psalm. He has also
Established them, (i. e. the heavens) for ever and ever; he has made a decree
which shall not pass.

L. All that you can infer from hence, is this, Viz. That the Heavens are of a
long duration the Hebrews making no difference between Eternity and a very long
Continuation of Time. Or at most, that some of the Celestial Bodies, will not
be dissolved and that the very Heavens are so Subject to the Decrees and Laws
of God, that no casual Concourse of Atoms, shall be able to resist his will.

S. But Pray observe the Words of Solomon, the greatest Philosopher of the
Jewish Nation, Eccles. 1. 9, and 10. verses. The thing which has been, it is
that which shall be, and that which is done, is that which shall be done, and
there is no new thing under the Sun. 10. Is there any thing whereof it may be
said, this is new? it has been already of old time, which has been before us,
etc.

L. If you would be pleased to cast your Eye upon the 8th verse of that
Chapter, you will find that Solomon is there speaking of the toil, labor, and
satiety of all Worldly Enjoyments, in which nothing is New, but the old
Vexations of Humane Life, return continually upon us -- as Virgil not unaptly
expresses it,

-- Redit labor actus in Orbem. But here is not one word, that has any relation
to Miracles, nor can by any force of reason be distorted to that sense. For
suppose Solomon's meaning is, that nothing was New in his Time, nor would be for
the future, what is this to the Doctrine of Miracles? for Miracles were no New
Things in the Time of Solomon, for they commenced almost with the beginning of
the World, and therefore they might happen again and again, and yet no new
thing be done in the World.

S. But what think you, of the 14th verse of the third Chapter of Eccles. I
know that whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever, nothing can be put to it,
nor any thing taken from it, and God does it, that men should fear before him.

L. I think thereby Solomon declares what we all acknowledge, viz. The
Perfection and Stability of all the Works of Nature, which nothing can alter
but the immediate Power of God, by whom all things were at first Created. But I
can never think, that Solomon, who had right conceptions of God, could mean
thereby, that God had divested himself of the Power of Acting contrary to the
Laws of Motion of his own making. But only that he does it seldom, and not to
support the Universe, which might continue as it is without it, but to transfer
some part of his Authority, to those who are Commissioned by him.

S. I must Ingenuously confess, you have removed several of those prejudices,
which I have imbibed from this Author, and I begin to see more of the
reasonableness of assenting to revealed Religion, than I had before considered.
But still I would beg your assistance, to dispel two doubts, which do much
perplex me.

1. The first is, since Natural Religion is grounded upon Reason, why is it not
a better guide to Happiness than revealed Religion, which stands altogether
upon an Historical basis?

2. If the way to happiness is contained in the Scriptures, which is the best
way to come to a right understanding of them?

L. You impose a greater task upon me, than I am able to undergo, after so long
a fatigue. But if you think it worthy your labor, to meet me at any other
convenient Time, I will deliver my Thoughts upon those Subjects, with all the
brevity and perspicuity, that you can expect from me.

S. Your proposal is fair and generous; I will wait your leisure to morrow
Morning; in the mean time all Happiness attend you.

Conference V.
S. WEll Sir, have you considered of what last Night I propounded to you?

L. Yes, I have, and hope to make it evident unto you, that without Divine
Revelation, we had been involved in ignorance, and misery, and that the Light
of Nature, could not have showed us the way to true Happiness.

S. That is the thing I desire to hear from you.

L. I hope, you will grant, that the Soul is immortal, and at least capable of
a lasting Happiness or Misery.

S. I was always one of those Deists, which never did deny it; although I know
there are some who very confidently do.

L. And that the mind of Man cannot be very happy, till it be pretty secure of
lasting Joys in a future State, or at least freed from the danger of Living in
perpetual torments.

S. I must confess this to be true, of all those who give themselves any
tolerable liberty of thinking.

L. Then you will grant also, that the greater certainty men have, both of what
true Happiness is, and how it may be obtained, so much the better it is for
them.

S. None can doubt it.

L. Then it follows, that the Confirmation of Natural Light, by Revelation, is
one of the greatest Benefits that God can in this World bestow upon Mankind.

S. But what Confirmation can reason receive from History? This seems to me, to
be like the Suns receiving Light from a farthing Candle.

L. To understand this well, we must consider, that there are as it were 3
Mediums of certainty, by which the mind of Man arrives to the Knowledge of
Truth. The first is Reason, which apprehends common, plain, and universal
Notions, and draws right conclusions from them. The second is Sense, by which
we Judge of the Truth of Matters of Fact, and are certain of what Impressions
External objects do make upon our Organs, tho it does discover to us, the true
Nature of things, and the third is Revelation, to which we assent, because we
are assured it comes from God, the Fountain of Truth: Now tho Reason and Sense,
are the only Mediums of certainty in the works of Nature, with which the
Scriptures do not directly meddle, yet Reason is defective in showing us the
way to supernatural Happiness in two respects. First, because many things
belonging thereunto, are not deducible from reason alone. And Secondly, because
many things that are deducible from thence, in their own Nature, yet are not
Actually deduced by the Generality of Mankind.

S. Pray, Sir, a little Explanation: You seem now like Socrates in
Aristophanes, to walk upon the Clouds.

L. It is not deducible from reason alone, that God will never annihilate the
Soul; Or what will be its future State, or that he will forgive great Sins,
upon condition of Repentance; or that there are 3 Persons in the Trinity; or
that the Son of God would be Incarnate in the Flesh; or make satisfaction for
Sins; with other Articles of the like Nature.

S. But it is deducible, that there is a God, and that he is to be loved, and
feared, and that our Neighbor is not to be injured, and that temperance is
conducive to preserve health, wealth, and reputation.

L. But you must observe, that not one half of Natural Religion, or Morality,
that is deducible from reason, was ever actually thence deduced by one half of
mankind. What is more obvious to reason, than the Unity and Spirituality of the
Godhead, and what was more common all over the World, than the worship of many
Deities and Corporeal Representations of the Gods? What attribute in the Divine
Nature shines more illustriously to the Eye of Reason, than Universal Love and
Benignity? And yet that hindered not the Pagans from burning their Children to
Moloch, and giving the Fruit of their Bodies, for the Sins of their Souls. How
few were there amongst their very Philosophers, who believed the immortality of
the Soul? and some of them denied the difference between Moral Good and Evil.

Nec natura potest justo secernere iniquum. S. Prithee add no more, I am
satisfied that the greatest part of mankind, live more by sense than by reason;
and that they never use their reason any further, than just to serve the uses
of the Animal Life.

L. Tho therefore reason is Natural to all Men, yet it does not follow, that
all men are endued with all possible degrees of Natural knowledge in Morality,
any more than in Mathematics, where all is deducible from plain and obvious
Principles, and yet very few are well versed in that Noble Science.

S. Why, will you say, that there is a greater certainty in Revelation, than in
Reason?

L. Yes, there is: For Miracles are as so many Appeals, both to sense and to
reason too. The senses hear, or see something done, which reason tells 'em, is
done by the invisible Power of God, and if by God, then Signs of a Divine
Mission, in the Person that performs them, and if the Mission be Divine, the
same reason tells us, that the message must needs be true. So that Miracles
give Testimony to Divine Mission. 1. If they be wrought openly, and the effects
permanent, to distinguish them from juggling Tricks and Impostures. 2. If they
are directly repugnant to some known and universal Law of Nature, to
distinguish them from mere Natural Wonders. 3. If they are brought to give
Testimony to such Doctrines, as are not repugnant to Natural Religion, or good
manners, to distinguish them from the delusions of Evil and Malicious Spirits.
And 4 ly, When they are agreeable to Prophesies, which like so many lines, tho
drawn at several times, tend to one center, as it happened in the Person of our
B. S. now it is evident, that when sense and reason both conspire together, and
Act as it were in consort, it forces the assent of all sorts and degrees of
men, more strongly than dry speculation: And therefore since it is necessary
for the Good of Man, that the Will of God should be known, it was convenient it
should be made known in such a manner, as would convince the reason of the
Learned, and the very senses of the less thinking part of mankind, and this
could be done no other way so commodiously, as by Prophecy and Miracles.

S. Your reason, good Sir, for that?

L. If some things necessary to be known, are not deducible from reason, as it
is now, would you have thought it better, that God should have quite altered
the frame of humane Nature, and given new faculties to discern his Will?

S. No, that would have been too violent a force upon the mind -- I do not like
that.

L. Would you have had him spoken in a supernatural way to all mankind? By an
immediate voice from Heaven?

S. I cannot but see many absurdities in that wild supposition.

L. Would you have had him spoken to some select Persons, without any Corporeal
representations, by the sole operation of his Spirit?

S. I cannot see how that could have mended the matter; for I can no more frame
a Notion of certainty in bare Inspiration, than in the Hieroglyphical
representations made to the Ancient Prophets.

L. Would you have had him sent his Messengers on his Errands, without any
visible Power of Prophecy or Miracles, to be believed upon their bare word?

S. He might, if it had pleased him; but then I do believe very few would have
given them credit.

L. Would you have Miracles wrought every day?

S. I should be glad to see a Miracle, or two, for my own satisfaction: But I
must confess, if they were very frequent, they would not in a short time be
distinguishable from the Works of Nature.

L. Then I perceive you Sceptists desire something, but you know not what. For,
give your thoughts the utmost liberty of ranging, yet you will never find a
more commodious way of Gods speaking to mankind, than that which is recorded in
the Scriptures; because it is fuited to all the faculties of the Soul, and is
apt consequently to force the assent of all mankind: And if we consider the
subject matter of it, we shall find, that it reveals to man all those necessary
Truths, which are no ways deducible from reason alone; and Secondly, it gives
light, perspicuity and luster, to all those Moral Duties, which are indeed
deducible by operose deductions from reason, but have not been thence Actually
deduced by the less thinking part of mankind.

S. I should have a better Opinion of Scripture, if you could give me some
rules, of interpreting those Ancient Writings; for I had rather go to no
Oracle, than to an Oracle that has a double meaning.

L. The obscurity of the Scriptures, is very much insisted upon by the
Romanists, to make room for an infallible guide and interpreter; and from them
taken up by the Deists, to destroy all the whole frame of revealed Religion.
But the Scripture is neither so obscure, as the Romanists pretend, nor so
absurd as you Deists do make it. And First, I think it would be very much to
the purpose, to reduce Scripture to those several heads of the Subject matter,
that is contained in them. For,

First, For some things are the pure and proper objects of humane reason, in
which Natural Religion and Revelation, are not at all concerned; such as are
the motion of the Earth or Heavens, and other Phaenomena's of the works of
Nature. Of these it is not necessary, that the Scripture should speak in the
most proper, and the most Philosophical terms. It is enough that it excites us
to our duty, by the contemplation of their Beauty and Order; and therefore your
Author's Observation of the Errors of the Author of Joshua's History,
concerning the motion of the Sun, is little to the purpose, unless he can
prove, it was the design of that book, to give us a system of Astronomy.

Secondly, Other things in the Scripture delivered, are matters of pure
Revelation, which reason could never discover, but receives them as additions
to it. Such as are the Doctrine of the Trinity, Incarnation, Sacraments, and
the like, which my Lord Bacon in his Book, de augmentis scientiarum, wishes
reduced into one Body, that so we might distinctly view, what knowledge is
altogether supported by Divine Revelation, and what is owing to the unerring
rules of humane reason: For whatsoever is delivered by Revelation, is to be
received with the same firmness of assent, as a first Principle, but with this
difference, that we may safely venture to draw legitimate conclusions, from
first Principles of reason; but we must be more modest in matters of mere
Revelation, lest otherwise we wade beyond our depth. For here we must acquiesce
in nothing but the Scriptures.

Thirdly, Other matters are intelligible, by Reason and by Revelation too, as
visible by a double Light. Thus the whole substance of the Decalogue, excepting
only the Circumstantial part, of the precise time of worship in the Sabbath,
and our Savior's Divine Sermon in the Mount, and other precepts of morality,
are so many branches of Natural Religion. Revelation only confirms, what
reason, as it were, guessed at before, and makes that obvious to the meanest
capacity, which before was known to the more thinking part of mankind, and adds
the certainty of future rewards and punishments, which alone can engage a man
to act with vigor. And therefore we rightly enough interpret moral duties, by
known Principles of humane reason. For otherwise, we should run into many
absurdities, by adhering to the very Letter of the Decalogue its self. If we do
not interpret the 2d Commandment in this manner, every Picture in our Houses,
every Sign in our Streets, would be so many breaches of the Divine Commandment;
Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, nor the Likeness of any
thing, etc. All Executions of Criminals, and slaying of men in a just War,
would be downright Murders, if the Commandment, Thou shall not kill, was to be
taken in a strict and literal sense, nay, the Scriptures would contradict
themselves, when in some cases, they command Criminals to be put to Death.

Fourthly, Other things are Matters of History. Such as are the Narrations of
what happened to the Jews, and what Prophesies and Miracles were wrought amongst
them. And of these we Judge, as of other Matters of Fact, Viz. By the Number
and Credibility of Witnesses. And here we appeal to the common sense of
mankind, for these Miracles which are History to us, to those who saw them,
were matters of sense. The Wisdom of God, is wrapped up in the Scriptures, as it
is in the works of Nature, and is thence to be deduced, by observing Method and
Order, without which all things appear to the understanding, without shape, or
beauty.

S. Is this all you would advise?

L. No. I would be glad to see, if the work were possible, an Authentic
History, Synchronical, with all parts of those sacred Writings. For want of
this, many have carp'd at Moses's History, who yet can find out nothing so
Ancient, nor so agreeable to all the remnants of past events, that were
preserved in the Fables or Histories of Pagan Writers. Where we have a
Synchronical History, it agrees very well with the Prophesies of Daniel, and no
doubt, but if an Account could be found, of whatever happened to the Neighboring
Nations about Palestine, it would clear many Passages in the other Prophets,
which now seem triffling, absurd, or unintelligible.

S. What do you think, of an exact Knowledge of the Hebrew words, and all the
Idioms of that Language?

L. I think it very useful, but that defect is sufficiently supplied to the
Vulgar, by faithful Translations of Learned Men. I therefore in the last place
would recommend, what is touched upon by your Author, an exact History of the
Books of the Scripture, viz. By whom written, for what end, at what time, what
was the Natural disposition, abilities, and qualities of the respective Penmen
(for Authors I must not call them) with other Circumstances of the like Nature.

S. Then I perceive you will agree with my Author in the manner of
interpreting, tho not in the Divine Authority, of those sacred Writings.

L. So far as it agrees with truth and no farther. I approve of a Collection of
those places that seem to agree, and of those which seem to be most repugnant.
But Vid p. 86.
then I do not infer from thence, that the Opinions of the sacred Writers were
really repugnant; because then some of them must have been false, and to
ascribe falsehood to inspired Writers, is the same thing as to ascribe it to
God himself: And because I find no seeming opposition in those Writings, which
may not be reconciled, by an exact knowledge of the Language, comparison with
the Context, and Attention to the true Scope and Design of Holy Persons. As for
what your Author says, that we are not to reject the literal sense of any
inspired Pen Men, because it is absurd, since in speculative matters they are
guilty of great absurdities, it is not to be admitted by a rational Man. In
those things indeed, which are intelligible from Principles of reason as well
as Revelation, if any thing is plainly absurd and impossible to reason, we may
and ought to fly to a Metaphorical sense and meaning. But we must not do so in
matters of mere Revelation, because they being deducible from no Principle of
Reason, we are not competent Judges of what is absurd or possible in them, but
we give assent to them, for no other cause, than because they are delivered by
God. Nor do I wish for an Historical Account, of the Lives and Dispositions of
the Ancient Prophets, that from thence, like your Author, I may ascribe what I
think to be erroneous, to the Education, Ignorance, or Stupidity of the
Prophet, because Inspiration equals the understandings of Men, and leaves
nothing to Natural abilities, but only the manner of expression; And that I
must confess, might be guessed at from such an Historical Account of the Books,
and the respective Penmen.

S. I have heard you hitherto, with some delight and satisfaction, but I fear
you will not be able, to assign any better method of interpreting Scripture,
than that which is propounded by my judicious Author. For as nothing unfolds
Nature better than a Natural-History, so is Scripture best interpreted by a
History of the Scripture it self. And this History must not only contain the
Properties and Idioms of the Original Languages, in which they were at first
Written, (of which we have discoursed something already) but secondly, a
Collection of the sentences of each Book, which are reducible to the same
General Head; that so Scripture may not be expounded by any Notions of reason,
but by sentences Collected from its self.

L. I cannot see how this can at all advance the design of the Author.

S. Then I will open your understanding with a clear instance. Moses says in p.
86.
one place, that God is a fire, and in another, that he is a Jealous God. Now
you Divines, would presently conclude, that fire was to be taken in a
Metaphorical sense, because it is contrary to Natural reason, to think, That an
immaterial God, should be a material fire: Not considering, that Moses might
teach, that God is a fire, tho that Doctrine p. 87.
is absurd, and contrary to reason. And unless the word fire, in the 31st of
Job and the 12th verse, had been put to signify wrath or Jealousy, nothing had
been more plain, Than that Moses had taught the Israelites, that God was a
fire, i. e. the refined part of the most sublimated Ether. Now since Moses
teaches that God is Jealous, and the Scripture no where says, That he is void
of Passions, thence we may conclude, that Moses did believe, or at least was
willing to make the simple Israelites believe, that there Vid. sig.
are the same Passions in God as there are in Man. And pray consider, how many
Absurdities there would be in the Christian Religion, if you Divines, in
Propositions repugnant to common Sense, did not (to save the Credit of your own
Profession) fly from a Literal to a Metaphorical Sense and Meaning.

L. That Scripture is very well expounded by Scripture, in most Cases, is a
Proposition which we are more fond to defend than your very Author; but yet we
are unwilling to exclude that use of common Sense and Reason, without which it
is impossible to understand the meanest Author. When we read any Historian,
Orator, or Poet, we readily guess what words are used in a proper, and what in
a Translated sense, by the very contexture and position of the words, without
turning over the whole History, Poem, or Oration, to find out a Metaphor, or
Catacresis, that lies open to the first view of the Reader. And let any Man
read the 23d of Deuteronomy, and the 23d and 24th verses, and Judge whether
Moses therein could be conceived as teaching the Israelites, That God is a real
fire, tho Job had never spoke one word of the matter. 23. Take heed to your
selves, lest you forget the Covenant of the Lord your God, which he made with
you, and make you a Graven Image, or the likeness of any thing, which the Lord
thy God has forbidden thee. 24. For the Lord thy God is a Consuming Fire, even
a Jealous God. How is it possible, That Moses should be conceived as teaching
the Israelites, that God is real Fire, when in the same breath he forbids them
to make any likeness of him; which the Israelites must needs have done, every
time they struck a light, or went to Oven, if God had been a real fire. Suppose
Job had never used the word fire in all his complaints, could not the
Israelites have understood Moses, when he expresses the Activity, and Vehemence
of Gods Indignation against Idolatry, in such plain words? Viz. Thy God is a
Consuming Fire, even a Jealous God. Besides, with what impudence, does your
Author, expound Moses by Job, when according p. 9.
to his Canons of Interpretation, Non licet mentem unius Prophetae, ex locis
clarioribus alterius concludere neque explicare, nisi evident issime constet,
eos unam eandemque fovisse sententiam -- We must not conclude the mind of one
Prophet, from the more express places of another, unless we are certain that
both were of the same Opinion. And again he tells us, in the 95th page, that we
must not hope to solve all repugnancies in the scriptures, by comparing one
place with another, since that only can illustrate some few places by chance,
Quando quidem nullus propheta eo fine scripsit ut verba alterius aut sua ipsa
ex professo explicaret. No Prophet wrote on purpose to explain his own, or
another Prophets meaning.

S. Methinks it is something odd, to say, That no Prophet wrote any thing to
explain his own meaning.

L. It is no other than your Author obtrudes upon you, under the name of solid
Reason, whereas he is full of Inconsistencies, and seems never to know his own
mind. In the 87 th. Page notwithstanding the illogical deduction of a universal
Proposition, from a single instance, he concludes from this passage of Moses,
That the knowledge of the Scriptures is to be Deduced only from themselves; but
from the very next Line, to the end of the Chap. he contends earnestly to
prove, That the knowledge of the true Sense of the Scriptures, is to be gained
not from the Books themselves, but from an History of the Books, and the
various chances that have happened to them, viz. a Narration of the Lives,
Manners, and Affections of the respective Penmen, who they were, at what time,
to whom, and upon what occasion they wrote each Book; so that according to your
Author, the Interpretation of Scripture is to be taken ex solis biblii.
from the Scriptures alone, and yet without such an extrinsick History, which
himself confesses to be wanting, it is impossible to know the true sense of
them.

S. I must confess, that my Author is a little too guilty of contradicting
himself, for great wits have short memories: But still you do not show any
Reason, why we should not believe that God, in the Opinion of Moses, was
subject to Humane Passions, since it is no where contradicted in the Scriptures
themselves,

L. Because the Scriptures themselves do teach, That God is a Spirit, John 4.
24. and that consequently, he cannot be subject to Passions, which are always
accompanied with some Perturbations of the Body; and since by Nature we have no
distinct, and Adaequate Comprehension of the Principles, and manner of
Operation of the Divine Nature, in distributing Rewards, and Punishments, it
was impossible for Moses to express God's first Resolution of rewarding the
Good, and punishing the Bad, in more proper terms than those of Love and Anger,
etc. Tho therefore those Expressions are Figurative, when applied to God, yet
since they are the most proper that we can find, for what we cannot fully
understand, it is plain that Moses had right Conceptions of God, when in words,
he ascribed those Passions to him.

S. Then you interpret Scripture by Reason.

L. I do not make my Reason, the Standard of Divine Revelation, but I hope,
that I may make the same use of my Reason, in Interpreting Scripture, as you,
or any sensible Man would do, in Reading any Humane Author.

S. It would be hard to deny you that liberty; besides I am so much a Friend to
Truth, that I must ingenuously confess, that it is not plain to me, that Job in
that place by Fire, does either understand Jealousy Vid. Job 31.
or Anger, but rather the crime of Adultery, or Fornication, for thus he
speaks, v. 9. If my heart has been deceived by a Woman, or if I have laid wait
at my Neighhours door; Then let my Wife grind unto an other, and let others bow
down upon her. For this is an Heinous Crime, yea it is an Iniquity to be
punished by the Judges. For it is a Fire that consumes to Destruction, and
would root out all mine Increase. Now it seems to me, that it is not Jealousy,
which is no very expensive passion, but the being deceived by a Woman, and the
guilt of lying in wait at his Neighbors Door, which Job calls here a Consuming
Fire, that would soon bring Destrustion upon his Body and Estate.

L. And yet your admired Author, makes use of such forced Interpretations of
Scripture, to affix absurdities of his own Invention, to those Sacred Writings,
and thereby to destroy their Divine Authority. For indeed the whole contexture
of the Scriptures, both of the Old and the New Testament, do give us such clear
Notions of the Unity and Spirituality of the Divine Nature, that they cannot be
distorted, to savor any Opinion that is contrary to Natural Religion, without
open violence, as well as secret Art and Cunning: Tho it must be confessed at
the same time, that they teach some things above our Reason, be cause they came
from an Author who knows more than in this Life can be understood by us.

S. If you rightly understand the Ambiguities of the Hebrew Language, which my
Author very learnedly reckons up, in the 93. Page and the great want we have of
a certain History of the Books themselves, and the Lives of the Authors, you
would easily perceive that we know little or nothing of the true sense of
Scriptures, unless it be in those places which treat of Moral Precepts, for
they are so plainly Intelligible, that they retain the same perspicuity in all
Languages.

L. We know that the Hebrew, as well as all other Languages, is subject to some
Ambiguities, which may create Error, but we do not see that these Ambiguities
are so frequent, or of such consequence, as to shake our Belief of any one
Fundamental Article of Revealed Religion. But with what Gygantick confidence,
would your Aurhor raise a Stupendous structure, upon this narrow and rotten
Foundation? There are some ambiguities, in some places, that may sometimes
arise, concerning the true meaning of some few Texts of Scripture -- Therefore
we can never be certain of the true meaning of any one Text therein, those only
excepted, which contain Moral Precepts, for of those we were certain before
hand. But we can never understand, from thence, that there was such a People as
the Jews, or such a man as Moses, or such a Person as our Savior, who did
wonderful things in Judea, nor any Apostles sent out by him, for these are all
speculative matters, which (tho the New Testament was wrote in Greek, yet) are
altogether obscured by the ambiguities of the Hebrew Language. Can you think
your Author would have descended to this absurd way of arguing, if his cause
would have bore a better? Is not our Faith on our Savior, grounded upon plain
Narrations of such Matters of Fact, as are as easily intelligible in one
Language as another, and will not History as well bear a Translation as the
Problems of Euclid? Does not he pretend to expound Scripture by some Hebrew
History, (if he could get one for his purpose) and yet is all History so
obscure, that it is impossible to be expounded?

S. You cannot deny, but that a History of the Lives of the Prophets, would
much conduce toward the better understanding of Prophetical Writings.

L. It might give light to some few places, but is far from being absolutely
necessary to expound all. Why may we not as well understand the Scriptures,
without such a History, as the works of Plato, or Cicero, or Levy? Besides, in
what Language must this Expounding History be wrote? Not in Hebrew, for then it
must be subject to the same ambiguities, as the Bible it self -- Nor in any of
the Eastern Tongues, for then the matter would not be much mended; Nor in any
Foreign dialect, for then it would not pass for Authentic, as wrote by one not
skilled in the Jewish Affairs. Then by whom must this History be wrote? By an
Author that pretends to be inspired, then Spinosa will have the same prejudice
against him, as against the other Prophets, and Penmen of the Holy Scripture,
whom he exposes as Madmen, and will not allow them to say one thing, (unless
in Morals) that can be understood, or that ought to be believed by us: If this
History is wrote by an Author that pretends to no Inspiration, tho that one
thing might recommend him to Spinosa, yet it will give all thinking men just
cause of caution, that they be not imposed upon, by a man whom they know to be
as fallible as themselves: And therefore unless they can be well satisfied,
that his integrity is greater, his understanding clearer, and his opportunities
of knowing all the important Matters of Fact, of those Ages, more advantageous,
than those of the Holy Penmen, they will see no reason, why they should rather
Correct Scripture by the Historian, than the Historian by Scripture.

S. Ay, but my Author gives you such a History of Scripture, as makes all the
Pentateuch, Books of Joshua, Judges, etc. To appear to be a Novel Invention,
most likely to be jumbled together by Esdras, as he well Conjectures, and that
the other Books of the Old Testament, received as Canonical, are not of that
Antiquity which you Divines ascribe to them.

L. But then you should consider, that your Author is a Person upon whose
Judgment we cannot rely, since we can have no reason to be satisfied with the
integrity, or Authority of such an Historian. How little his integrity is, we
have already seen, by his pretending to be a Deist, and to advance the Law of
Nature, which consists chiefly in Loving God; when it is plain from his Chapter
of Miracles, that he is really an Atheist, as every man must needs be, that
holds the infinity, and immutability of the Power of Nature: As also by his
partial Distorture of Scripture, by denying it the same liberty of using words
in a Translated sense, which is given to all other Writings. As for clearness
of Judgment, which is the second Commendation of an Historian, I cannot see how
your Author can pretend to that, whom I have showed, to have laid down so many
false propositions, drawn so many false conclusions, and so frequently to have
contradicted himself. And as for his opportunities of knowing the Matters of
Fact, of the most grand importance of those Ages, we all know, that he is as
ignorant of them as our selves, and therefore we had rather believe those who
lived in Ancient times, and were Eyewitnesses of what our Savior did, or
suffered for our sakes, than a Modern upstart, whom we are sure can understand,
at most, no more than our selves of the matter?

S. But tho you slight his Authority, yet if he can prove by solid reasons, as
he attempts in his 8th Chapter, That the Pentateuch was not wrote by Moses,
etc. You are bound to yield to them, and to deny its Divine Authority.

L. But if his Reasons, are fallacious, and Conjectural (as I could easily
demonstrate, had we Books and leisure in this place, to go through the
Argument, which yet at best would be but loss of time) then you cannot blame
me, if I withdraw my assent from his Pernicious Doctrines. But to bring matters
to a short issue. Do you believe, that the Account the Evangelists give of the
Life of our Savior, and the Acts of his Apostles, is altogether unintelligible
by the Hebriasms, and various Lections?

S. No, I think no man of common sense or modesty, will pretend to say so.

L. Do you think, that all therein recorded of them, could be done by any
Natural, or Diabolical Power?

S. You have already demonstrated the impossibility of the first, and the
absurdity of the second assertion.

L. Then if our S. and his Apostles, who proved their own Divine Mission, did
bear Testimony to the Writings of Moses, and the other Prophets, all your
Authors Criticisms, or Conjectural fancies of Esaras, Vanish into nothing. For
with what truth could our Savior have said, Mat. the 19th and the 7th. That
Moses Commanded to give a Bill of Divorcement, and that Moses, for the hardness
of their Hearts, suffered them to put away their Wives? or St. John 19. 17.
That the Law was given by Moses, if the whole Pentateuch had been a Fiction of
Esdras? Our Savior therefore has confirmed the Law of Moses, and the Divine
Authority of the Old Testament, by a new addition of Signs and Wonders,
impossible to be gainsaid by the Cunning, or Malice of Man.

S. You have now given me full satisfaction, concerning the Divine Authority of
the Scriptures, into a dislike of which I was led by the Sophistry of this
intrieguing Author. For it mightily pleased me, to hear his project, to deduce
all knowledge from Natural reason, which as he teaches, p. 98. Proceeds from
plain and obvious Notions, to the most obscure and remotest objects.

L. Let Natural reason proceed never so cautiously, yet she can never ascend so
high, as to understand clearly those supernatural things which concern a future
State, of which she has here, no complete Ideas. And besides, if God is a free
Agent, it follows, he can prescribe what conditions of salvation do best please
him: And Natural reason can never ascend to the knowledge of what a free Agent
will have done, from any known or obvious Maxims in Nature.

S. No more than one man, by reason alone, can tell what is the will and
pleasure of another -- But I will ask you one Question more, Viz. Who ought to
be the Interpreter of Scripture? P. 103. penes unumquemque snmmum jus, summaque
authoritas, de religione libere judicandi, etc.
for Spinosa gives away that Authority to every private Man.

L. The ambiguous use of the word Interpretation, has been the cause of much
Error, and much Mischief in the World, it is a Multiplied Idea, which will
breed confusion in the understanding, if it be not carefully resolved into its
first Principles. For first, sometimes to interpret Scripture, is put to
signify only, a right apprehension of what is the true sense of Scripture, and
an expression of that true sense, in plain and proper terms: And this belongs
to every individual Man, to whom the Gospel is Preached. For every man has a
right to understand those truths that are a-like beneficial to all mankind, and
which are therefore promulged, that they may be made known unto all: And as
every man has a right to understand as much as he can of Divine truths, so also
may be Communicate that knowledge by Speech to others, tho the public Exercise
of that Office, do most properly belong to the Ministers of God. But others, by
the word Interpret, do understand, the Power of affixing what sense they please
upon the Scriptures, and constraining others to admit the same, be it what it
will, as true and genuine. But such an Authority as this, can neither belong to
every Private man, nor to any humane Power whatsoever. For no man can have
Authority from the God of Truth, to oppose truth it self, and it is gross
nonsense, to call Contradiction of Scripture, an Interpretation of it. There
is no room for Interpretation, but in places that are obscure and dubious, but
plain Texts expound themselves, and to pretend that every man has a right* of
affixing a contradictory sense, to the most easy, express, and intelligible
Texts of Scripture, is as much as to say, Every Man Summum jus. summa
authoritas.
has a right to be a Fool, and to deceive himself, and to live in Error, and be
nursed up in the ignorance of those things, that most concern his Happiness, and
to give the Lie to his great Creator. Instead of believing the Scriptures, to
be the Word of God, every private man, according to your Authors Hypothesis,
may believe them lawfully to be the invention of Satan, or the dictates of
Madmen, or the invention of some cunning Politicians. What is more plain than
our Saviors words, Mat. 16. 17. Verses. Go you into all the World, and Preach
the Gospel unto every Creature. He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved, but he that believes not shall be damned.

Suppose a man discoursing upon these words, should pretend to teach from
hence, that no Gospel either was, is, or ever ought to be Preached to the
World; That no man ought to believe that Jesus is the Messiah, and that there
is no Condemnation to unbelievers either in this World, or in the World to
come. Would you call this an Interpretation of that Text of Scripture?

S. Not if I was in my right Senses.

L. And yet your prodigal Author gives this large Authority to every private
Man, of Interpreting Scripture after this absurd, and erroneous manner.

S. Perhaps, he only means, it is in every Man's Power to Interpret Scripture
as he pleases.

L. So it is in every Man's power to be Erroneous, and to Act contrary to the
Law of Nature; but has he therefore a right to Murder, Steal, or commit
Adultery? But he does not only say, Summum jus libere sentiendi de Religione
penes unumquemque esse, but, Summam Authoritatem Scripturam p. 103.
Interpretandi, apud unumquemque esse.

S. Methinks the right of Interpreting Scripture, ought rather to be given to
some Body of Men, who are most likely to preserve it.

L. I have already showed you, That Contradiction is no Interpretation, and,
that no Humane power, can have Authority to oppose Divine Revelation, unless
you could prove, That Man is more Omniscient than God.

S. God forbid, that I should attempt that; for now I begin to hate the very
name of Deism, as it stands Opposed to the Belief of Revealed Religion.

L. And you would hate it more, if you considered, from the Dregs of how many
Sects and Factions this Poison is Extracted, and how much it tends to destroy
all Morality, and use of right reason in the World. From the Papists, it takes
the Doctrine Deficiency, and Obscurity of the Scriptures, and the necessity of
a Living Interpreter. From the Quakers, it take the Doctrine of See chap. 12.
p. 144, 145
of the Light within, as sufficient to Salvation, (which he calls, The Law of
Nature, and they term, the Spirit,) and of villifying the Scriptures, as mere
Paper, and Ink, as he expressly calls 'em, Chap. 12. Page 145. Vereor ne nimis
sancti; etc. Simulachra et imagines, hoc est Chartam et atramentum pro
Scriptura adorent. In which words, he makes Reverencing the Scriptures, to be a
kind of Idolatry. From the Independent, it takes the Renunciation of Catholic
Communion, and makes every Man, as they do every Congregation, to be a Church
as it were to himself, and it borrows something of the Doctrine of Fatal
Necessity from the rigid Preshyterian. Then as to its tendency to Immorality,
it takes from us all certainty of the means of Grace, and hope of Glory,
through the Mediation of our Blessed Savior, and leaves us nothing to Adore,
but a careless, deceitful, and inflexible Deity, and whilst it pretends to
leave us Piety, it really robs us of the true Ided of God: It leaves Justice
and Charity, no other encouragement than they can find in this world, and God
knows that is often little enough; and it gives the full Reins to Lust, and
Appetite, to Eat, Drink, and be Merry, for all beyond the Grave, is but
Conjecture, or idle Speculation: Nay, it drives the mind unto an assent to so
many Absurdities, and Contradictions, as must at last center in downright
Atheism; for a Man may as well believe, that there is no God at all, as believe
that there is a God, who has exerted his own power to abuse the World; and
Atheism in a few Years would run up again into the old Pagan Idolatry, (since
Humane Nature cannot be long without Religion,) or some Superstition of (if
possible) a more ridiculous, and pernicious Nature.

S. Sir, you need add no more, I am fully satisfied of the necessity of
Revealed Religion, and only beg your Prayers to Almighty God, that I may
increase in all useful Knowledge, and Walk worthy of so Heavenly a Vocation.

L. I am glad if any weak endeavors of mine, can contribute any thing to the
Vindication of that Religion, into which I was at first Baptized, and which is
now so much opposed by the Fraud, and Malice both of Men, and Deviss; And may
God, who has began this Conversion in your heart, assist you, always with his
Grace, and make you perfect in every good Work, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

S. I thank you for your Christian endeavors, and wish you an hearty farewell.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Chapter Brom, 1697.
THE Snake in the Grass, or Satan Transformed to an Angel of Light discovering
the deep and unsuspected subtilty, which is Coucht under the pretended
simplicity of the Quakers. The Second Edit. with Additions. Price 4 s. bound.

Satan Dis-rob'd from his Disguise of Light, or the Quakers last shift to cover
their Monstrous Heresies, laid fully open, in a reply to Thomas Ellwood's
Answer (Published in May, 1696.) to George Keith's Narrative, of the proceeding
at Turners -- Hall, June 11. 1696. By the Author of the Snake in the Grass.
Price 1. s.

A Discourse proving the Divine Instituon of Water Baptism, by the Author of
the Snake in the Grass. Price 1 s.

The Quakers Set in their true light, from the Year of their rise, 1650. To the
Year of their Progress 1697, by Francis Bugg, Senior. Price 1 s.

The Case of the Quakers, Relating to Oaths Stated; wherein they are
Discovered, to oppose Prophetical, to pervert Evangelical, to falsify
Ecclesiastical, and to Contradict their own Doctrines. Price 6 d.

Arithmetical Recreations, all performed without Algebra, with several
Arithmetical Problems, and their Answers, by Will. Leybourn, the Second Edit.
Enlarged and Amended. Price 1 s.

The Reformed Monactry, or the Love of Jesus, a sure and short, pleasant and
easy way to Heaven, by the Reverend Mr. Luke Beaulieu. Price 1 s. 6 d.

An Essay concerning Preaching, Written for the Direction of a Young Divine,
and Ufefull also for the People, in order to Profitable hearing; together with
a seasonable Defense of Preaching, and the plain way to it, by Dr. Glanvil.
Price 1s. 6 d.

Dr. Combers Works, on the Common Prayer, in Folio and Octavo.

Friendly and Seasonable Advice to the Roman Catholics of England, by Dr.
Comb. Price 1 s.

A Manual of Prayers, for the use of the Scholars of Winchester College, and
all other Devout Christians. To which is added, three Hymns for Morning,
Evening, and Midnight, newly revised, by the Author of the Practice of Divine
Love. Price bouud 1 s.

The Plague of Athens, which happened in the Second Year of the Peloponnesian
War. First described in Greek, by Thucydides. Then in Latin, by Lucretius, now
attempted in English; By the Right Reverend Father in God, Thomas, Lord Bishop
of Rochester. Price 6 d.

The Poems of Horace, Consisting of Odes, Satyrs, and Epistles, Rendered in
English, and Paraphrased, by Alexander Brom, Gent. and several other Persons
Price bound 4 s.

Songs and other Poems, by Alexander Brom, Gent. Price bound 3 s.


