A LETTER FROM EDMUND ELLIS A MINISTER of the Church of England TO JOHN NORRIS
Another Minister of the same Church In Vindication of the QUAKERS from the
Charge of being SOCINIANS.
SIR,
HAving been lately informed, that a French Minister now in London, being found
Guilty of Spreading the Doctrine of the SOCINIANS, is said to pretend to be a
Quaker; and having a long time thought it my Duty to do what in me Lies, to
take off that harmless sort of Men, that are called Quakers from that Popular
Odium, which by some Persons they have been most Unjustly exposed unto, I make
this Address to you, being known to have Writ against them, but a Person of
more Learning and Candor than any other that I have yet known to have Written
against them; most earnestly Entreating you by the Love we owe to all Mankind,
that you would be pleased to concur with me in my present Endeavors to
vindicate these Men, from that unjust Imputation, viz. That they are SOCINIANS.
You know R. Barkley, in his Apology, P. 84. says expressly. If (the Doctrine
Concerning the Light within contradicts, overturns, and enervates the false
Doctrine of the Pelagians, Semi-pelagians, SOCINIANS and others, who exalt the
Light of Nature, [and] the Liberty of Man's Will, in that it wholly excludes the
Natural man from having any place, or portion in his own Salvation, by any
Acting, Working, or moving of his own, until he be first quickened, raised up,
and acted by Gods Spirit.

Clement Lake (one of those they call Quakers) in one of his Letters (lately
Published) to John Flavel an Independent Preacher has these Words, in Answer to
Flavels Charge, That the Quakers lead men to Obedience to the Light within for
Salvation: We press Obedience to the Light within, we own who is Jesus Christ
the Light of Israel the Light of the World, who is given to be a Covenant to
the People, and a Light to the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes Esa 42. 6, 7.
This was David's Light to his Feet, and Lanthorn to his Paths, Ps. 119. 115. And
this Word, or Light, or Jesus was in the beginning, and in him was life, and
the life was the Light of men, John 1. 8. Can those Men be SOCINIANS, who
acknowledge that Jesus Christ is the True Light In every Man, which he could
not be, if he were not Infinite? I must bear my Testimony to this Crooked and
Perverse Generation, That Jesus Christ being the True, and Eternal GOD is IN
every Man, Converting or Convincing him in order to his Conversion, or (in
proportion to the Repugnancy he makes against the Divine Illumination)
Tormenting him: I say Tormenting him, not Directly but Consequentially, as the
Torment or Vexation of a Spirit, or Rational Soul, is the Natural Result of all
Repugnancy to THE TRUE LIGHT, which is the INFINITY of Goodness. I further
Testify, and shall be ever ready, by the Grace of God to maintain the Assertion
(which I hope by you will not be denied) that it is possible for any man (that
has not made up the full Measure of Iniquity) at all times, and in all places,
by a Sincere Dependence upon the Power and Virtue of the LIGHT WITHIN,
MANIFESTING any Action to be Sinful, to conceive an Aversion to it. I desire
your Candid Reflections on the Answer I shall here give to one Passage in your
First Treatise Concerning the Divine Light, p. 65. I had no Reason to confine
it (as the Quakers do) to Divine and Spiritual Truths, but to extend it to all
Truth without Exception, which I suppose to be equally perceivable in this
Divine Light, which as being the very Essence of God, must be equally
exhibitive of all. To this I answer, First that the Quakers speaks of the LIGHT
with reference to his being INCARNATE, And so it is mani est, whatsoever
Influence he has upon the Souls of Men, it is in Order to their Sanctification,
it shows nothing else but Sanctifying Truth. Secondly, I assert, that all Truth
is Divine, Sanctifying Truth, which being Rightly apprehended, will most
certainly carry the Soul to GOD, the PRIME VERITY, the Fountain of all Being.
You say, you suppose all Truth to be equally Perceivable in this Divine Light.
We grant that all such Truth, the Consideration whereof is for the Pesent
Necessane to our Sanctification, is Perceivable in this Divine Light. There are
many things in your Published Writings that deserve the thanks of all Men,
particularly your Confutation of Mr. Locks Conceit that we have no Innate Idea
of God; For whose sake I beseech you to own the Truth, wheresoever your find
it, and I shall ever remain

Your Faithful Servant in the love of all Truth, EDMUND ELYS.
Totness in Devon. August 4. 1693.

