A LETTER TO THE Author of a Book, ENTITLED, An Answer to W.P's KEY, About the
Quakers LIGHT WITHIN, etc.
By Edmund Elys, a Servant of Jesus Christ.
SIR,
I Consider that the Controversy that you and I are engaged in, is of
infinitely greater concern to all Men than all the Contests of all the Kings,
and other Potentates in the World about Temporal Power and Dominion: For the
Nations are as a drop of a Bucket, and are counted as the small Dust of the
Balance: But THE TRUE LIGHT, concerning whose Influence upon the Souls of Men,
we are now to Dispute, is, The High, and Lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity,
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. I beseech you therefore to consider that you
must give account at the Day of Judgment of every word you shall return in
Answer, to what I shall here say in vindication of the Truth concerning The
Light within, Asserted by W. P. in his small Treatise, Entitled, The Key, etc.

You say, p. 12. Never was any Nation, or any Generation, or any one Man
instructed by that Light that is in the Conscience of every Man, that there
ever was such a one as Jesus of Nazareth, much less, that he was the Lord, and
least of all what he required of his Servants and Attendants: Therefore no
light within common to all Mankind, can be the Rule of the Christian Religion.
So that the notorious Experience of all Men confutes the pretense of the
Quakers, since it was never possible for any Man to learn, the least part of
the Christian Religion by the Light within that is in every Man's Conscience.
Answ. Whoever did not Rebel against the Light, which is in the Conscience of
every Man, did believe that there was such a one as Jesus of Nazareth, as soon
as this Truth was Declared unto him by Christ, or His Apostles, or any other
that had received Authority from CHRIST to Preach the Gospel. In a sincere
Conformity to the Law of GOD written in the Heart, is employed a Virtual Assent
to all Truth. You say, ( p. 26.) That, Our Conscience is an inward Sense
perceiving immediately nothing but our own Thoughts, which thoughts are
therefore its Notices; and the Minds perceptive, Power presenting these in it
self, is the Light in the Conscience of every Man. Answ. CONSCIENCE is the
KNOWLEDGE of the Law of God in Conjunction with the KNOWLEDGE of the
Conformity, or Difformity of our own Actions, or Omissions thereunto: By
Knowledge here I mean the Inward Man, or the Heart considered, as Knowing the
Law of God, etc. The Truth of what I say is evident from these Texts of
Scripture, Romans 2.15. 1 John 3.20, 21. This is a gross Falsehood that Conscience
perceives nothing immediately but our own Thoughts: For it immediately
perceives the Law of God, viz. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
Heart, and with all thy Soul, and thy Neighbor as thy self; after that it
perceives the Conformity, or Difformity of our own Actions, or Omissions
thereunto. In the Law of God written in the Heart, is manifestly employed the
Idea of God; for we cannot have any Perception of the Law of God without some
Perception, Notion, or Idea of His Existence. This Innate Idea, Notion, or
Perception of the Divine Being, the one being absolutely infinite, is that
peculiar Participation of Eternal REASON, The WORD, which was in the beginning
with God, and which was God, with which our Blessed Creator, the Fountain of
all Goodness has endued all Rational Souls. This I suppose is that which W. P.
means by His own Light, viz. the immediate Emanation of the WORD, or REASON
ESSENTIAL upon All Rational Souls. It Is excellently observed by W. P. Key. p.
2. that, This Light is something else than the bare Understanding Man has as a
Rational Creature: For as such, Man cannot be a Light to himself; but has only
a capacity of seeing by means of the Light, with which Christ, the Word,
enlighteneth him.

The Humane Intellect, or Understanding is called Reason, because it is the
power or faculty of perceiving the Emanations of the Essential Reason, the
Fountain of all Truth, and Goodness. You tell us that The Mind's perceptive
Power presenting these (our Thoughts) in it self is the Light in the Conscience
of every Man. I suppose upon second thoughts you will retract this: What! is
the Power, or Faculty perceptive of Light or Truth, the Light it self? I Will
grant that the Humane Understanding, or Intellectual preceptive Faculty, being
the Eye of the Soul, may be called the Light that is in us; not because we are
conscious of our Thoughts, but because we are capable of perceiving the TRUE
LIGHT in our own Souls.

You say, This light is the Deity it self, and then the Soul of every Man will
be Deified thereby. Answ. Not so but the Soul of every Man that Walks in this
Light, that adheres to it, as the Principle of all his Actions, may truly be
said to be made Partaker of the Divine Nature, (...).. It is a most horrid
Error (if not plain Blasphemy,) to say as you do, that It was never possible to
learn the least part of the Christian Religion by the Light within, that is in
every Man's Conscience: For by the Light within we understand CHRIST himself,
and that Light which immediately Flows from Him, the Fountain of Light, the Sun
of Righteousness, which we are called to Reflect upon, and Conform our Will,
and Affections thereunto, by all the Notices that GOD gives of himself by any
of his WORDS, or WORKS. Whatever knowledge a Man can have of the sense or
signification of any Texts of Scripture, without this Reflection or immediate
Application of the Will and Understanding to Christ himself, the Fountain of
Light in his own Soul, such Knowledge is rather the Picture, Form, or Image of
Knowledge, than True Divine Knowledge: It Is that Knowledge which puffs up,
and renders Men more like the Devil, the Father of Lies. It Is only by obeying
the Light within, or by our adherence to the Spirit of Truth in our own Hearts,
that we can ever attain to the knowledge of the Truth, as it is in JESUS; that
is, as it saves those that have any apprehension of it, from their Sins. p. 21.
you have these words: God is Light, and God is within other things, as well as
Men; is then God a Light within to every Tree, or Beast, or Star? Answ. GOD,
being the ONE absolutely infinite, is in every Creature; but He is a Light only
to those Creatures, which he has endued with a Capacity of having some sight,
or perceivance of Him. I desire you would Peruse all those Papers which have
been or shall be Published for Me, by Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard in
Lumbard-street. If you shall attempt the Confutation of this Paper, or of any
thing else that I have Published, I desire you would not write one Line without
this Consideration* That we shall all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, and that our Life is but a Vapor, etc.

Totness in Devon, July 12. ^^95. I am, Your Servant in the Love of the Truth.
Edmund Elys.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard in Lombard Street, MDCXCV.


