DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
At the Court at Whitehall, The One and thirtieth of January, 1678/9.
Present, The Kings Most Excellent Majesty His Highness Prince Rupert Lord
Chancellor Lord Treasurer Lord Privy Seal Duke of Monmouth Duke of Lauderdale
Lord Chamberlain Earl of Salisbury Earl of Bridgwater Earl of Peterborow Earl
of Sunderland Earl of Clarendon Earl of Essex Earl of Bathe Earl of Craven Earl
of Ailesbury Earl of Carbery Lord Viscount Newport Lord Bishop of London Lord
Bishop of Durham Lord Maynard Mr. Vice-Chamberlain Mr. Secretary Coventry Mr.
Secretary Williamson Master of the Ordnance.


WHereas His Majesty has received Complaint in Council, That several Justices
of the Peace of several Counties, Cities and Liberties within this Kingdom,
notwithstanding the many Proclamations which His Majesty has been pleased
lately to Publish, for the better Security of His Majesty's Person and
Government, and of the True Protestant Religion, Do refuse, or neglect to put
the same in Execution, (at which their neglect and refusal, at a Time wherein
it is most apparent, That not only His Majesty's Royal Person and Government,
but the True Protestant Religion within this Kingdom, have been, and still are
in great danger) His Majesty cannot but signify His just Displeasure: And
therefore has this day been pleased in Council to Order, That all His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace do with all Care and Diligence pursue His
Majesty's Commands signified in such His late Proclamations. And His Majesty
does hereby further direct the Lord Chancellor of England, upon due Complaint
made of the neglect or refusal of any of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace,
in the Execution of the Premises, forthwith to put them, and every of them out
of Commission for the Peace, as Persons disaffected to His Majesty's
Government, and the True Protestant Religion; And to put in their Places
Persons who may be likely to Act with more Vigor and good Affection.

ROBERT SOUTHWELL.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1678/9.


