By the Lords Justices,
Tho. Cantuar. J. Summers C. S. Pembroke C. P. S. Devonshire. Shrewsbury.
Dorset. Godolphin.


WHereas it has been Represented unto Us by the Levant Company, That they have
reason to fear that some of His Majesty's Subjects, who have Authority to Seize
the Ships, Goods and Merchandises belonging to the French King and his
Subjects, and such Ships, Vessels and Goods as are liable to Confiscation, may,
by Color thereof, take other Ships and Goods of Subjects of other Princes and
States in Amity with His Majesty: And whereas We have also been Informed that
diverse of His Majesty's Subjects have betaken themselves to the Sea-Service of
Foreign Princes and States in Amity with His Majesty; and also that others of
His Majesty's Subjects, having His Majesty's Commission to Seize the Ships and
Goods of the French, have also taken Commissions from other Princes and States
for Seizing the Goods of other Foreigners who are in Enmity with such Princes
or States; by Color whereof they pretend to make Prize not only of the Goods
of His Majesty's Enemies; and such as are liable to Confiscation, but also of
other Goods of some of His Majesty's Friends or Allies, if they happen to fall
in their way, whereby such Persons having such several Commissions may be
Liable to the Punishment due to Pirates, and such their Proceedings may be of
dangerous Consequence to all that Trade on the Sea: We being willing to Provide
against such Enormous Practices, and likewise to Evidence upon all Occasions
the particular Consideration We have for all His Majesty's Friends and Allies,
as well as His own Trading Subjects, have thought fit, by the Advice of His
Majesty's Privy Council, hereby strictly to Prohibit and Forbid all His
Majesty's Subjects, who have any Commission or Commissions to Seize the Ships
and Goods of the Subjects of the French King, and such other Ships, Goods and
Merchandises as shall be liable to Confiscation, according to the Treaties
between His Majesty and other Princes and States, that they do not, upon
Pretense or Color thereof, Seize the Ships, Goods or Merchandises of others,
which are not liable to Confiscation according to the aforesaid Treaties; or if
any such Ships or Goods shall happen to be Seized upon just Cause of Suspicion,
that after it shall Legally appear that the same do belong to His Majesty's
Friends or Allies, and are not liable to Confiscation, as aforesaid, that such
His Majesty's Subjects do forbear to keep or detain the same, or to take away
any such Goods so belonging to His Majesty's Friends or Allies. And We do also
hereby strictly Command and Require, That no Officer or Mariner whatsoever,
being His Majesty's Subject, do Presume to put himself into the Martial
Sea-Service of any Foreign Prince or State, or to Accept of, or Execute, or
Serve under any Commission of War, or Letter of Marque, or Reprizal, from any
such Prince or State, or in any other Ship or Vessel than such as do belong to
His Majesty or His Subjects, without Leave from His Majesty, or the Lord High
Admiral, or the Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral for
the time being, in one Form obtained. And we do hereby Charge and Command all
Officers, Mariners and Seafaring Men whatsoever, who are now in such Foreign
Sea-Service, to leave the same forthwith, upon Pain of their being Reputed and
Punished as Pirates. And We do hereby Charge and Require all English Consuls,
Agents, and other Ministers Residing with any of His Majesty's Friends and
Allies, that they cause due Publication hereof to be made, and that they use
all Lawful Ways and Means to Discover and Suppress all Offenders against this
Our Proclamation. And We also Require all ViceAdmirals, and Commanders of His
Majesty's Ships of War, and Officers in Ports and Maritime Places, to Apprehend
and Seize such of His Majesty's Subjects who shall continue to Serve in any
Foreign Man of War or Privateer, or under any Foreign Commission at Sea, and
neglect to return upon these Our Summons; and that they send Certificates
thereof with all speed to His Majesty's High Court of Admiralty, to the end
that the Offender or Offenders may be Proceeded against according to the Laws
in that behalf Provided.

Given at the Council Chamber at Whitehall, the Eight and Twentieth Day of May,
1696. In the Eighth Year of His Majesty's Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1696.


