THE Earl of Shaftsbury's GRAND JURY VINDICATED From the Aspersions cast on
them in the late Address from some of the Middle Temple, London.
SIR,
HAving little diversion besides the reading of Gazets and other
News-Pamphlets, that of Feb. 20. 1681. came to me of course, which tells us of
a Declaration Presented to His Majesty by Edm. Saunders Esquire; Councellor at Law,
and several other Gentlemen of the Middle Temple; and Signed by the Gentlemen
of that Society: This indeed surprised me at first: but finding no more of the
Ancients of the Bar named, nor the Bench so much as mentioned; I concluded
presently that 'twas the Act only of some Good-fellows of the House, who being
met at a Tavern, and better filled with Wine than Law, thought themselves fit
to give an Opinion of all things and persons; and presuming that Number would
add weight to their Paper, styled themselves The Gentlemen of the Society; to
look big in a Gazette, how unvaluable soever in their Chambers. Nor is it to be
wondered at, If a Low- Birth, narrow Fortune, and Debauched Life, do so
slavishly expose some men to any great Temptation, as to undervalue their
Profession, and abandon Religion. The Laws of England are so tender of men's
Lives, that no one can suffer Death but by the averment of twice twelve men,
that he committed such a Fact for which that Punishment is awarded, and
therefore however of late (for the advancement of Power by depriving men of
half that safety which the Law gives them) it has been given in Charge to
Grand-Juries to find upon a probable Evidence, and always the highest Offense,
because it may be lessened at a Trial, where it is expected the influence of a
Court should be great enough to hang or save, according to Directions; Yet let
every true Englishman, when he serves upon this Duty, consider what care the
Law takes in their returns, not only that they be good and lawful men; but that
they be of the Vicinage, and so are presumed to have a clearer knowledge both
of the nature of the Fact, Credit of the Witnesses, and Reputation of the Party
accused, than any other persons though equally able and honest, yet not living
within those limits can reasonably be imagined to have; For as my Lord Chief
Justice Vaughan observes in Bushels Case, They may have Evidence from their own
Personal Knowledge, by which they may be satisfied, and sometimes are, of the
incredibility of the Witnesses; and as a Jury cannot discharge that Trust which
the Law reposeth in them, if they do not well weigh the Credit of their
Evidence and all Circumstances relating to the Fact; so they cannot satisfy
their Consciences if they shall deliver a Verdict otherwise than they believe:
Therefore my Lord Chief Justice Vaughan in Bushel's Case p. 140. makes this one
fault in that Return, That the Jurors are not said to have acquitted the
persons Indicted against full and manifest Evidence, Corruptly, and knowing the
said Evidence to be full and manifest against the Persons indicted; for how
manifest soever the Evidence was, if it were not so to them, and that they
believed it such, it was so far from being a Fault, that it was their Duty,
because sworn to give their Verdict according to the best of their knowledge;
and they had been forsworn, at least in foro Conscientiae to have done
otherwise; so that according to the opinion of this great and learned Judge, a
Jury must, and cannot otherwise be guided than by their thoughts of the
Evidence. What a Court may call clear and plain proof (as they have done in the
late and unusual way of examination of Witnesses) may appear far otherwise to
them, and for reasons weighty and convincing; and whatever men may say or write
yet since they cannot believe as they please, it is not in their power to alter
their Judgment according to another direction. So that there might be motives
strong enough to induce the E's. of S. Jury to acquit him, though there had
been as many more such witnesses, and had all as positively sworn the Treason,
as those that appeared; as the consideration of the Evidence it self, how
improbable some things were, and how ireconcilable others to common sense and
belief; how infamous the Witnesses were, and what applications they had made to
the City (and perhaps to some of them) for a subsistence, before they entered
into this Conspiracy; the state of my L. S. as he stood in the way of Popish
designs; and therefore necessary to be destroyed, and by no means so
advantageous to their Cause, as under the color of a Protestant Plot to be
proved by Popish Evidence. How unlikely a man of his Prudence was to discover
such a Design to persons that might betray, but could never give the least
advantage to it; how fatal the Kings Death must needs be to a man of his
Fortune, eminently irreconcilable to Popery and a Popish S^ccess^r: the Jurors
might have under their consideration these or the like circumstances, and from
them conclude, that such thorough and improbable swearing was not gratis; and
upon the same reasons that such a party as would be at the charge of such and
so many Witnesses, would not spare for Price, nor want opportunity to convey
into his Closet the horrid Paper that was found there. It is worth
consideration that every Witness comes to a Grand Jury under the Obligation of
this Oath, viz.

The Evidence that you shall give to the Grand Inquest upon this Bill of
Indictment, shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth: so
help you God.

So that hearing all that can be said against the Prisoner, it were very
unreasonable if they should not be so tender of his life, as not to hazard it
at a further Trial, if what is said on one side be not to them sufficiently
convict^ve; and how can a conscientious Juror aver that upon his Oath, the
truth whereof he is not satisfied in his Judgment? For the form of their
presentment runs thus, The Jurors upon their Oaths do present, that A. B. is
guilty of Treason, Murder, or Felony; for they must upon their Oaths aver the
Fact as well as the Subsequent Jury, (or else the Prisoner can never be
Convicted) and therefore ought to be as careful in their Verdicts, and not find
a Bill upon that Evidence though of the Grand Jury, which they would not upon the
same Evidence find if of the other, the Prisoner no way defeating it upon his
Trial. Of what esteem Grand-Juries were in former times in the Trial of men's
lives, (how insignificant soever some would render them now, by directing them
to find in Course and Form) may be easily collected from the Statute 3 H. 8.
Chap. 12. Which though cited upon all occasions to Justify the Authority in
altering of Pannels, yet the reason is not observed why that power of reforming
was so entrusted; the words are these: Whereas great oppressions have been
within most parts of England by the subtilty and undue demeanor of Sheriffs by
making and returning for the body of the shires at every Sessions the names of
such persons who for the benefit of such Sheriffs will be wilfully forsworn at
the solicitation of such Sheriffs and their ministers; By reason whereof many
and diverse substantial persons, the Kings true Subjects, contrary to equity and
rigbt, have div^rs and many times wrongfully been Indicted of diverse Murders,
Felonies, and other misbehaviours by their covin and falsehood, to the utter
undoing of their lives, loss of their goods and lands. By the Preamble of this
Act, it is plain that this power of Reforming was given to no other intent, than
that the Subject might have honest Grand-Juries, men of such integrity and
understanding, as will-neither be corrupted nor frighted into a false averment
of any Indictment, and thereby put the Prisoner in hazard of his life at a
farther Trial; which was the only crime of which those Grand Juries so
corruptly returned could be guilty; for they could do no more than find the
Indictment as it was brought to them, and the Prisoner must afterward come
upon another Trial, and before Justices too, to make his defense. And yet the
Statute says, these Indictments have been to the utter undoing of the lives
and fortunes of diverse substantial persons the Kings true Subjects, especially
when found o^ course in that manner and form as they are sent to them; which
Jurors ought particularly to consider in this age, where violent prosecutions
are so frequent, and many undone by great fines upon hasty expressions, (or
parhaps pleased with the Libels of the age, and having no other malice to the
Government than reading the Wit of the Phamphlets, are made the Publishers,
that they may be Fined to their ruin, if they prove not persons of a
conscience like these Gentlemen, fully complying to every thing in fashion)
lest by a common rumor they mistake that for form which is the essential part
of every Indictment, and the consideration thereof absolutely necessary in
their giving a Verdict, because the safety or destruction of the Prisoner
depends as much upon their finding his Intention as his Fact: For all
Indictments in capital Cases must be laid Feloniously, Traitorously,
Maliciously, Seditiously, with intention to raise discord between the King and
his People, or in such like expressions declearing the intention of the
offender. The Bill thus drawn, the Prosecutor looks no farther than the proving
those Words or Actions to which that malice is so affixed. Now if a Jury
affirms the Indictment thus formed as has been the common course, then indeed
the Party is in Law supposed Guilty of all the Malice, as it is there asserted,
not that the Law presumes the Malice (as of late has been too much insinuated
into Juries but because the Jurors upon their Oaths do find the Fact committed
with such Malicious Intentions; for a cunning Clerk, or learned Attorney
General, may with his additions so dress up an ordinary Trespass, as to look
like a formidable Treason, and bring a man in question for his Life upon the
most trifling offense, if a wise discerning Jury shall not think fit to take
off the Varnish, and find the true naked fact as it shall appear to them.

In the great contested case of Barnardiston and the Sheriff of Suffolk, if the
Jury had found only a false Return, and not found it to be done Maliciously and
knowingly, as was asserted in the Declaration, who can believe that my Lord
Chief Justice Hale, and his then learned brethren in the King's Bench, would
have given Judgment for the Plaintiff; the knowledge and malice of the
Defendant so found by the Jury, was the ground of that Judgment. As in the case
of Pen and Mead, who being Indicted for certain Trespasses and Contempts,
unlawful Assemblies and Tumults, to the disturbance of the Peace, their
Intention appearing otherwise, were Justly acquitted; for though the Evidence
was very plain that they with a great number besides were met together, yet the
Jurors being upon their Oaths convinced That meeting of theirs was not with any
Intention to raise Tumults, or disturb the Peace, as was charged upon it in the
Indictment, could not bring them in Guilty. And for want of this careful
distinguishing in Juries, we shall in a little time (if London preserves its
Charter, have the Apprentices Riots in the Easter holy days when they go to
pull down a Bawdy House, made a new Treason, by the only addition of the word
Traitorous to this accustomed riotous offense; and nothing shall for ever
hereafter be a Riot (although our Old Laws have known some great tumults to be
no more) when a vigorous Attorney General shall think fit to call it Treason

LONDON Printed for R. Baldwyn, 1682.


