ORDERS Established The 14th of this present JANUARY, By His Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, For Regulating the ARMY, AND For the Soldiers paying of
Quarters, and fair behavior in the Countries: Together with several Letters
from His EXCELLENCY to the Committees and Justices of Peace of the several
Counties, to put the said ORDERS in execution.

PUblished by special Command from His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of COMMONS,
January 26. 1646.

At a Counsel of War held at Northampton, Thursday the 14th of Ian. 1646.
Orders set down and agreed upon, to be presented to the General for the the
better regulating of the Army in discharging of quarters, and otherwise.
I. THat all Members of this Army from the fourth of this instant January, for
such time as they have or shall have pay, and orders to discharge their
Quarters, shall pay for the same at the several rates hereunder expressed,
except they can in any particular find themselves or their Horses cheaper. And
above these respective rates, none shall be compellable to pay, until the
Counsel of War, or Superior Authority shall give other order, but at these
rates the respective Landlords are to find those that are or shall be duly
quartered upon them, and at these rates every one shall discharge his Quarters
weekly, and at their remove shall make even for any odd days less then a Week.

The Rates to be as follows; viz.
Each Trooper mounted, to pay for his Diet, and Hay for one Horse, Ten pence
per diem. A Trooper unmounted, for Diet Six pence per diem. A Dragooner
mounted, for Diet and Hay, Nine pence per diem. A Dragooner unmounted, for Diet
Five pence per diem. Officers of Horse or Dragoons not in Commission, viz.
Trumpeters, and Corporals of Horse, Sergeants of Dragoons, and Chyrurgions
Mates, Sadlers and Farriers of Horse, and all Servants of Horse-Officers, to
pay the same rates as Troopers. Drummers and Corporals of Dragoons, and
Dragoon-Officers men, to pay the same rates as Dragoons. Each Gentleman of the
Lifeguard, to pay for his own and his servants Diet, Sixteen pence per diem.
He that has no servant to pay for his own Diet Twelve pence per diem.
Gentlemen of Captain Knights Troop, for their own Diet Nine pence per diem. For
their men as Troopers. All that have Horses to pay for provender (unless they
can buy cheaper) at Six pence per peck. Each Foot Soldiers, as also Corporals
and Drummers of Foot, Four pence per diem. Sergeants of Foot Six pence per
diem. All Commission-Officers of Horse, Foot and Dragoons, to pay for Diet as
they can agree with their Landlords.
II. That all Soldiers and Officers shall content themselves with such ordinary
Diet, as those with whom they Quarter usually afford themselves and their
Families, or as may be afforded for the respective rates aforesaid: And if any
shall otherwise enforce, or attempt to enforce his Landlord to provide
Dainties, or extraordinary Diet (not affordable as before) upon complaint
thereof to the next Superior Officer in Commission, such Officer shall compose
the business betwixt the Quarterer and the Landlord, and cause the Quarterer to
rest satisfied with such reasonable Diet as before, or otherwise shall punish
him, or secure, and send him to be punished by a Court of War as there shall be
cause: and this the Officer is not to neglect at his own peril of being
responsal himself if further Complaint be made, and if any Landlord shall
refuse to admit or entertain such as are duly quartered upon him, the Captain
or chief Officer present with the Troop or Company shall send some
Commission-Officer with such assistance as shall be needful to cause the
quarterer to be received into, and settled in his Quarter, with as much
quietness as may be. And if any Landlord shall be refractory or obstinate in
not entertaining or supplying with necessary Quarters, those that are duly
quartered upon him, the chief Officer present with the Troop or Company (if he
cannot otherwise compose the business between the Landlord and the quarterer)
shall send such obstinate refuser to the chief Officer present with the
Regiment or Brigade, who shall (if there be cause) transmit him to the General,
either in safe Custody, or otherwise with respect to his quality, to answer his
contempt.

III. That if any Soldier or Officer not in Commission shall refuse or neglect
to discharge his Quarters at the said rates (except as before excepted) upon
complaint thereof from his Landlord to the next Commission-Officer of the Troop
or Company, such Commission-Officer shall cause the neglecter to pay the double
of what he should have paid; viz. To the Landlord the full sum due for his
Quarters, with one moiety of the penalty into the hands of the Cornet or
Ensign, for the common use of the Troop or Company, to be disposed of for that
purpose, at the discretion of the Captain; and if upon such complaint, such
Commission-Officer do not cause the Soldier to make present payment to his
Landlord, at the rates due as aforesaid for his quarters, or secure, and send
the obstinate refuser to the Marshal General, to be punished by a Court of War
(such Commission-Officer, upon the Landlords complaint to his Superior officer,
or to a Counsel of War) shall pay to the Landlord out of his own purse, the
full double of what was due from the Soldier, besides satisfaction for the
Landlords necessary costs and charges of prosecution, and the Soldier to pay
besides, both for his Quarters, and the penalty as aforefaid.

IV. If any Commission-Officer shall refuse or neglect to discharge his own
Quarters as aforesaid, upon like complaint to his Superior Officer, the said
rule and penalty as before, to hold both as to the neglecter or refuser, and to
the Superior Officer complained unto.

V. That each Soldier and Officer, immediately upon his coming into any new
Quarter, shall give true notice of his Name and Surname to his Landlord, or the
chief of the Family (unless it be expressed in his ticket) under pain of
forfeiting a days pay to his Landlord, if it be not done within twelve hours
after his coming in, unless he remove sooner; and if any Troop or Company lie
still for three days or more in any Quarter, the chief Officer present with the
Troop or Company, shall before their remove, cause some trusty Officer to see
that each Landlord (through the whole Quarter) have the true Names of his
Quarterers, and of the Troop or Company and the Regiment.

Orders for prevention or redress of abuses in general.
I. THat if any Commision-Officer be complained unto for any abuse, injury or
disorder, committed by any Soldier or Inferior Officer under his command, shall
not without delay, do his best endeavor to find out both the offense and the
offender, and to secure, and bring him to punishment or Trial, or (if the
offense be a private injury to a Countryman) shall not cause present redress
or satisfaction to the injured, so far as is in his power, such Officer upon
information from the Countryman to his Superior Officer, or otherwise (so as
his neglect come to the cognizance of a Counsel of War) shall be culpable for
his neglect either to the loss of place, or otherwise, according to the degree
and quality of his neglect; and if the business were of private damage or
injury to the Country man; then to the making of satisfaction out of his own
purse, if by his neglect the Offender cannot afterward be known or produced.

II. That every Commission-Officer (upon notice from the Committee or any
Justice of Peace of the Country where he Quarters, concerning any complaint
brought in against any Soldier or Officer under his command for any offense or
injury to a Country man, or abuse to the Country, and of a certain day and
place assigned for the appearance of both parties, and their witnesses, before
the Committee or the said Justice) shall cause the party complained of (with
what witnesses he may have for his defense) to appear accordingly; and shall go
himself, or else some other Commission-Officer in his room, to attend the said
Committee or Justice of Peace, at the time and place so assigned; and upon the
appearance, he or the other Officer sent in his room, shall be assistant to the
said Committee or Justice of Peace, in hearing both parties what they can
allege, and taking the Examinations, both of the parties and witnesses on both
sides; and if thereupon the party complained of apppear culpable, and the
Offense such, as that the said Committee or Justice, with the Officer assisting
him, cannot well award private satisfaction therein to the complainant or
persons agrieved, of present punishment to the offender, but that it need or
deserve a more public trial; Then the said Commission Officer to join with
the Commmittee or Justice to certify the whole Examinations and Evidence in
the case unto the General* and to provide a Messenger for conveyance thereof,
unless the Committee or Justice will send the same some other way; And the said
Officer is from thenceforth to secure the Offender, to be sent for further
trial, either to the Head Quarter of the Army, or of the Brigade whereof he is
a Member, as the General shall thereupon direct.

III. No Member of the Army shall by threats or otherwise, deter any from
complaining, or from prosecution of the complaints, or shall offer any
violence, or put any burden, injury or wilful prejudice upon any for
complaining, under pain of cashiering, with loss of Arrears, or further
punishment, as the matter of the injury or violence will bear.

I do approve, ratify and confirm these Orders of the Counsel of War; And do
hereby require all Officers, Soldiers and Members of the Army under my command,
duly to observe the same: And all Field-Officers, Captains and others in their
several charges, to see that they be published unto all under their respective
commands, as other the Articles and Laws of War.

Given under my Hand at Northampton, the 18th day of January, 1646. T. Fairfax.

The Generals Letter sent with the Articles unto the Committees and Justices of
the several COUNTIES.
Gentlemen,
HAving with the advice of a Counsel of War set down Rules and Orders for the
future discharge of Quarters, as also for the better prevention and redress of
any disorders of the Soldiery; I have here sent unto you Copies of those
Orders, and do desire your speedy care, that they may be made known throughout
your County, that all may take notice what they are to expect from the
Soldiery, and what lies upon themselves for prevention or redress of any injury
done to them from the Soldier. I desire also, That every Justice of Peace
residing in your County, may have a several Copy of the Orders. And for the yet
more assured satisfaction of Quarters, I shall add this (which also I desire
may be imparted to each Justice of Peace, and made known through the County)
That if, notwithstanding these strict Rules and Penalties, any one shall
presume to shift away, leaving his Quarters not discharged according to these
Orders, I desire the Committee, or any Justice of Peace in the County, would
take Information thereof from the parties so injured (with the Testimony upon
Oath of some person beside himself) expressing what sum is so left unpaid, and
by what Soldier or Officer, or of what Troop, or Company and Regiment, and the
same to certify in particular unto me (your selves keeping a Copy or Abstract
of them) and I shall thereupon cause the Money to be deducted double out of the
respective Soldiers or Officers next Pay, and the same due to be returned to
the Committees for their respective Landlords; or if the Landlord himself will
prosecute the Complaint before a Court of War, he shall be sure to find the
effect of the Orders enclosed, both as to satisfaction for his Quarters with
the double penalty, and also for his charges of prosecution. Lastly, as to the
time for which Quarters are to be paid, you may take notice, that the whole
Army has lately received Pay, and Command to discharge Quarters from the
Fourth of this instant January forwards: And if future want of Pay shall
necessitate the discontinuance while any of the Army Quarters in your County,
you shall have notice thereof. I remain,

Northampton, Jan. 1646. Your very assured Friend, T. FAIRFAX.
To the Committees and Justices of Peace of the County of



Another Letter from the General to the Committees and Justices of Peace of the
Counties where any of the Army is Quartered, for prevention or redress of
disorders and abuses in general.
Gentlemen,
YOu may perceive in the Orders I herewith send you, what provision is made,
That no Countreyman (upon any abuse or disorder of Soldiers) needs be afraid to
complain to their Officers, nor doubt much of present redress through their
hands; or, if he fail thereof (through the Officers connivance or neglect) he
needs but remember what Officer he complained unto, and the Officer shall be
responsal for the Offense: But farther, if the Country man find not redress
in that course, or be yet fearful to go that way, I shall be content that he
make his complaint to you, or (for his yet more ease) to the next Justice of
Peace; And do desire, That the Justice would take the Information, and
(assigning a day for both parties, with their Witnesses, to appear before him)
would in writing under his Hand, give notice thereof, and of the Offenders
Name, to the next Commission-Officer, having command over him, and upon the
appearance, would, with such Officers assistance, hear both parties, take their
Allegations, and Examine upon Oath the Witnesses on each side, and if thereupon
the party complained of appear culpable, and the Offense such, as that the
Justice and Officer assisting cannot well end it by award (to the present
satisfaction of the agrieved, or punishment of the Offender) but that it need
or deserve a more public Trial, That then the Justice, with the Officer (or
the Justice alone, if the Officer refuse to join) would certify the whole
Examinations and Evidence, and send the same, sealed up, either unto me, or to
the chief Commander of the Brigade quartering in the Country, who shall
thereupon order a Court of War to proceed to more public Trial and Censure of
the business, without farther trouble of Witness to the Complainant, if that
Evidence be full and clear: And to this purpose (as you will find in the
Orders) all Officers are directed to observe and comply with the Committee, or
any Justice of Peace herein, and to furnish Messengers for conveyance of what
shall be so certified, unless your selves or the Justice will otherwise send
it. And this also I desire may be speedily imparted to each Justice, and made
known to the Country.

Northampton, Jan. 19. 1646. Your assured Friend to serve you, T. FAIRFAX.

At a Counsel of War held at Northampton the 14th of January, 1646. ORDERS
agreed upon, to be presented to the General for the regulating of the Army in
quartering, to prevent excessive charges to the Country therein, or
unreasonable defalkations from the pay of the Army to discharge the same.
I. THat no Soldiers or Officers shall be Billeted upon any Lands where there
is no House, nor upon any House where there is not Housekeeping, either by a
Master or Mistress of a Family, or by their Children, Servants, or others by
their appointment, or sufficient accommodations for quartering either Horse or
Man, but all shall be quartered upon Householders, where they may be
accommodated according to their number, and their respective conditions of
Horse or Foot.

II. That every Soldier and Officer shall be assigned to some certain
Householder or House where there is such House keeping as before; and no Soldier
or Officer shall have more then one Householder assigned for his Quarter at one
time, nor shall have any other appointed as contributory or assisting Quarters,
except it be one place for himself, and another for his Horse; or (being an
Officer or Gentleman) one for himself, and another for his Servants and Horses;
and this only by due, particular and certain Assignment.

III. That no Soldier or Officer (being so assigned to a certain Quarter) shall
for hire of Money or Reward, remove from such his Quarter to quarter elsewhere,
under pain of Imprisonment, and further punishment by a Counsel of War.

IV. That no Soldier or Officer shall exact or accept any Money, or any other
Alowance at all from his Landlord, or any other for him, in lieu of Quarter,
upon pain of cashiering, and restoring the double of what is so taken.

I do approve, ratify and confirm these Orders of the Counsel of War; And do
hereby require all Officers and Soldiers of the Army under my Command duly to
observe the same: And all Field-Officers, Captains, and others in their several
Charges, to see that they be published unto all under their respective
Commands, as other the Articles and Laws of War.

Given under my Hand at Northampton the 19. day of January, 1646. T. FAIRFAX.

The Draught of another Letter sent to the Committees of the several Counties,
enclosing the less Orders, viz. For regulating of Quarters.
GENTLEMEN,
WHereas upon the Assignment of a quarter to any Troop or Company, the
inhabitants (looking upon it as a charge, no way to be repaid, and therefore to
be equally borne by all that hold any thing within the Assignement chargeable
to a Tax) do use accordingly to distribute the Soldiers unto all, after the
rate of such a Tax, without regard to conveniences for quartering, whereby it
happens that persons not provided for quartering (or not for the number charged
upon them) are put to hire the quartering of them at Innes or Alehouses, or
else to hire the Soldiers to quarter themselves, (the like to which is usually
done where two or more inhabitants are charged but with one Soldier) and that
in either case at such excessive rates, as the pay of the Soldier would not
bear; Which course must needs bring either an unreasonable burden upon those
people (if such charges should never be repaid) or unreasonable defalcations
from the pay of the Soldier when the charge of quartering shall be satisfied
(if at the Rates so paid) Now since it is certainly intended, and provided, that
all quarters of the Army, shall from henceforth be paid (at the rates allowed)
either in ready money by the Soldiers themselves, or by abatement thereof out
of the Taxes for the Army (wherein all will at last come to bear their shares
for what they hold) The General therefore (with the advice of a Counsel of
War) has set down certain rules (to prevent such inconveniences in the
distribution of quarters) whereof I have here, by his appointment, sent you a
Copy, and thought good for your, and the Countries better satisfaction, thus to
let you understand something of the grounds,

Northampton the 19. of January 1646. Your humble Servant, H: Ireton.

Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Commander in chief of the Forces raised by the
Parliament. To all Colonels, and other Officers of the Army under my Command.
For the better regulating of the Army, and prevention, or redress of abuses
therein; I do hereby order and declare as follows.
I. THat all Officers within fourteen days after the date hereof, shall repair
to their respective charges in the Army, upon pain of being liable to loose
their places for neglect, at the judgment of a Counsel of War.

II. That no Officer under the same pain as aforesaid, shall hereafter depart
or absent himself from his said charge for above the space of 24. hours,
unless in attendance at the Head-quarter of the Army or Brigade, without such
leave in writing, as is hereafter expressed, viz.

The inferior Officers of any Troop or Company to have leave under the hand of
the Captain, or chief Officer present with the Troop or Company: The Captain or
such chief Officer present to have like leave from the Field Officer, or chief
Commander present with the Regiment; Field Officers, or the chief present with
Regiments to have like leave from the chief of the Brigade, or from a general
Officer in command over him.

III. That no Captain, Field-Officer, or chief present with any Troop, Company
or Brigade, shall have power to give leave to any Commission-Officer under
their respective commands to be absent for above the space of ten days;
neither shall it be lawful for any Commission-Officer, by virtue of any such
leave as before expressed, to be absent above the said space of ten days
without leave under my own hand, or under the hand of the Major General, or
Lieut. General, under the same pain as before.

And these Orders, I require to be forthwith upon receipt published, to each
Troop and Company or Regiment by their respective chief Officers present, and
to be thenceforth duly observed.

Given under my hand and Seal the 19. day of January 1646. T: Fairfax.

FINIS.

