AN EXACT Abridgment Of all the STATUTES OF King WILLIAM AND Queen MARY, Now in
Force and Use.

By J. Washington Esquire

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of the Kings Printers, And by the Assigns of R.
Atkins and E. Atkins Esquires And are to be sold by M. Gilliflower, S. Keble,
D. Brown, W. Rogers, T. Goodwin, A. Churchill and J. Walthoe. 1694.

THE TITLES Of all the STATUTES Contained in this ABRIDGMENT Now in Force and
Use.
1. AN Act for removing and preventing all Questions and Disputes concerning
the assembling and sitting of this present Parliament. 2. An Act for reviving
of Actions and Process lately depending in the Courts at Westminster, and
discontinued by the not holding of Hillary-Term, and for supplying other
Defects relating to Proceedings at Law. 3. An Act for establishing the
Coronation Oath. 4. An Act for the abrogating of the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, and appointing other Oaths. 5. An Act for the removing Papists and
reputed Papists from the Cities of London and Westminster, and ten Miles
distance from the same. 6. An Act for the taking away the Revenue arising by
Hearth-Mony. 7. An Act for the explaining and making effectual a Statute made
in the first Year of King James II. concerning the Haven and Piers of Great
Yarmouth. 8. An Act for the encouraging the Exportation of Corn. 9. An Act for
preventing Doubts and Questions concerning the collecting the Public Revenue.
10. An Act for the better securing the Government, by disarming Papists and
reputed Papists. 11. An Act, That the Simoniacal Promotion of one Person may
not projudice another. 12. An Act for rectifying a Mistake in a certain Act of
this present Parliament, For the amoving Papists from the Cities of London and
Westminster. 13. An Act for exempting their Majesty's Protestant Subjects,
dissenting from the Church of England, from the Penalties of certain Laws. 14.
An Act for enabling Lords Commissioners for the Great Seal to execute the
Office of Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper. 15. An Act for the Exportation of
Beer, Ale, Syder and Mum. 16. An Act for reviving two former Acts for exporting
of Leather. 17. An Act to regulate the Administration of the Oaths required to
be taken by Commission or Warrant Officers employed in their Majesty's Service
by Land, by virtue of an Act made this present Session of Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for the abrogating of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance,
and appointing other Oaths. 18. An Act to vest in the two Universities the
Presentations of Benefices belonging to Papists. 19. An Act for taking away the
Court holden before the President and Council of the Marches of Wales. 20. An
Act for appropriating certain Duties for paying the States General of the
United Provinces, their Charges for his Majesty's Expedition into this Kingdom,
and for other Uses. 21. An Act for Relief of the Protestant Irish Clergy. 22.
An Act to repeal the Statute made in the fifth Year of King Henry IV. against
the multiplying of Gold and Silver. 23. An Act for the better preventing the
Exportation of Wool, and encouraging the Woollen Manufactures of this Kingdom.
24. An Act for explaining part of an Act made in the first Year of King James
I. concerning Tanned Leather. 25. An Act for prohibiting all Trade and Commerce
with France. 26. An Act declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and
settling the Succession of the Crown. 27. An Act for preventing all Doubts and
Questions concerning the collecting the Public Revenue. 28. An Act for the
charging and collecting the Duties upon Coffee, Tea and Chocolate, at the
Custom-house. 29. An Act for preventing venatious Suits against such as acted
in order to the Bringing in their Majesty's, or for their Service. 30. An Act
for the better Security and Relief of their Majesty's Protestant Subjects of
Ireland. 31. An Act for Recognizing King William and Queen Mary, and for
avoiding all Questions touching the Acts made in the Parliament assembled at
Westminster the thirteenth day of February 1688. 32. An Act for granting to
their Majesty's for their Lives, and the Life of the Survivor of Them, certain
Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors. 33. An Act for granting to their
Majesty's a Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, and other Sums of Money payable
upon Merchandises exported and imported. 34. An Act for enabling the Sale of
Goods distrained for Rent, in case the Rent be not paid in a reasonable time.
35. An Act for the Exercise of the Government by Her Majesty during his
Majesty's Absence. 36. An Act to declare the Right and Freedom of Election of
Members to serve in Parliament for the Cinque Ports. 37. An Act for reversing
the Judgment in a Quo Warranto against the City of London, and for restoring
the City of London to its ancient Rights and Privileges. 38. An Act for the
discouraging the Importation of Thrown-Silk. 39. An Act for the King and Queens
most Gracious, General, and Free Pardon. 40. An Act concerning the
Commissioners of the Admiralty. 41. An Act for granting to their Majesty's
certain Impositions upon all East India Goods and Manufactures, and upon all
Wrought Silks, and several other Goods and Merchandise to be imported after the
25th day of December 1690. 42. An Act for the continuance of several former
Acts therein mentioned, for the laying several Duties upon Wines, Vinegar and
Tobacco. 43. An Act for reviving a former Act for regulating the Measures and
Prices of Coals. 44. An Act for paving and cleansing the Streets in the Cities
of London and Westminster, and Suburbs and Liberties thereof, and Out-Parishes
in the County of Middlesex, and in the Borough of Southwark, and other Places
within the Weekly Bills of Mortality in the County of Surry, and for regulating
the Markets therein mentioned. 45. An Act for the encouraging the Distilling of
Brandy and Spirits from Corn, and for laying several Duties on Low-Wines, or
Spirits of the first Extraction. 46. An Act for granting to their Majesty's
several additional Duties of excise upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors for four
Years, from the time that an Act for doubling the Duty of Excise upon Beer,
Ale, and other Liquors, during the space of one Year does expire. 47. An Act
for preventing vexatious Suits against such as acted for their Majesty's
Service in Defense of the Kingdom. 48. An Act for the more effectual putting in
Execution an Act, Entitled, An Act for prohibiting all Trade and Commerce with
France. 49. An Act for Relief of poor Prisoners for Debt or Damages. 50. An Act
for abrogating the Oath of Supremacy in Ireland, and appointing other Oaths.
51. An Act for the better ascertaining the Tithes of Hemp and Flax. 52. An Act
for the Encouragement of the Breeding and Feeding of Cattle. 53. An Act to take
away Clergy from some Offenders, and to bring others to punishment. 54. An Act
for the more effectual discovery and Punishment of Deer-stealers. 55. An Act
for the better explanation, and supplying the Defects of the former Laws for
the settlement of the Poor. 56. An Act for the better repairing and amending
the Highways, and for settling the Rates of Carriage of Goods. 57. An Act
against corresponding with their Majesty's Enemies. 58. An Act for the Relief
of Creditors against fraudulent Devises. 59. An Act for the better ordering and
collecting the Duty upon Low-Wines and Strong Water; and for preventing the
Abuses therein. 60. An Act that the Inhabitants in the Province of York may
dispose of their Personal Estates by their Wills, notwithstanding the Custom of
that Province. 61. An Act for granting to their Majesty's certain Rates and
Duties of Excise upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors for securing certain
Recompenses and Advantages in the said Act mentioned, to such Persons as shall
voluntarily advance the Sum of ten hundred thousand Pounds toward carrying on
the War against France. 62. An Act for taking Special Bails in the Country upon
Actions and Suits depending in the Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas and
Exchequer at Westminster. 63. An Act for granting to their Majesty's certain
Additional Impositions upon several Goods and Merchandises for the prosecuting
the present War against France. 64. An Act to prevent Abuses committed by the
Traders in Butter and Cheese. 65. An Act for encouraging the apprehending of
Highway Men. 66. An Act for reviving two former Acts of Parliament for the
repairing the Highways in the County of Hertford. 67. An Act for prohibiting
the Importation of all Foreign Hair Buttons. 68. An Act to make Parishioners of
the Church United Contributors to the Repairs and Ornaments of the Church to
whom the Union is made. 69. An Act for punishing Officers and Soldiers who
shall Mutiny or Desert their Majesty's Service, and for Punishing false
Musters, and for the Payment of Quarters. 70. An Act for continuing certain
Acts therein mentioned, and for charging several Joynt-Stocks. 71. An Act to
prevent Frauds by Clandestine Mortgages. 72. An Act for the regaining,
encouraging and settling the Greenland Trade. 73. An Act to prevent malicious
Informations in the Court of King's Bench, and for the more easy reversal of
Outlawries in the same Court. 74. An Act for preventing Suits against such as
acted for their Majesty's Service in Defense of the Kingdom. 75. An Act for the
better Discovery of Judgments in the Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas and
Exchequer at Westminster. 76. An Act for delivering Declarations to Prisoners.
77. An Act for regulating the Proceedings in the Crown-Office of the Court of
King's Bench at Westminster. 78. An Act for the more easy discovery and
conviction of such as shall destroy the Game of this Kingdom. 79. An Act for
reviving, continuing and explaining several Laws therein mentioned, which are
expired and near expiring. 80. An Act for continuing the Acts for prohibiting
all Trade and Commerce with France, and for the Encouragement of Privateers.
81. An Act for repealing such parts of several former Act, as prevent or
prohibit the importation of Foreign Brandy, Aqua Vitae and other Spirits and
Bacon, except from France. 82. An Act for the importation of fine Italian,
Sicilian and Naples Thrown Silk. 83. An Act to repeal a Clause in the Statute
made in the four and thirtieth and five and thirtieth Years of King. Henry the
eighth, by which Justices of Peace in Wales are limited to eight in each
County. 84. An Act to supply the Deficiency of the Money raised by a former Act,
Entitled, An Act for granting to their Majesty's certain Rates and Duties of
Excise upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors, for securing certain Recompenses and
Advantages in the said Act mentioned, to such Persons as shall voluntarily
advance the Sum of ten hundred thousand Pounds toward carrying on the War
against France. 85. An Act to prevent Disputes and Controversies concerning
Royal Mines. 86. An Act for granting to their Majesty's certain Rates and
Duties upon Salt, and upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors, for securing certain
Recompenses and Advantages in the said Act mentioned, to such Persons as shall
voluntarily advance the Sum of ten hundred thousand Pounds toward carrying on
the War against France. 87. An Act for the explaining, and for the more
effectual Execution of a former Act for the Relief of poor Prisoners. 88. An
Act for repeal of a Clause in the Statute of the fifth Year of Queen Elizabeth
(containing diverse Orders for Artificers and others) which relates to Weavers
of Cloth. 89. An Act for Relief of the Orphans, and other Creditors of the
City of London. 90. An Act to prevent Delays of Proceedings at the
Quarter Sessions of the Peace. 91. An Act to take away the Process for the
Capiatur Fine in the several Courts at Westminster. 92. An Act to repeal the
Statute made in the tenth Year of King Edward III. for finding Sureties for the
good abearing, by him or her, that has a Pardon of Felony. 93. An Act for
continuing the Act for punishing Officers and Soldiers who shall Mutiny or
Desert their Majesty's Service, and for punishing false Musters, and for the
payment of Quarters, for one Year longer. 94. An Act for the importation of
Saltpeter for one Year. 95. An Act for the exportation of Iron, Copper and
Mundick Metal. 96. An Act for enabling their Majesty's to make Grants, Leases
and Copies of Offices, Lands and Hereditaments, parcel of their Duchy of
Cornwall, or annexed to the same, and for confirmation of Leases and Grants
already made. 97. An Act for raising the Militia of this Kingdom, for the Year
1694. although the Months Pay formerly advanced be not repaid. 98. An Act for
granting to their Majesty's several Rates and Duties upon Tunnage of Ships and
Vessels, and upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors, for securing certain Recompenses
and Advantages in the said Act mentioned, to such Persons as shall voluntarily
Advance the Sum of fifteen hundred thousand pounds toward carrying on the War
against France. 99. An Act for granting to their Majesty's several Duties upon
Vellum, Parchment and Paper for four Years, toward carrying on the War against
France. 100. An Act for the licensing and regulating Hackney-Coaches and
Stage-Coaches. 101. An Act for appointing and enabling Commissioners to
examine, take and state the Public Accounts of the Kingdom. 102. An Act for
building good and defensible Ships. 103. An Act for the better Discipline of
their Majesty's Navy Royal.
AN EXACT ABRIDGMENT Of all the STATUTES OF King William and Queen Mary, IN
Force and Use until the 14th of March, in the Fifth Year of Their Reign, An.
Dom. 1692/3.
Accounts.
I. STat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 2. c. 9. Sir Robert Rich, Sir Thomas Clarges, Paul
Foley, Robert Austen, Sir Matthew Andrews, Sir Benjamin Newland, Sir Samuel
Barnardiston, Sir Peter Colliton, and Robert Harley, or any Five or more of
them, shall be Commissioners for taking the Accounts of the Public Revenues of
the Crown, which were in the Receipt of the Exchequer on the Fifth Day of
November 1688. or since, or shall be before the Power for taking these Accounts
be determined, and of all Arrears thereof; and of all Moneys then and before
the determination of the said Power, in the Hands of the Receiver General, or
Cashiers of the Customs, Excise or Hearth-money, and of the Sum of 412925 l. 14
s. 6 d. Granted by an Act of the First Session of the late Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for the Granting a present Aid to Their Majesty's, and of the
Money paid or payable by an Act, Entitled, An Act for raising Money by a Poll,
and otherwise, toward the Reducing of Ireland; and by one other Act,
Entitled, An Act for preventing Doubts and Questions, concerning the
Collecting the Public Revenue; and by one other Act, Entitled, An Act for the
Grant to Their Majesty's of an Aid of 12 d. in the Pound, for one Year, for the
necessary defense of the Realm; and of one other Act, Entitled, An Act for an
additional Duty of Excise upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors; and one other Act,
For Appropriating certain Duties for paying the States General of the United
Provinces their Charges for His Majesty's Expedition into the Kingdom, and for
other Uses; and of one other Act of the Second Session of the same Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for preventing all Doubts and Questions, concerning the
Collecting the Public Revenue; and of one other Act, Entitled, An Act for a
Grant to Their Majesty's of an Aid of two Shillings in the Pound for One Year;
and of one other Act of the same Session, Entitled, An Act for a Grant to
Their Majesty's of an additional Aid of 12 d. in the Pound for One Year; and of
one Act, Entitled, An Act for Charging and Collecting the Duties upon Coffee,
Tea and Chocolate, at the Custom-house; and of one other Act, Entitled, An Ast
for Review of the late Poll, granted to Their Majesty's, and for an additional
Poll toward the Reducing of Ireland; and by one other Act, Entitled, An Act
for Raising Money by a Poll and otherwise, toward the Reducing of Ireland, and
Prosecuting the War against France; and by one other Act, Entitled, An Act for
Granting to Their Majesty's for their Lives, and the Life of the Survivor of
them, certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors; and one other Act,
Entitled, An Act for Granting to Their Majesty's a Subsidy of Tonnage and
Poundage, and other Sums of Money payable upon Merchandises Exported and
Imported; and by one other of this Session, Entitled, An Act for Granting an
Aid to Their Majesty's of the Sum of 1651702 l. 18 s. and by one other Act,
Entitled, An Act for doubling the Duty of Excise upon Beer, Ale and other
Liquors, during the space of One Year; and by one other Act, Entitled, An Act
for Granting to Their Majesty's certain Impositions upon all East India Goods
and Manufactures, and upon all wrought Silks, and several other Goods and
Merchandise, to be Imported after the 25th Day of December 1690. and by one
other Act, Entitled, An Act for the continuance of several former Acts therein
mentioned, for the Laying several Duties upon Wines, Vinegar and Tobacco, and
of all Prizes taken since the said Fifth Day of November, and of Money paid for
the same to any Person Authorized to receive it, or otherwise; and of all the
Crown Lands, First Fruits and Tenths of the Clergy, Wine-licences, Fines,
Forfeitures, and of all other Branches of the Revenue, and all Public Money
whatsoever, that has arisen since the said Fifth Day of November; or shall
arise before the determination of the Power hereby Granted; and how, and by,
and to whom the same has been disposed or paid; and for taking Accounts of all
Their Majesty's Stores, Provisions, and Habiliments of War by Land and Sea; and
to set down what numbers of Ships, Yachts or Boats, were on the said Fifth Day
of November, or at any time since; and what Sums of Money, Provisions,
Victuals, S^oes, etc. have been provided or paid since the said Fifth Day of
November, or shall be provided and paid, toward the Payment or Maintenance of
the Land Forces in England or Ireland, or elsewhere, or their Forces by Sea,
and the numbers of them respectively; and toward the Building, Repairs or
Setting out of any Ships or Navies since the said Fifth Day of November, and
before the determination of the Power aforesaid.

II. The Auditor of the Receipt in the Exchequer, and the Clerk of the Pells
there, and all other the Officers of the Exchequer, and the Receipt thereof,
the Secretary and Treasurer at War, Muster-master and Play Master of the Land
Forces in England and Ireland, all Principal Officers and Commissioners of the
Navy and Ordnance, all Officers and Keepers of Their Majesty's Stores and
Yards, and all Persons employed as Commissioners, in and about the Treasury, or
the Management, Ordering, Paying or Receiving of Their Majesty's Treasure,
Revenue, Provisions or Stores of War, and all Persons whatsoever, whom the said
Commissioners, or any Five of them, shall think fit to Examine, are hereby
required to observe such Orders, as they or any Five of them shall, by writing
under their Hands, Direct and Ordain, for and touching the taking of the said
Accounts.

III. The said Commissioners to sit in the Inner Court of Wards at Westminster
or where they think fit, with or without Adjournment, and to send their
Precepts for Persons, Books, Papers and Records, and to Administer an Oath for
the better discovery of the Truth of the Inquiries by them to be made; and all
Bailiffs, Constables, Sheriffs and other Officers, are hereby required to obey
and execute their Precepts; and the said Commissioners, or any Five of them,
may Employ such Clerks, Messengers and Officers as they think fit, and give
them an Oath for their faithful Demeanor; which Clerks and Officers shall take
nothing for their Service, but such Salary as the Commissioners shall direct.

IV. Two of the said Commissioners first named in this Act, before they enter
upon the Execution thereof, shall take an Oath before the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, or the Master of the Rolls, in these words; viz.

I A. B. do Swear, that according to the best of my Skill and Knowledge, I
shall Faithfully, Impartially and Truly demean my self in Examining and Taking
the Accounts of all such Sum or Sums of Money and other things, brought or to
be brought before me, in Execution of one Act, Entitled, An Act for Appointing
and Enabling Commissioners to Examine, Take and State the Public Accounts of
the Kingdom, according to the Tenor and Purport of the said Act.

V. And every other of the said Commissioners shall take the said Oath before
the said two Commissioners.

VI. The Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, shall cause to be paid such Sums
of Money, not exceeding 2000 l. to such Persons as the said Commissioners, or
any Five of them, shall direct, to be employed in the Payment of Clerks,
Messengers and other Officers, and in defraying other necessary Charges; the
same to be Accounted for by him to whom it is paid, according to the course of
the Exchequer; and the said Commissioners shall from time to time, if required,
and at the end of their Proceedings, by virtue of this Act, give an Account
thereof in writing, under Five or more of their Hands and Seals, to the King
and Queen, and both Houses of Parliament at their next Meeting.

VII. All Accountants shall make their Accounts in the Exchequer, as formerly,
this Act notwithstanding.

VIII. The Powers hereby Granted shall endure for one Year, from the 25th day
of January 1690. and no longer.

IX. The Lords Commissioners of the Treasury shall pay 500 l. to each
Commissioner for his Care and Pains herein.

X. The said Commissioners, or any Five or more of them, shall take an Account
what Sums of Money were ordered and paid during the late King James his Reign,
for Repairing the Fleet, and how the same has been disposed of.

XI. This Act shall give no Authority to the said Commissioners to demand an
Account of Money paid to Their Majesty's Privy Purse, or expended for secret
Service.

XII. Nothing in this Act shall hinder the said Commissioners from requiring an
Account upon Oath, of Pensions, Salaries, and Sums of Moneys paid or payable to
Members of Parliament.

XIII. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. c. 11. Sir Thomas Clarges, Knight. Sir Peter
Colliton, Bar. Sir Samuel Barnardiston, Bar. Sir Benjamin Newland, Knight. Sir
Matthew Andrews, Knight. Paul Foley, Esquire and Robert Harley, Esquire or any four, or
more of them, are hereby constituted Commissioners for taking an Account of the
Public Revenue of the Crown, and all other Accounts, which by an Act made in
the Second Year of Their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for Appointing and
Enabling Commissioners to Examine, Take and State the Public Accounts of the
Kingdom, were to be taken by Commissioners thereby constituted; and the said
Act is hereby revived, and shall be in force from the 24th. of April next, to
the 25th. of April, 1694. and be executed by the Commissioners herein named, or
any four or more of them: And the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury shall
issue and pay the like Allowances for Clerks, and other Charges, as the said
Act directs, and the like quarterly Payments to the Commissioners hereby
constituted, as by the said Act is appointed to the Commissioners therein
named: and the Commissioners hereby constituted, shall take Accounts of all
Their Majesty's Revenue, and other public Moneys due and payable to them
between the 5th. day of November 1688. and the 25th. day of April, 1694 not yet
accounted for by virtue of the said recited Act, or the last Clause touching
Public Accounts in one Act in the Third Year of Their Majesty's Reign,
Entitled, An Act for Raising Money by a Poll, etc.

Admiralty.
I. Sat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 2. c. 2. All and singular Authorities,
Jurisdictions, and Powers, which by Act of Parliament, or otherwise, are vested
in the Lord High Admiral of England, for the time being, have always
appertained to, and shall be used and executed by the Commissioners of the
Admiralty, as if they were Lord High Admiral.

II. Every Officer present upon Trials of Offenders, by Courts Martial, to be
held by virtue of any Commission granted by the Lord High Admiral, or
Commissioners of the Admiralty, shall before any proceeding to Trial, take this
Oath, to be administered by the Judge Advocate, or his Deputy; viz.

You shall well and truly try and determine the matter now before you, between
our Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and Queens Majesty's, and the Prisoner to
be tried.

So help you God.

Bails.
I. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. c. 4. The Judges of the Kings Bench, or any two of
them, whereof the Chief Justice to be one, for the Court of Kings Bench, and
the Judges of the Common Pleas, or any two of them, whereof the Chief Justice
to be one, for the Court of Common Pleas, and the Barons of the Colf of the
Exchequer, or any two of them, whereof the Chief Baron to be one, for the Court
of Exchequer, may by Commissions under the Seals of the said respective Courts,
from time to time Empower such Persons, other then common Attorneys and
Solicitors, as they shall think fit, in all and every the Counties of England
and Wales, and Town of Berwick, to take such Recognizances of Bails, as any
Persons shall be willing to make before them, in any Action or Suit depending,
or to be depending in the said Courts, in Manner and Form as the Justices and
Barons of the said Courts have used to take the same. Which Recognizances shall
be transmitted to some one of the said Justices or Barons respectively; who,
upon Affidavit made of the due taking thereof, shall receive the same, upon
payment of the usual Fees: Which Recognizance shall be of like effect, as if it
were taken de been esse before any of the said Justices or Barons: For taking
which Recognizances, the Persons empowered shall receive Two Shillings and no
more.

II. The Justices and Barons respectively shall make such Rules for the
justifying such Bails, as to them shall seem meet, so as the Cognizors be not
compelled to appear in person in any of the said Courts (unless they live in
London or Westminster, or within ten Miles thereof) to justify themselves, but
the same is hereby directed to be determined by Affidavits taken before the
Commissioners.

III. Any Judge of Assize may take such Recognizances, which shall be
transmitted and received, as aforesaid, (without Oath) upon payment of the
usual Fees.

IV. Persons representing or personating others before any empowered by this
Act to take Bails, shall be adjudged Felons.

Beer, etc.
I. Stat. Ann. 1. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 22. From and after the twenty fourth
of June, 1689. any Person may ship off within any of the usual and allowed
Ports by Law, and at the common Keys, and within the usual hours of Excise, to
be Exported into Foreign Parts, in the presence of a sworn Officer to be
appointed by the Farmers, etc. of Excise, within the limits where the same
shall be shipped, any strong Ale, strong Beer, Cider, or Mum, paying Custom for
the same, after the Rate of 1 Shilling per Tun, and no other Duty: Such Officer
to certify the quantity so shipped off, to the Commissioners and Officers of
Excise, where the Entry thereof shall be made; who are hereby required to make
Allowance, or repay the Excise of the Beer, Ale, Cider, or Mum so Exported, to
the Brewer or Maker thereof, within one Month after such Exportation, deducting
Three pence per Tun, for the Charges of their Officers.

II. If any Merchant, Master of Vessel, or other Person shall cause or suffer
any Liquors so shipped, to be laid on Land, or put into any other Vessel,
within England, Wales, or the Town of Berwick, he shall forfeit the same, and
50 l. more for every Cask so unduly landed, or put on Board any Vessel, the one
Moiety to the King and Queen, the other to the Informer. And Their Majesty's
Commissioners and Officers of the Customs, shall charge every Master of any
Vessel, in his Victualling Bill, with so much Beer, Ale, Cider, or Mum, and no
more, as such number of men use to spend in such Voyages; the Excise whereof to
be recovered according to the Laws established.

III. The said Rate of One Shilling the Tun for Beer, etc. Exported, shall be
levied and paid under such Rules and Penalties, and for such time, and in such
manner as by the Laws of Tonnage and Poundage are ordained.

IV. No Mum Imported during the continuance of this Act, shall have any part of
the Custom or Excise repaid upon Exportation.

Butter and Cheese.
I. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 7. After any Factor or Buyer has bought
Butter or Cheese, and approved the same, the Seller shall not afterward be
chargeable with any Penalties in the Act of the 14 Car. 2. Entitled, An Act
for Reforming Abuses in Weighing and false Packing of Butter.

II. Such Factor or Buyer shall set his Seal, or Mark, or Name at length on the
Cask in which such Butter is; and in case the same be afterward exchanged or
opened, and the Cask changed, or bad Butter packed up, and mixed with good, or
any Fraud be committed by the Seller, the Offender, being convicted upon Oath
before one or more Justices of Peace, or upon his own Confession, shall forfeit
Twenty Shillings for every such Ferkin and Offense, to be levied by Distress
and Sale of the Offenders Goods, restoring the Overplus, after Charges
defrayed. And Constables of Parishes, and Chief Constables of Hundreds are
hereby authorized to levy the same by Warrant under Hand and Seal of such
Justice or Justices.

III. Warehouse-keepers, Weighers, Searchers, or Shippers of Butter and Cheese,
in any Port within this Kingdom, shall receive all Butter and Cheese that shall
be brought to them, for any Cheesemonger free of the City of London, or any
other making the said Commodities, and take care thereof, till the same can be
shipped, and shall ship it successively, as it comes to their hands, on the
next Vessel that shall come to lade Butter and Cheese for London (Except the
Owners order the contrary) and shall receive of the Owners Two Shillings and
Six pence for every Load, and no more, and so proportionably. And if any such
Persons, or their Servants shall refuse to receive such Goods, or to take due
care thereof, or to ship them successively, as aforesaid, they shall forfeit,
being convicted in manner aforesaid, for every Ferkin of Butter, Ten Shillings;
and for every Weigh of Cheese, Five Shillings, to be levied, as aforesaid.

IV. Warehouse-keepers, Weighers, etc. shall keep Books, and enter therein all
Butter and Cheese that shall be brought to them as it comes, with the time when
received, the quantity and and Owners Name; and when the Goods are shipped off,
shall make Entries of the time when shipped, the Master's Name, the Vessels
Name, and to whom consigned: Which Book shall be open for all Persons to see
and search gratis. And if any Warehouse-keeper, etc. shall not keep such Book,
or not make Entries, as aforesaid, or undue Entries, or refuse in the daytime
to produce the Book to be searched, such Offenders, being convict in manner
aforesaid, shall forfeit for every Firkin of Butter Two Shillings and Six
pence; and for every Weigh of Cheese, Two Shilling and Six pence, and for every
other the aforesaid Offenses, Two Shillings and Six pence to be levied, as
aforesaid; and for want of Goods to levy the Penalty, the Justice, before whom
such Conviction shall be made, may commit the Offender to Goal, till the
Penalties be satisfied.

V. If Masters of Vessels coming to lade Butter and Cheese, or their Servants,
refuse to take on Board any such Butter and Cheese as shall be tendered to be
shipped by any such Warehouse-keeper, etc. before their Vessels be laden, they
shall forfeit, being convict, as aforesaid, for every Firkin of Butter so
refused, Five Shillings, and for every Weigh of Cheese, Two shillings and Six
pence, to be levied, as aforesaid.

VI. One half of the Forfeitures within this Act, to go to the Poor of the
Parish, and the other half to the Informer.

VII. This Act shall not exclude Cheesemongers free of the City of London, from
sending their own Vessels, or such as they shall hire for their own Goods.

VIII. Nothing in this Act shall extend to the Counties of Chester and
Lancaster, nor to the County of the City of Chester.

IX. Persons aggrieved by the Determination of any Justice of Peace, may appeal
to the next General Quarter Sessions, whose Determination shall be final: The
Person appealing first giving to the Party accused, a Bond of Twenty Pounds
Penalty, with one or more Sureties, to the liking of the Justice of Peace, to
pay such Costs as shall be allowed, in case the Appellant be not relieved, the
said Costs to be paid within a Month after the determining the Appeal.

Cattle.
I. Stat. 3 and 4 W. and M, cap. 8. It shall be lawful for any Persons, native
or foreign, at any time to ship, and transport into any part of the World in
Amity with Their Majesty's, Beef, Pork, or Hogs-flesh, Butter, Cheese, or
Candles, free from any Custom or Imposition whatsoever.

Chancellor.
I. Stat. Ann. 1. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 21. Commissioners to be appointed to
execute the Office of Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England for the time being, may use and exercise all and every the same and
like Offices, Authority, Jurisdiction and Execution of Laws, and other Customs,
Privileges, Emoluments, and Advantages, which the Lord Chancellor of England,
or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, of right ought to use, have and execute, as
belonging to their Offices, or otherwise, and shall have and take place next
after the Peers of this Realm, and Speaker of the House of Commons, unless any
of them shall happen to be a Peer, and then to take place accordingly.

II. Any one Commissioner may hear Motions, and give Orders touching
Interlocutory Proceedings, so as such one Commissioner in the absence of the
others, shall not make Decrees, or put the Great Seal to any thing, unless
there be two present.

III. The nominating and appointing of the Custos Rotulorum in all Shires and
Counties, shall be as is directed by a Statute made in the 37 year of K. Hen. 8.

IV. The Custos Rotulorum, or other person to whom of right it does belong,
shall from time to time nominate and appoint the Clerk of the Peace.

V. If any Clerk of the Peace shall misdemean himself in his Office, the
Justices of Peace in their General Quarter Sessions, or the Major part of them,
upon Complaint in Writing exhibited against him, may upon Examination, and due
Proof thereof, suspend or discharge him: And in such case the Custos Rotulorum,
or other person to whom of Right it shall belong, shall appoint another person
residing within such County, etc. to be Clerk of the Peace in his room; and in
case of neglect or refusal to make such Appointment before the next General
Quarter Sessions after such refusal, the Justices of Peace at their General
Quarter Sessions may appoint one.

VI. Provided always, that he shall be liable to all the Penalties, Conditions,
etc. hereby mentioned and expressed, and may be discharged by the said
Justices, as aforesaid.

VII. No Custos Rotulorum, or other person to whom it does, or shall belong to
nominate a Clerk of the Peace, shall s^ll the said Place directly or
indirectly, upon the Penalty that every Custos Rotulorum, or other person so
selling, and every Clerk of the Peace so buying, shall be disabled to hold
their Places, and forfeit double the Value of what shall be so given or taken,
to be recovered by him or them that will sue for the same, to their own use, by
any Action of Debt, Suit, Bill, Plaint or Information, in any of Their
Majesty's Courts at Westminster.

VIII. Every Clerk of the Peace, before he enters upon his Office, shall in
open Sessions take this Oath, viz.

I A. B. do swear, That I have not, nor will pay any Sum or Sums of Money, or
other Reward whatsoever, nor have given any Bond, or other Assurance to pay any
Money, Fee, or Profit directly or indirectly to any person or persons
whomsoever, for such Nomination or Appointment.

So help me God.

IX. Nothing in this Act shall relate to the Clerk of the Peace for the Duchy
and County Palatine of Lancaster.

X. This Act to commence from the 1st. day of May 1689.

Churches.
I. Sat. 4 and 5 W. and M. c. 12. Where any Churches have been, or shall be
united by virtue of an Act made in the 17th. year of the Reign of the late K.
Charles the Second, and one of them at the time of such Union was, or hereafter
shall be demolished, in such case whenever the Church to which the Union was,
or shall be made, shall be out of Repair, or want decent Ornaments, the
Parishioners of the Parish, whose Church shall be down or demolished, shall pay
toward the Charge of such Repairs and Ornaments, in proportion, as the
Archbishop or Bishop that shall make such Union, shall direct; and for want of
such Direction, shall bear one third part of the Charge.

Clergy.
I. Stat. 3 and 4 W. and M c. 9. Such as shall rob any person, or feloniously
take away Goods being in a Dwelling House, the Owner or other person being
there, and put in fear, or shall rob any Dwelling house in the day time, any
Person being therein, or shall be accessory to any of the said Offenses, or to
break any Dwelling House, Shop, or Warehouse thereunto belonging, or therewith
used, in the day time, and feloniously take away Money or Goods to the value of
5 s. though no person be therein, or shall counsel, hire or command any person
to commit any Burglary, being thereof attainted, or being indicted thereof,
shall stand mute, or will not directly answer to the Indictment, or shall
peremptorily challenge above 20 Jurors, shall not have the Benefit of their
Clergy.

II. Persons indicted of any offense, for which by virtue of any former Law
they are excluded from Clergy, if convicted by Verdict or Confession, shall not
be admitted to the Benefit thereof, if they stand mute, or will not answer
directly to the Felony, or shall challenge peremptorily above 20.

III. Persons indicted for stealing any Goods in any County, and thereof
convicted, or standing mute, or not answering directly to the Indictment, or
challenging peremptorily above 20, shall be excluded from the Benefit of their
Clergy, if it appear upon Evidence, that the said Goods were taken in any other
County, in such manner, as if the said persons had been convicted by a Jury
there, they should have lost the Benefit of their Clergy.

IV. Persons buying, or receiving stolen Goods, knowing them to be stolen,
shall be deemed Accessaries to the Felony after the Fact.

V. If any persons shall steal any Chattels, etc. which by Contract or
Agreement they are to use, or shall be let to them in Lodgings, such stealing
shall be adjudged Larceny and Felony.

VI. If a Woman be convicted of an Offense, for which a man might have the
Benefit of his Clergy, upon her Prayer to have the Benefit of this Statute,
Judgment of Death shall not be given against her, but she shall suffer the same
punishment that a man should suffer, viz. shall be burnt in the Hand, and
farther be kept in Prison, not exceeding a year.

VII. A Transcript certified by the Clerk of the Crown, of the Peace, or of the
Assizes, containing the Tenor of the Indictment, and of the persons having had
the Benefit of his Clergy, or of this Act, to the Judges or Justices in any
other County, shall be a sufficient proof that such persons has had the
Benefit of his Clergy, or of this Act.

Coals.
I. Stat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 7. An Act made in the 16th and 17th. years
of the Reign of the late K. Charles II. for Regulating the Measures and Prices
of Coals, is hereby revived and continued from the 1st. day of December, 1690.
for the space of 7 years, and from thence to the end of the next Session of
Parliament.

II. Owners of Vessels English built, and belonging to the Subjects of England,
whereof the Master is an Englishman, Trading with Coals to and from Newcastle,
or the Parts adjacent, or to Wales, to London, or any part of England, may
navigate their Vessels with as many Foreign Seamen as the Master or Owners
shall think fit, during the present War, any thing in an Act made in the 12th.
year of K. Charles II. Entitled, An Act for Encouraging and Increasing
Shipping and Navigation, to the contrary notwithstanding.

The Act of K. Charles the Second, hereby Revived, is as follows, viz.
Stat. 16 and 17 Car. 2. From and after the 6th. of March, 1664. all Sea coal
brought into the River of Thames, and sold, shall be sold by the Chaldron
containing 36 Bushels heaped up, and according to the Bushel sealed for that
purpose at Guildhall; and all other Coals commonly sold by Weight, shall be
sold after the proportion of 112 pounds to the Hundred of Avoir du pois: on
pain to forseit the Coals otherwise sold, or exposed to sale, and the double
value thereof, to be recovered by any who will sue for the same in any Court of
Record, or by Complaint to the Lord Mayor and Justices of Peace within London,
or any two of them, or to the Justices of Peace of the several Counties and
Places where such Coals shall be exposed to sale; who are hereby empowered to
convict the Offenders, and to levy the Forfeitures by Warrant, one half to the
Prosecutor, and the other half to the Use of the Poor, or Repairing the
Highways. The Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and the Justices of Peace of
the several Counties, etc. or any Three of them, whereof one to be of the
Quorum, shall set prices of Coals to be sold by Retail.

And if any Ingrosser or Retailer of Coals refuse to sell, as aforesaid, the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Justices of Peace respectively, shall empower whom
they think fit, to enter into any place where such Coals are stored up; and in
case of refusal, taking a Constable, to force Entrance, and to sell the said
Coals at the prices set, as aforesaid, rendering the Money to the Owner, Charges
deducted.

This Act to continue for 3 years, and to the end of the next Session of
Parliament.

No person sued by virtue of this Act, shall be sued upon any other for the
same Offense; and if any Action be prosecuted for any thing done by color
hereof, the Defendant may plead the General Issue, and give the Special Matter
in Evidence, and if the Verdict be found for him, or the Plaintiff become
Nonsuit, he shall recover his Damages and double Costs.

No Person having any Interest in a Wharf, used for Coals, or Trading in Coals
in his own or any others name, or engrossing the same, in order to sell them,
shall intermeddle in the setting the price of Coals.

Continuance.
I. Stat. 4. and 5. W. and M. cap. 24. Entitled, An Act for Providing
Carriages by Land and by Water for the use of His Majesty's Navy and Ordnance,
shall be in force for Seven years from the 13th day of February 1692. and from
thence to the end of the First Session of Parliament then next ensuing.

II. An Act, Entitused, An Act for encouraging of Coynage, made in the 18th
Year of King Charles. 2. And another Act made in the 25th Year of the same
King, Entitled, An Act for continuing a former Act concerning Coynage, shall
be in force from the 13th Day of February 1692, and to the end of the First
Session of Parliament then next ensuing.

III. An Act made in the 2^th and 23th Years of the Reign of the same King,
Entitled, An Act for the better and more certain recovery of Fines and
Forfeitures due to His Majesty, shall be in force, and is hereby made perp^tual.

IV. All Officers, to whom it belongs to make returns of Estreats into the
Court of Exchequer, shall upon the delivery in of all and every such Estreat
and Estreats, take this Oath, viz.

You shall Swear that these Estrates now by you delivered, are trult and
carefully made up and examined, and that all Fines, Issues, Americaments,
Recognizances, and Forfeitures, which were Set, Lost, Imposed, or Forfeited,
and in right and due course of Law ought to be estreated into the Court of
Exchequer, are to the best of your Knowledge and Understanding therein
contained: And that in the same Estreats are also contained and expressed all
such Fines as have been paid into the Court from which the said Estreats are
made, without any wilful or fraudalent Discharge, Omission, Misnomer or Defect
whatsoever.

So help you God.

Which Oath any of the Barons of the Exchequer shall Administer.

V. An Act made in the 22th and 23th Year of the same King, Entitled, An Act
to prevent the Planting of Tobacco in England, and for Regulating the
Plantation Trade, shall be in full force for Seven Years from the said 13th Day
of February, 1692. and from thence to the end of the next Session of Parliament.

VI. An Act made in the 19th Year of the same King, Entitled, An Act for
Assigning Orders in the Exchequer, shall be in force for Seven years from the
said 13th Day of February, 1692. and from thence to the end of the next Session
of Parliament.

VII. Whereas an Act made in the 22th and 23th years of the same King,
Entitled, An Act to revice an Act, Entitled, An Act to prevent the
disturbance of Seamen and others, and to preserve the Stores belonging to His
Majesty's Navy Royal, with some Alterations and Additions, was by an Act made
in the 1st Year of the Reign of the late K. James, Enacted, to be in force for
Seven years, and from thence to the end of the 1st Session of the next
Parliament; The said last mentioned Act shall be continued for Seven years from
the said 13th of February, 1692. and from thence to the end of the next Session
of Parliament.

VIII. An Act made in the 22d and 23d of the said K. C. 2. Entitled, An Act to
prevent Frauds in the buying and selling of Cattle in Smithfield, and
elsewhere, together with a Proviso in an Act made the 1st year of the late K.
James for the Reviving and Continuance thereof, That the said Act should not
extend to Salesmen or Factors employed by Farmers or Feeders, shall be in force
for Seven years from the 13th of February, 1692. and from thence to the end of
the next Session of Parliament.

IX. An Act made in the 1st year of Their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act
for the better preventing the Exportation of Wool, and encouraging the Woollen
Manufacture of this Kingdom, (except such part thereof as relates to the free
Exportation of the Woollen Manufacture) shall be in force for Three years from
the said 13th day of February, 1692. and from thence to the end of the next
Session of Parliament.

X Provided that no Wool shall be Imported from Ireland into the Port of
Exeter, any thing in this or any former Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

XI. An Act made the 13th and 14th years of the late King Charles 2. Entitled,
An Act for the better relief of the Poor of this Kingdom, as to all Parts
(other then what relates to the Corporations thereby Constituted) shall be in
force for Seven years from the said 13th of February, 1692. and from thence to
the end of the next Session of Parliament.

XII. An Act made in the 30th year of the late K. Charles 2. Entitled, An Act
to enable Creditors to recover their Debts of the Executors and Administrators
of Executors in their own wrong, shall be perpetual.

XIII. And further, Executors and Administrators of Executors, or
Administrators of Right, who shall waste or convert to their own Use, the Goods
or Estate of his Testator or Intestate, shall be chargeable, as their Testator
or Intesta^e should or might have been.

XIV. If any Woman has been or shall be Convicted of any Felony, for which a
Man might have the Benefit of Clergy, and has once had, or shall have the
Benefit of an Act made at the last Session of this present Parilament, E^^^ed,
A^ Act to take away Clergy from some Offenders, and to being others to
punishment, and shall be again Convicted of any other Felony, such Woman thall
be totally excluded from having any other benefit of the said Act.

XV. The said last mentioned Act to continue for Three years from the said 13th
of February, 1692. and from thence to the end of the next Session of Parliament.

XVI. An Act made in the 13th and 14th years of the Reign of the late King
Charles 2. Entitled, An Act for preventing abuses in Printing Seditions,
Treasonable and Unlicensed Books and Pamphlees, and for regulating Printing and
Printing Presses, shall be in force for One year from the 13th of February
1692. and from thence to the end of the next Session of ^arliament.

XVII. All Jurors (other then Strangers upon Trials per medietatem linguae)
returned upon Trial of Issues joined in the King's Bench, Common Pleas or
Exchequer, or before Justices of Assize, or Nisi prius, Oyer and Terminer,
Jail-delivery, or General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, after the 1st Day of
May 1693. within any County of England, shall have in their own Name, or in
Trust for them, within the same County, 10 l. a year at least, above Reprizes,
of Freehold or Coppy-hold Lands, or of Lands in ancient Demesne, or in Rents,
in Fee-simple, or Feetail, or for their own or some other Persons Life. And in
every County of Wales, such Jurors shall have 6 l. a year at least, as
aforesaid. All which Persons having such Estates, are hereby made liable to
serve, as aforesaid. If any be returned of lesser Estate, it shall be good
cause of Challenge, and the Party returned shall be discharged upon such
Challenge, or upon his own Oath. Nor shall any Jury-man's Issues, making
default, be saved, but by special Order of the Court, or Judges, for some
reasonable Cause proved upon Oath: And the Ven. fac. for Impannelling Juries in
England, shall run thus; viz.

Rex, etc. praecipimus. etc. quod Ven. fac. coram, etc. duodecim liberos and
legales homines de vicineto de A, quor' quilibet habeat december Librat. terrae,
tenementor' vel reddit' per annum ad minus, per quos, etc. and qui nee, etc.

and the residue after the ancient manner, and the Writs for Returning Juries
in Wales, shall be in like manner, altering only the Word december for sex. And
Sheriffs, Coroners, and other Ministers returning in any such Panel any
Person, not having 10 l. or 6 d. respectively by the Year, as aforesaid, shall
forfeit for every such Person so Returned, the Sum of Five Pounds to Their
Majesty's.

XVIII. No Sheriff or Bailiff of any Liberty, or their Ministers, shall return
any such Persons to have been Summoned by them, unless they shall have been
Summoned Six days at least before the Day on which they ought to make their
Appearance; nor shall take any Reward to excuse the Appearance of any Juror
Summoned or Returned, on Pain to Forfeit for every such Offense 10 l. to Their
Majesty's.

XIX. Saving to all Cities, Boroughs and Towns Corporate their ancient Usage of
returning Jurors, in such manner as has been accustomed.

XX. Provided that it shall be Lawful to Return Persons upon the Tales in any
County within England, who shall have 5 l. a year, above Reprizes, and within
Wales 3 l. a year.

XXI No Fee or Reward shall be taken by any Person whatsoever, upon the Account
of any Tales returned, upon Pain to Forfeit 10 l. for every such Offense, the
one Moity to the Prosecutor, and the other to Their Majesty's.

XXII. No Writ de non ponendis in Assisis and Juratis shall be granted, unless
upon Oath made that the Suggestions are true.

XXIII. So much of this Act as relates to the returning of Jurors, to be in
force for Three years from the 1st of May 1693. and from thence to the end of
the next Session of Parliament.

Corn.
I. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. I. cap. 12. When Malt or Barley, Winchester
Measure, shall be at 24 s. per Quarter, or under; Rye at 32 s. per Quarter, or
under; and Wheat at 48 s. per Quarter, or under, in any Port of this Kingdom or
Wales; Merchants and others, who shall put on Shipboard in English Shiping,
the Master and Two thirds of the Mariners, being Their Majes^ies Subjects, any
sorts of the Corn aforesaid, to Export the same beyond Sea, shall bring
Certificates under their Hands, containing the quantity and quality of the Corn
shipped, to the Persons appointed to Collect the Customs in any such Port, and
upon Proof made of such Certificate by one or more Credible Persons upon Oath,
and upon Bond given by such Merchant or other Person, in ^00 l. for every
hundred Tuns of Corn so shipped, and so proportionably, that the said Corn,
dangers of the Seas excepted, shall be Exported into Parts beyond the Sea, and
not be landed in England, Wales, Guernsey, Jersey or Berwick, shall receive
from the Persons appointed to Collect the Customs, as aforesaid, for every
Quarter of Barley or Malt, ground or unground 2 s. 6 d. for every Quarter of
Rye. 3 s. 6 d. for every Quarter of Wheat 5 s. and shall pay no Custom, nor any
Fee or Reward for Corn so laden to be Exported. And upon Certificate under the
Common Seal of the Chief Magistrate in any Place beyond Sea, or under the Hand
and Seals of Two known English Merchants upon the Place, that such Corn was
there Landed, or upon Proof by Credible Persons, that such Corn was taken by
Enemies, or Perished at Sea, the Examination and Proof thereof being left to
the Receivers of the Customs, the Bond shall be delivered up to be Cancelled:
And the Moneys so paid shall be allowed, as paid to Their Majesty's.

Courts.
I. Stat. 1 W. and M. Stss. 1. cap. 27. Whereas by a Statute made in the 34th
and 35th years of the Reign of King H. 8. Entitled, An Act for certain
Ordinances in the King's Majesty's Dominion and Principality of Wales, It is
Enacted, That there shall be and remain a President and Council in the said
Dominion and Principality of Wales, and the Matches of the same, with all
Officers, Clerks and Incidents thereunto, in Manner and Form as has been
heretofore used and accustomed; Which President and Council shall have Power
and Authority to Hear and Determine by their Wisdoms and Diseretions, such
Causes or Matters as be, or hereafter shall be, Assigned to them by the King's
Majesty, as heretofore has been accustomed and used; Be it Enacted, that the
said Clause be Repealed, and that the said Court before the President and
Council be dissolved and taken away.

II The Justices of the Great Sessions in Wales, shall yearly Nominate Three
Persons for each Shire in their Circuits, to be Sheriffs of the same, and
certify the same to the Lords of the Privy Council Crastino animarum, that
Their Majesty's may appoint one of them to be Sheriff for that year.

III. Errors in Pleas personal within Wales shall be redressed by Writ of
Error, as Errors in Pleas real and mixed are appointed to be redrest by the said
Statute of 34 and 35 of King H 8.

IV. Judgments and Decrees passed in the said Court before the 1st Day of June
1689. shall remain in force and execution upon them in the same State in which
they were before the making this Act.

Crown-Office.
I. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 22. No Corporations, Lords of Manors or
others, having Grants by Charter or other good Conveyances, who have Enrolled
and had the same allowed by the Court of King's Bench, shall be compelled to
Plead the same to any Inquisition returned by any Coroner. And if any
Corporations, Lords of Manors or others, have or shall have such Grants from
the Crown for Felons Goods, Deodands and other Forfeitures, they shall not be
compelled to enrol their whole Charters or Grants, but such part thereof as may
express the Grants of such Felons Goods, Deodands and Forfeitures and no more;
for doing whereof the Clerk of the Crown shall receive 20 s. for his Fee, and
no more; and from and after such Enrolment, they shall not be compelled to
Plead the same to any inquisition.

II. If any Clerk of the Crown shall hereafter issue out any Process against
such Grantees, after such Enrolment, he shall forfelt for every such Offense to
the Party grieved, the Sum of 5. l.

III. But the Clerk of the Crown shall incur no Penalty mentioned in this Act,
for issuing Process against any persons, who shall not upon every purchase of
the Title of such Felons Goods, etc. Inrol and Plead the said Purchase in the
said Court, nor against any Devisee, who shall not Enrol or Plead such Devise,
nor against any Heir, who shall not Inrol his or her Right by descent, and till
after such Pleas have been allowed of by the said Court, nor where by any
Inquest of any Coroner the Goods of any Felon or Felons or Decodands, shall not
be found to be in the Hands of such Purchaser, Devisee or Heir.

IV. Upon issuing of any Exigent for any Criminal Matter, before Conviction,
there shall issue a Writ of Proclamation, bearing the same Test and Return, to
the Sheriff of the County, City or Town where the persons in the Record of the
said Proceedings are mentioned to inhabit, according to the form of the Statute
made Anno. 31 Eliz. which Writ shall be delivered to the Sheriff Three Months
before the return thereof.

V. This Act to continue for Three years from the 25th Day of March 1693. and
to the end of the then next Session of Parliament.

Customs.
I. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 6. After the 29th Day of September 1689. so
much of every Act of Parliament, as requires the Levying the Duties arising by
those Acts, by way of Excise, upon Coffee, Chocolate and Tea, shall cease and
determine, and is hereby Repealed.

II. And be it farther Enacted, that after the 25th Day of December 1689. the
Duties and Charges hereafter mentioned, shall be Collected and Received at the
Custom-house upon Coffee-berries, Tea in the Leaf, and Cacao-nuts, and upon
Chocolate ready made, and according to the Proportions herein after mentioned,
besides what is now payable for the same at the Custom house, viz. Upon every
100 Weight of Coffee Imported, containing One hundred and twelve pound 5 l. 12
s. Upon every 100 Weight of Cacao Nuts, containing as aforesaid, 8 l. 8 s. Upon
every pound weight of Tea, 5 s. and upon every pound Weight of Chocolate, 5 s.
and so proportionably.

III. If any of the said Commodities shall be unshipt or laid on Land, the
Duties not paid, or lawfully tendered to the Collector or his Deputy, with the
consent and agreement of the Comtroller and Surveyor there, nor agreed with for
the same in the Customhouse, they shall be forfeited, the one Moiety to Their
Majesty's, the other to the Informer. This Act to continue for Five years and
no longer.

IV. Merchants and others having paid the Duties and Impositions by this Act
appointed, who shall within Six Months after Importation, again transport the
said Goods or any part thereof, shall be repaid Two thirds of the Duties by
them paid, of so much of the said Goods, as they shall export.

V. It shall be lawful to Import Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Cloves and Mace, in any
English Ships (One third part of the Mariners whereof to be English) from any
parts beyond the Seas, paying double the Sums the same are charged with in the
Book of Rates; so as notice be first given to the Commissioners or Farmers of
the Customs of the Quality and Quantity thereof, with the Name of the Ship and
Master, and the place where they intend to Import the same, and taking a
License under their Hands, or of any Three of them, for the Lading and
Importing thereof, as aforesaid; which License shall be given without Fee or
Reward.

I. Stat. 1. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 4. The Commons assembled in Parliament, do
hereby Give and Grant to your Majesty's the Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage,
and other Sums of Money Granted to the late K. Charles 2. in the Twelfth year
of his Reign, by an Act, Entitled, A Subsidy granted to the King of Tonnage
and Poundage, etc. according to the Rates therein mentioned, and the Rules and
Orders thereunto annexed, (other then such concerning which it is otherwise
provided by any Act made in the last Parliament) and pray that it may be
Enacted, and be it Enacted, that the said Subsidy and other Sums of Money be
paid to Their Majesty's for Four years, from the 24th Day of December 1690. and
that the aforesaid Act, and an Order of the House of Commons, made in pursuance
of the Rules and Orders annexed thereunto, for settling Officers Fees, Dated
the 17 of May 1662. ans Signed by Sir Edward Turnor, then Speaker, shall be of
force during the said Four years.

VII. An Act made in the 12th year of the said K. Charles 2. Entitled, An Act
to prevent Frauds and Concealments of His Majesty's Customs and Susidies; and
an Act made in the 14th year of his Reign, Entitled, An Act for preventing
Frands, and regulating Abuses in His Majesty's Customs; and an Act made in the
22d year of His Reign, Entitled, An Act for Improvement of Tillage and the
breed of Battle, and another Act made in the 25th year of His Reign, Entitled,
An Act for taking off Aliens Duties upon Commodities of the Growth, Product and
Manufacture of the Nation, and another Act made in the said 25th year of his
Reign, Entitled, An Act for the encouragement of the Greenland and East-land
Trades, and for the better securing the Plantation Trade, and one other Act
made in the First year of the late King James 2. Entitled, An additional Act
for the Improvement of Tillage, shall be in force during the said Term of Four
years.

VIII. Nothing herein shall be Construed to determine any Clauses in the said
Acts, which were intended to be perpetual.

IX. It shall be lawful for any persons to advance upon the Credit of this Act
any Sums of Money, not exceeding 500000 l. in the whole, at the Interest for
such Money as shall be lent before the 10th of June 1690. of 8 l. per Cent. and
for Money lent after, 7 l. per Cent.

X. After the First Day of November. 1690. during the continuance of this Act,
there shall be continued within London an Office for the Receipt of the
Subsidies and other Sums hereby Granted, into which all such Moneys shall be
paid, of which the Receiver General shall separate and keep apart Three parts
(the whole in Four to be divided) which shall remain from time to time, after
Payments made thereout, by virtue of any Laws now in force upon Debentures for
Goods Reshipt, or Corn Exported, or discounts upon Bonds, and of Allowances for
dammaged Goods and Bills of Portage; and the Comptroller General of the
Customs, shall keep a distinct Account of the said Three parts; to which
Accounts all Persons concerned may have free Access, without Fees; and the
Receivers shall weekly on Wednesday, unless it be a Holy Day, and then the Day
after that is not a Holy Day, pay the said Three parts into the Receipt of the
Exchequer, apart from other Moneys.

XI. And there shall be provided in the Exchequer in the Office of the Auditor
of the Receipts, one Book, in which such Moneys shall be Entered apart, and all
Persons Lending Money upon the Credit of this Act, shall have a Tally of Loan
Struck, and an Order for Repayment, bearing Date with the Tally, In which Order
there shall be a Warrant for Payment of Interest, according to the Rates
aforesaid, to be Paid every Three Months: such Orders to be Registered in Course
without preference, and all Persons shall be paid in Course as their Orders
stand Entered; and the said Money shall not be divertible to any other Use,
Intent or Purpose. And if the Receiver General, do not pay in the said Moneys
as aforesaid, or misapply any Part thereof, he shall forseit his Office, and be
incapable of any Office or Place of Trust, and shall pay the Value of the Sums
misapplied to him that will sue for the same. No Fee, Reward or Gratuity shall
be demanded or taken, for providing or making any such Registers, Entries, View
or Search, in or for Payment of Money Lent, or the Interst, by any of Their
Majesty's Officers, their Clerks or Deputies, on pain of payment of treble
Damages to the Party grieved, and Costs of Suit; and the Officer taking or
demanding any such Fee, shall lose his Place; and if any undue preference be
made in point of Registry or Payment, the Party offending shall be liable by
Action of Debt or of the Case, to pay the Value of the Debt, Damages and Costs
to the party grieved, and shall be forejudged his Place, if an Officer, and if
a Deputy or Clerk, shall be for ever incapable of it. And if the Auditor shall
not direct the Order, or the Clerk of the Pells Record, or the Teller make
Payment, according to each Persons Order, they shall be adjudged to forfeit,
and their Deputies and Clerks herein offending, to be liable to such Action,
Damages and Costs, as aforesaid: All which Penalties and Forfeitures to be
Recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, etc.

XII. If several Tallies of Loan or Orders for Payment bear Date, or be brought
the same day, it shall be no undue preference which is Entered First, so all be
entered the same Day. Nor shall it be any undue preference to direct, record,
and pay subsequent Orders of Persons that come and demand their Money, and
bring their Orders, before others that do not come to demand theirs, so as
there be so much Money left as will satisfy precedent Orders (Interest upon
Loan being to cease from the time that the Money is kept in Bank for them.)

XIII. Moneys due by Virtue of this Act, after Order Entered in the Register,
may by Endorsement be transerr'd, and the Assignee may in like manner Assign
toties quoties: but such Endorsement must be notified in the Office of the
Auditor of the Receipt, and an Entry or Memorandum made thereof in the Book of
the Register for Orders.

XIV. Stat. 2. W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 4. There shall be paid to Their
Majesty's and Their Successors, for the several Merchandises hereafter
mentioned, over and above the Duties already imposed, the farther Duties
following, viz.

XV. For Calicoes and other Indian Linen, and for wrought Silks, and other
Manufactures of India and China (Except Indigo) imported between the 25th of
December. 1690. and the 10th of November. 1695. 20 l. for every 100 l. value; and
for wrought Silks imported within that time, from any other place, 10 l. for
every 100 l. value; and for Raw-Silks imported within that time from China or
the East Indies, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

XVI. For all Linen imported within that time from places whence it may be
imported (other then Linen of the Manufacture of the Spanish Netherlands or
United Provinces, not Exceeding an Engl. Ell and half quarter in breadth) one
Moiety above what is already imposed: And for Linen of the Manufacture of the
Spanish Netherlands or United Provinces, of the breadth of 2 Else or upwards,
and under 3 Else, as much more as is now charged; and of the breadth of 3 Else
or upwards, treble as much as is now charged.

XVII. For Deal-Timber, and all other Wood imported within that time from any
part of Europe, except Ireland, 10 l. for every 100 l. value, above what is now
charged.

XVIII. For every Tun of Hemp Seed, or other Seed-Oyl imported within that
time, 8 l. and so proportionably for greater or lesser quantities.

XIX. For every hundred Weight of Hops, containing 112 pounds, imported within
that time, 20 s. above what is now charged, and so in proportion.

XX. For every 100 Weight of Pepper, containing 112 pounds, 28 s. above the
charge in the Book of Rates, and so in proportion, one third part to be paid
down, and Bond to be given for the payment of the Remainder at Twelve Months
end, or else to discount 10 per Cent. for present payment.

XXI. For every 100 l. value of Grocery Wares and Drugs (other then Pepper,
Liquorice, Currants, Sugar, Tobacco, Mace, Cinnamon, Nutmegs and Cloves) 10 l.
For every 100 pound of Currants, 5 l. above the charge in the Book of Rates, and
so in proportion.

XXII. For every Tun of Iron (except Bushel Iron) imported in any other Vessel
then English built, and whereof the Master and three Fourths of the Mariners
are English, 33 s. And for every Tun of such Iron imported in Vessels English
built, and so navigated, 23 s. and so in proportion.

XXIII. For Foreign Iron-Wire (except Card-Wire, an^ Wire smaller then Fine and
Superfine, and Wooll-Cards, or o^ he Wares made of Iron-Wire) for every 100
Weight, con^aining 112 pounds, 22 s. 6 d. and so in proportion: Which of
Iron-Wire (except, as aforesaid) it shall be lawful to import during the time
aforesaid. For Steel-Wire imported, 14 s. for every 100 Weight, containing, as
aforesaid. For every Iron Pot, and Iron Kettle imported, 1 s. 3 d. For every
small Back for Chimneys, 1 s. 2 d. for every large Back, 2 s. 4 d. for every
100 weight of Rod-Iron, containing 112 pound, 5 s. and so in proportion: for
every 100 weight of Frying-pans, containing as aforesaid, 4 s. and so in
proportion: for every 100 weight of Steel, containing as aforesaid, 5 s. 6 d.
and so in proportion: for every 100 weight of Anvils, containing as aforesaid,
9 s. 3 d. and so in proportion: for every hundred of single white or black
Plates, 4 s. 4 d. and so in proportion: For every hundred of double white or
black Plates, 8 s. 8 d. and so in proportion: for every Harnessplate, or Iron
double, 1 s. 4 d. for every 100 weight of Iron drawn or hammered, less then
three quarters of an Inch square, and all other Iron Ware manufactured,
containing as aforesaid, 5 s. Provided that no manufactured Iron Ware hereby
charged to pay by the Piece or Hundred weight, shall be liable to pay by the
Tun. And for every 100 weight of Brass, Latten, or Copper-Wire, containing as
aforesaid, 15 s. and so in proportion.

XXIV. For every Last of Hemp Seed, Cole-seed, and Rape-seed, 4 l.

XXV. For all Yarn of Flax or Hemp, other then Cable-Yarn, an additional Duty
of as much as is now charged in the Book of Rates; for every 100 weight of
Cable-Yarn, 5 s. and so in proportion.

XXVI. For all manufactures of Glass (except Rhenish and Muscovia Window-glass)
3 s. for every 20 s. value above what is already charged.

XXVII. For every 100 weight of Molosses, containing as aforesaid, imported
from any other place then the English Plantations in America, 8 s.

XXVIII. For every 100 weight of Tallow, containing as aforesaid, 5 s. and so
in proportion: for every 100 weight of Tallow-Candles, containing as aforesaid,
10 s. and so in proportion.

XXIX. For every pound of Bever-wooll cut and combed (except Wool combed in
Russia, and imported thence in English Vessels) 15 s.

XXX. For every Barrel of Potashes, containing 200 weight neat, 8 s. and so in
proportion.

XXXI. For every 100 weight of Cordage ready wrought, containing as aforesaid,
5 s. and so in proportion.

XXXII. For every Tun of Olive-Oyl imported, 4 s. and so in proportion.

XXXIII. For every Ream of Royal Paper, 2 s. of Blue Paper, Demi Paper, and
painted Paper, 1 s. 6 d. for every Bundle of Brown Paper, 2 d. and for all
other Paper, as much more as is now charged in the Book of Rates.

XXXIV. For every 100 weight of Liquorice, containing 112 pounds, 18 s. and so
in proportion: for every such 100 weight of Liquorice Powder, 1 l. 17 s. 4 d.
for every pound weight of Juice of Liquorice, 1 s. and so in proportion.

XXXV. For every 100 weight of Barilla or Saphora, containing 112 pound, 2 s. 6
d. and so in proportion.

XXXVI. For every 100 weight of Soap, containing as aforesaid, 10 s. and so in
proportion.

XXXVII. For all Earthen Ware, not mentioned in the Book of Rates, 2 s. 6 d.
for every 20 s. value.

XXXVIII. For every 100 weight of Starch, containing, ut supra, 20 s. and so in
proportion.

XXXIX. For every 100 weight of Allom, containing, ut supra, 2 s. 6 d. and so
in proportion.

XL. For every 100 weight of Brimstone, containing, ut supra, 4 s. 8 d. and so
in proportion.

XLI. For every 100 weight of Tin, containing, ut supra, 30 s. and so in
proportion.

XLII. Where any Duties upon Goods and Merchandise hereby granted, are to be
levied according to the value, the value shall be taken according to the Books
of Rates, if such Goods are particularly there rated; if not, the value shall
be taken by the Importers Oath; the Duties hereby imposed, not to be reckoned
into the value.

XLIII. For all additional Duties hereby imposed, the Importer giving security,
shall have 12 Months time (where the same is not otherwise limited) for payment
thereof by four quarterly payments; or upon present payment shall have 10 l.
per Cent. abated him: And if such Goods or Merchandise be again exported within
a Twelve Month, the additional Duty shall be repaid, and Security vacated.

XLIV. The Duties hereby imposed, shall not affect such foreign Stores as have
been sold for the use of the Navy, by Contract with the Navy-board, or
Commissioners for the victualling, before the 15th day of November 1690.

XLV. The Duties hereby imposed, shall be raised, collected and paid in manner
and form, and by such Rules, and under such Penalties and Forfeitures as are
mentioned in the Act of Tonnage and Poundage, Anno 12 Car. 2. and the Rules and
Orders thereunto annexed.

XLVI. Any persons may advance Money to Their Majesty's upon the Security of
this Act, at 8 l. per Cent. for forbearance, and no more.

XLVII. All Moneys that shall be paid into the Exchequer by virtue of this Act,
shall be registered apart and distinct from all other Moneys payable upon any
other Branch of the Revenue. And they that lend Money on the Credit of this
Act, shall have Tallies of Loan struck for the same, and Orders for repayment,
bearing date with their Tallies; in which Orders there shall be Warrants for
payment of Interest at the Rate of 8 l. per Cent. per Annum, to be paid every
Three Months; such Orders to be registered in course, without preference: And
all persons shall be paid in course according as their Orders stand entered. No
Fee, Reward, or Gratuity shall be taken for providing or making any such
Registers, Entries, View or Search in or for payment of Money lent, or the
Interest, by any of Their Majesty's Officers, their Clerks or Deputies, on pain
of payment of treble Damages to the Party grieved, with Costs of Suit; and the
Officer demanding any such Fee, shall lose his place. And if any undue
preference be made in point of Registry or Payment, the Party offending shall
be liable by Action of Debt, or of the Case, to pay the value of the Debt,
Damages and Costs to the Party grieved, and shall be fore-judged his Place or
Office.

XLVIII. If several Tallies of Loan, or Orders for payment, bear date, or be
brought the same day to the Auditor of the Receipt, it shall be no undue
preference which he enters first, so he enters all the same day.

XLIX. Nor shall it be interpreted any undue preference, if the Auditor direct,
and the Clerk of the Pells record, and Tellers pay subsequent Orders of persons
that come and demand their money, and bring their Orders, before others that do
not come to demand theirs, so as there be so much money left as will satisfy
precedent Orders.

L. Moneys due by virtue of this Act, After Order entered in the Register, may
by Endorsement of the Order, be assigned and transferred; and the Assignee may
in like manner assign, and so toties quoties: But such Endorsement must be
notified in the Office of the Auditor of Receipt, and an Entry or Memorandum
made thereof in the Book of Register for Orders.

LI. Sat. 2. W. and M. Sess. 2. cap 5. The several Impositions and Duties upon
Wines and Vinegar, granted by an Act made in the 1st year of the late King
James II. shall be continued from the 23th of June. 1693. until the 24th of
June, 1696. and the said Act, and all Clauses therein, shall be of force until
the said 24th of June, 1696.

LII. And the Rates and Duties for all sorts of Tobacco granted by an Act made
in the 1st year of the said K. James, shall be continued in like manner: And
the said last mentioned Act shall be of force till then.

LIII. Provided that this Act shall not extend to repeal or alter an Act made
in the 1st year of Their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for prohibiting all
Trade and Commerce with France.

LIVE. It shall be lawful to advance, as well upon the security of this Act, as
upon the security of the said two former Acts, (from and after the payment of
the Sum of 600000 l. to the States General of the United Provinces) any Sum or
Sums of Money at the Interest of 8 l. per Cent.

LV. All Moneys, etc. as in Paragraph 47.

LVI. If several Tallies, etc. as in Paragraph 48.

LVII. Nor shall it be, etc. as in Paragraph 49.

LVIII. Moneys due, etc. as in Paragraph. 50.

LIX. Nothing in this Act shall extend to defeat or obstruct the Provision made
by an Act in the 1st year of Their Majesty's Reign, for payment of Wages due to
the Servants of the late K. Charles II. in such manner as by the said Act is
directed.

LX. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. c. 5. There shall be paid to Their Majesty's over
and above the Duties already payable:

LXI. For every 100 l. value of Amber Beads imported after the 1st day of
March, 1692. and before the 1st of March, 1696. 20 l. for Amber rough, 10 l.
for every 100 l. value: for Amber-Oyl, 10 l. for every 100 l. value.

LXII. For Anchovies, the little Barrel not exceeding sixteen pounds of Fish,
for every 100 l. value, 5 l.

LXIII. For Wood, Weed, or Sope-Ashes 6 s. the Last.

LXIV. For Barbers Aprons and Cheques, 8 d. the Piece.

LXV. For every 100 weight of Battery, Bashrones or Kettles, containing 112
pounds, 5 s.

LXVI. For every such 100 weight of Mettle prepared for Battery, 5 s.

LXVII. For every such 100 weight of Books unbound, 4 s.

LXVIII. For Lamp-black, 20 l. for every 100 l. value.

LXXIX. For Boutel Reins, 10 l. for every 100 l. value.

LXX. For every Gross of Bracelets or Neck laces of Glass, 2 s. 6 d.

LXXI. For Brass wrought, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

LXXII. For Buckrums, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

LXXIII. For Hair-buttons, 10 l. for every 100 l. value.

LXXIV. For Bristles dressed and undrest, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

LXXV. For every pound of Bacon, 4 d.

LXXVI. For Calves Skins, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

LXXVII. For Carpets, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

LXXVIII. For every Gross of Catlings and Lutestrings, 18 d.

LXXIX. For Scotch Coals, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

LXXX. For every 1000 of walking Canes, 25 s.

LXXXI. For Canes called Rattans, 5 s. the 1000.

LXXXII. For every 100 weight of Cast-Copper, containing 112 pounds, 7 s. 6 d.

LXXXIII. For every 100 weight of Copper, part wrought or raised, containing
112 pounds, 12 s. 6 d.

LXXXIV. For every such 100 weight of Copper fully wrought, 17 s. 6 d.

LXXXV. For Coral Beads, and all polished Coral, 20 l. for every 100 l. value.

LXXXVI. For all Manufactures of Cotton only (Except Dimity) not brought from
East India or China, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

LXXXVII. For every 100 l. value of Couries, 10 l.

LXXXVIII. For Elephants Teeth, 10 l. for every 100 l. value.

LXXXIX. For Flax rough, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

XC. For Flax dressed or wrought, 15 l. for every 100 l. value.

XCI. For every 100 l. value of Tow, 5 l.

XCII. For every Yard of Flannel, 2 d.

XCIII. For every Yard of Frieze, 3 d. 2 q.

XCIV. For every 100 l. value of Furs, 5 l.

XCV. For Gold and Silver Thread and Wire, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

XCVI. For every pound of Goats Hair, called Carmenia Wool, 4 d.

XCVII. For every pound of Goats Hair of any other sort, 2 d.

XCVIII. For Hides of all sorts, dressed and underst, except Buff and Losh, 5 l.
for every 100 l. value.

XCIX. For every Buff-hide, 2 s.

C. For every Losh-hide, 1 s.

CI. For Hemp rough, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

CII. For Jewels and precious Stones, 20 s. for every 100 l. value, upon the
Importer's Oath, in lieu of all Duties now payable for the same.

CIII. For every pound of Indico of foreign Plantation, not being of the Growth
of any the Dominions or Plantations belonging to the Crown of England, 4 d.

CIV. For every pound of Indico of the Growth of our own Plantations, 2 d.

CV. For all Iron, Iron-pots, Kettles, etc. and all other Iron Wares imported
from Ireland, the same Duties as are laid on Iron, and Iron Wares imported from
any foreign Part, by an Act of the Second Year of Their Majesty's Reign,
Entitled, An Act for granting to Their Majesty's certain Impositions upon all
East India Goods and Manufactures, etc.

CVI. For Latten shaven, black Latten and round Bottoms, 10 l. for every 100 l.
value.

CVII. For Leather of all sorts, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

CVIII. For all Lime and Lemmon-Juice, 20 l. for every 100 l. value.

CIX. For Litmus, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

CX. For all Lapis Calaminaris, 20 s. for every Tun.

CXI. For Madder, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

CXII. For Orchal, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

CXIII. For Pintadoes, not brought from East India or China, 5 l. for every 100
l. value.

CXIV. For Pitch, not being of the Product of the Dominions or Plantations of
the Crown of England, or Scotland, one Moiety more then is charged in the Book
of Rates.

CXV. For all sorts of Plate of Silver, gilt or ungilt, 5 l. for every 100 l.
value.

CXVI. For Rice, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

CXVII. For Rosin (except French Rosin) not being of the Product or Plantations
belonging to the Crown of England or Scotland, 10 l. for every 100 l. value.

CXVIII. For every Weight of Salt (except such as shall be used in curing Fish)
5 s.

CXIX. For Silk thrown of all sorts, in the Gum, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

CXX. For every pound of Silk wrought, other then Alamodes and Lutestrings, 2
s. more then the same is already charged in the Book of Rates, or by an Act in
the Second year of Their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for Granting to
Their Majesty's certain Impositions upon all East India Goods, etc.

CXXI. For Silk-ferret or Floret, one Moiety more then the same is charged with
in the Book of Rates.

CXXII. For Skins of all sorts, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

CXXIII. For all Tarr, not being of the Product of the Dominions or Plantations
belonging to the Crown of England or Scotland, one Moiety more then is charged
in the Book of Rates.

CXXIV. For Ticks and Tickings (except Scottish) 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

CXXV. For every dozen pounds of Thread Outnel, 4 s.

CXXVI. For all Tapistry and Dornix (except such as are manufactured in, or
brought from the French Kings Dominions) 10 l. for every 100 l. value.

CXXVII. For unwrought Inkle, one Moiety more then what is now paid for the
same.

CXXVIII. For all Pan-tiles, 8 s. the 1000.

CXXIX. For Dying-wood (except Red Wood from Guinea, Drugs and Logwood) 5 l.
for every 100 l. value.

CXXX. For Beeswax, 5 l. for every 100 l. value.

CXXXI. For every Tun of French Wine, 8 l. above all Duties already charged.

CXXXII. Upon all French Goods and Merchandise (except Wine, Brandy, Salt and
Vinegar) 25 l. for every 100 l. value.

CXXXIII. For Alamodes and Lutestrings, 15 l. for every 100 l. value.

CXXXIV. For Latten, Brass, or Copper-wire, 6 s. 6 d. the 100 Weight,
containing 112 pounds.

CXXXV. For Goods not particularly rated in the Book of Rates, paying Duty at
value, 5 l. for every 100 l. value, upon the Importer's Oath, according to the
Direction of the Book of Rates (except such Goods as are particularly charged
by this Act, or an Act of this Parliament, Entitled, An Act for Granting to
Their Maj^sties certain Impositions upon all East India Goods, etc.

CXXXVI. For every Gallon of Strong Water, Aqua vitae, or Brandy, commonly
called Single Brandy, to be paid by the Importer, before landing, 2 s. above
the Duties at any time before the Second year of Their Majesty's Reign, payable
for the same.

CXXXVII. For every Gallon of Strong Waters, Spirits or Brandy, above Proof,
called Double Brandy, to be paid as aforesaid, 4 s.

CXXXVIII. Two Clauses in an Act made the Second year of Their Majesty's Reign,
Entitled, An Act for Granting to Their Majesty's several Additional Duties
upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors, for Four Years, etc. concerning Single
Brandy, Spirits, or Aqua vitae, and Brandy, Spirits or Aqua vitae above Proof,
shall from the 1st day of March. 1692. be repealed.

CXXXIX. The Rates and Impositions hereby imposed, to be raised (except where
it is otherwise hereby directed) according to the Act of Tonnage and Poundage,
and the Directions thereunto annexed, or any other Laws now in force relating
to the Customs.

CXL. The several Rates and Duties upon Single and Double Brandy, shall be
levied according to the Directions of an Act made in the 12th year of K.
Charles II. Entitled, An Act for taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries,
etc. and of another Act in the 15th year of His Reign, Entitled, An Additional
Act for the better Ordering and Collecting the Duty of Excise, etc. or of any
other Law in force relating to the Excise.

CXLI. The Importers giving Security at the Custom house, shall have a Twelve
Months time for paying the Additional Duties hereby imposed by 4 quarterly
Payments; and for ready Money shall have 10 l. per Cent. abated: And if such
Goods be again exported within a Twelve Month by any Merchant English, or
within 9 Months by Strangers, the Duty shall be repaid, or the Security
vacated, for what shall be exported, all Brandy excepted.

CXLII. The Duties hereby charged upon Amber-Beads, Amber rough, Coral-Beads,
and polished Coral, and all Couries, to be repaid to the Merchant exporting the
same, within 3 years after the Importation thereof.

CXLIII. No Brandy shall be imported in any Vessel not containing 60 Gallons at
the least, on pain of forfeiting the same, or the Value, one half to Their
Majesty's, and the other half to the Informer.

CXLIV. The Officers concerned in levying the Duties arising by this Act, shall
keep a separate Account thereof, and pay the same in specie into the Exchequer
weekly; and upon neglect or refusal, shall forfeit their Places.

CXLV. During the continuance of the said Act, Entitled, An Act for Granting
to Their Majesty's certain Impositions upon all East India Goods, etc. the Sum
of 5 l. only shall be paid for every 100 l. Value of Raisins above the Rates
thereon charged in the Book of Rates, and 50 s. for every 100 l. Value of
Currants above the Rates in the Book of Rates (any thing in the said Act to the
contrary notwithstanding) the same to be Collected, as by the said Act is
directed.

CXLVI. No piece of Calico Imported during the continuance of the said last
recited Act, of the breadth of One yard and a quarter, shall exceed in length
Ten yards; and no Piece above that breadth shall exceed Six yards; and Pieces
exceeding those lengths, shall be Rated according to the length of Ten yards,
and Six yards for each Piece, and pay in that proportion according to the Sum
rated in the Book of Rates, and the Subsidy and additional Duty shall be
Collected and Paid according to that Admeasurement.

CXLVII. Linen of Prussia, Polonia, or any part of the East Country (except
Russia) above the breadth of three quarters and half a quarter of a yard, shall
pay as broad Germany Linen, and whited Hinderlands from the same Countries,
under that breadth, shall pay as narrow East Country Linen.

CXLVIII. During the continuance of an Act made in the First year of Their
Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for charging and Collecting the Duties upon
Coffee, etc. at the Custom-house, there shall be paid to Their Majesty's for
every 100 Weight of Coffee Imported 56 s. and no more; and for every Pound of
Cocao Nuts Imported from any of our own Plantations 6 d. and no more, and from
any other Countries 8 d. and for every pound of Tea, Imported from whence it
Lawfully may, 1 s. and no more; and for every pound of Chocolate 1 s. and no
more; any thing in the said recited Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

CLXIX. The Duties hereby charged upon Coffee, Cocao Nuts, Tea and Chocolate,
to be paid over and above the Duties Charged upon them in the Book of Rates.

CL. No Foreign Alamodes and Lutestrings shall be Imported after the 25 day of
March 1693. but upon notice first given to the Commissioners or Farmers of the
Customs, of the Quality and Quantity, Marks, Numbers and Package thereof, with
the Name of the Ship and Master, and the Place where they intend to import the
same, and taking a license from the said Commissioners or Farmers or any Three
of them, for the Lading and Importing thereof; which License shall be Granted
without Fee; the said Goods Imported without such Notice and License shall be
Forfeited, one Moiety to Their Majesty's, and the other Moiety to him that will
seize or sue for the same.

CLI. Officers of the Customs for passing any Debenture for Repayment of the
Duties to be paid back on Exportation, according to this or any other Act,
shall only receive such Fees as were payable for Debentures, for the Repayment
of the half Subsidy, according to the Book of Rates, and no more; nor shall any
Fee be taken for any Oath to be Administered at the Customhouse upon this Act.

CLII. The Act made in the 3d Year of Their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act
for Granting to Their Majesty's certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other
Liquors for one year, so far as it relates to Elections of Members to serve in
Parliament, and leaving true Notes in Writing of the last Gauges, with the
Penalties relating thereunto, shall from the First Day of March next be
revived, and continue during the continuance of this Act, and from thence to
the End of the next Session of Parliament.

CLIII. It shall be Lawful to Lend and Advance to Their Majesty's upon the
Credit of this Act, any Sum or Sums not exceeding in the whole 510000 l. and to
receive for forbearance 8 l. per Cent. per Aanum.

CLIV. Officers concerned in Levying the Duties arising by this Act, shall keep
a separate account thereof, and pay the same in specie into the Exchequer every
Wednesday, unless it be a Holyday, and then the day after; and upon neglect or
refusal shall incur the Penalties, etc. that other Officers of the Exchequer
before mentioned shall be liable to; which Moneys shall be applied to the Uses
mentioned in this Act.

CLV. Out of the Money which shall be paid into the Exchequer upon Loan or
otherwise, by Virtue of this or any other Act of this Session of Parliament,
for Granting Aids and Supplies, etc. (other then an Act, Entitled, An Act for
Granting to Their Majesty's an Aid of Four Shillings in the Pound, etc.) the
Sum of 1226516 l. shall be Appropriated for the payment of Officers and Seamen,
and for Stores, Provisions and Victuals for the Navy, and to the Expenses of
the Ordnance in respect to Naval Affairs, and other necessary Uses for the
Navy. And if any Officer belonging to the Revenue, Exchequer, Navy or Ordnance,
wittingly divert any Part of the Money hereby Appropriated to any other
purpose, he shall lose his Place, and be disabled to execute any Office
whatsoever.

CLVI. The additional Duties imposed by this Act, shall not affect such Foreign
Stores, as have been sold to the use of the Navy, by Contract with the
Navy-board before the First of January 1692. so as a Certificate be given by
the Commissioners of the Navy, that such Stores have been so Contracted for;
and so as the Importer make Oath of the Truth of the Contract, and that he will
deliver them into their Majesty's Stores accordingly.

CLVII. Commissioners and Patent-Officers, their Deputies, Clerks and Servants,
who have or shall have any Employment about the Customs, shall before the 19th
Day of April next, or at their admissions hereafter, take their Oaths for the
true Execution to the best of their Knowledge and Power, of their several
Trusts and Employments, and that they will take no Reward or Gratuity but their
respective Salaries, and what is or shall be allowed them by the Crown, or the
Regular Fees Established by Law for any Service done, or to be done in the
Execution of their Employments.

CLVIII. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 15. The several Impositions and Duties
upon Wines and Vinegar, Granted by an Act made the First year of the late King
James 2d, Entitled, An Act for Granting His Majesty an Imposition upon all
Wines, and Vinegar Imported between the 24th of June 1685. and the 24th of June
1693. Which by an Act of this present Parliament was continued from the said
24th of June 1693. to the 24th of June 1696. shall be farther continued until
the 24th of June School.

CLIX. The Rates, Duties and Impositions for Tobacco Granted by an Act in the
1st Year of the Reign of the said late King James 2d, Entitled, An Act for
Granting to His Majesty an Imposition upon all Tobacco and Sugar Imported
between the 24th day of June 1685. and the 24th day of June 1693. which said
Act (as concerning Impositions upon Tobacco only) by an Act of this present
Parliament, was farther continued unto the 24th day of June 1696. shall be
continued from the said 24th day of June 1696. to the 24th of June School.

CLX. The Additional and other Impositions and Duties upon several sorts of
Goods and Merchandise, Granted by an Act of this present Parliament in the
Second year of Their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for Granting to Their
Majesty's certain Impositions upon all East India Goods and Manufactures, and
upon all wrought Silks, etc. to be Imported after the 25th day of December. 1690.
and which were to have continuance to the 10th day of November. 1695. shall be
continued from the 9th day of November 1695. to the 10th day of November 1697.

CLXI. Any Persons may advance Moneys upon the Security of this Act, not
exceeding in the whole 500000. l. and to have any Sum for forbearance, nor
exceeding 8 l. per Cent. per Annum.

CLXII. There shall likewise be paid to Their Majesty's 5 l. for every 100 l.
of the Joynt-Stock of the East India Company, the said Stock being valued at
744000 l. The same to be paid by the Governor and Treasurer of the Company by
Four Quarterly Payments, the First on the 25 of March 1693. and to be deducted
upon the next Dividend.

CLXIII. And for every Share in the Joynt-Stock of the African Company, as the
Number of Shares are now reckoned, there shall be paid to Their Majesty's the
Sum of 20 s. by the Governor and Treasurer of that Company by Four Quarterly
Payments, the First to be made on the said 25th of March 1693. and to be
deducted as aforesaid.

CLXIV. And for every Share in the Joynt-Stock of the Hudson's- Bay Company, as
the number of Shares are now reckoned, there shall be paid the Sum of 5 l. by
the Governor and Treasurer of that Company ut supra. And for default of
Payment at the Days and Times aforesaid, the Charter of such Company
respectively shall be void.

CLXV. From and after the Sixth Day of April 1693. none shall be admitted to
swear to a Debanture for any Duties to be drawn back upon Re-exportation, but
he who is the true Exporter, as being either Interested in the Goods, or
Employed by Commission.

CLXVI. All Persons who by way of Insurance or otherwise, shall undertake to
deliver any Goods Imported from beyond Sea, without paying the Duties payable
for the same, or any Prohibited Goods, and shall deliver, or cause to be
delivered the same as aforesaid, knowing thereof, and all their Abbettors,
shall for every such offense forfeit 500 l. above the Forfeitures to which they
are already liable.

CLXVII. And all who shall agree to pay any Money for the Insuring or Conveying
any Goods Imported, without paying the Duties, or any Prohibited Goods, or
shall receive such prohibited Gods, or such other Goods, before the Duties are
paid, knowing thereof, shall also Forseit for every offense 500 l. the one
Moiety of the said Forfeitures to Their Majesty's, and the other to the
Informer.

CLXVIII. And if the Insurer or Manager of such Fraud be the Discoverer, he
shall not only keep the Insurance Money given him, and be discharged of the
Penalties to which he is liable, but shall have one half of the Penalties
imposed upon the Parties making such Insurance or Receiving the Goods, as
aforesaid; and in Case no Discovery be made by the Insurer, and the Party
Insured shall make discovery thereof, he shall recover back his Praenium, and
have One Moiety of the Forfeitures imposed upon the Insurer, and be discharged
of the imposed upon himself.

CLXIX. The said Penalties and Forseitures to be Recoverable according to the
Course of the Court of Exchequer, as other Penalties in like Cases are
Recoverable.

CLXX. No Penalty hereby inflicted to be recoverable, unless presented within
Twelve Months after the Fact Committed.

CLXXI. All Duties whatsoever that shall accrue to Their Majesty's at the
Custom-house after the 25th day of March 1693. for Prize-Goods, shall be
applied entirely to the Credit of an Act of Parliament, made this Session,
Entitled, An Act for Granting to Their Majesty's certain Additional
Impositions upon several Goods and Merchandise, for the Prosecuting the present
War against France, Any other Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Deer. Stealers.
I. Stat. 3. and 4. W. and M. cap. 10. If any Persons shall unlawfully Course,
Hunt, Take in Toils, Kill, Wound, or take away any Red or Fallow Deer in any
Forest, Chase, Purlieu, Paddock, Wood, Park or other Ground enclosed, where
Deer are or shall be usually kept, without the consent of the Owner, or Person
entrusted with the Custody thereof, or be aiding therein, and shall be
Convicted by Confession, or the Oath of one Witness before a Justice of Peace
of the County where the Offense shall be Committed, or the Party Apprehended,
within a Twelvemonth after the Offense done, they shall Forseit for every such
Offense 20 l. and for every Deer wounded, taken or killed 30 l. to be Levied by
Distress and Sale of Goods, by Warrant from the Justice before whom the
Conviction shall be made; the One third Part to the Informer, the other third
Part to the Poor of the Parish, where the Offense shall be Committed; and the
other third to the Owner of the Deer. And for want of a Distress, they shall be
Imprisoned a year, and set in the Pillory an hour, on some Market Day, in the
Town next adjoining to the Place where the Offense was Committed, by the Chief
Officer of such Market Town, or his under Officers.

II. Constables, Head-boroughs and Tythingmen, by a Justices Warrant, may Enter
and Search, as for Stolen Goods, the Houses and other Places of suspected
Persons; and if any Venison or Skins of Deer or Toils be found, shall carry
such Offender before a Justice of Peace; and if he do not give a good Account
how he came by them, and in some convenient time produce the Party of whom he
bought them, or prove such Sale upon Oath, he shall be Convicted of such
Offense, and be subject to the Penalties hereby inflicted for killing a Deer.

III. The Constable or other Officer or Persons prosecuting may detain such
Offenders in Custody, if they do not presently pay the Moneys due by the
Conviction, till a Return may be made of the Warrant for Distress, such
Detainer not exceeding Two days.

IV. Owners of any such Deer, or any acting under them, may resist such
Offenders, and be Indemnified, as if such Fact had been Committed in an ancient
Chase or Park.

V. No Certiorari shall be allowed to remove any Conviction or other proceeding
upon this Act, unless the Party Convicted shall before it be Allowed, become
bound to the Prosecutors in 50 l. with Sureties to be approved by the said
Justice, to pay within a Month after the Conviction confirmed, or a procedendo
Granted, their full Costs to be ascertained upon Oath.

VI. No Offender Punished by Virtue of this Act, shall incur the Penalty of any
other Law for the same Offense.

VII. Persons prosecuted for any thing done in pursuance of this Act, may Plead
the general Issue, and give the special Matter in Evidence.

VIII. If any Person shall in the night time pull down or destroy or cause to
be pulled down or destroyed the Pails or Walls of any Park, Forest, etc. or
other Ground enclosed, where Red or Fallow-Deer shall be kept, such Persons
being Convicted by Oath of one Witness before a Justice of Peace, shall by such
Justices Warrant suffer Imprisonment for Three Months.

Distresses.
I. Sat. 2. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 5. After the First Day of June 1690. where
any Goods or Chattels shall be distrained for Rent, reserved and due upon any
Demise, Lease or Contract, and the Tenant or Owner of the Goods shall not
within Five days after such Distress and Notice thereof (with the cause of such
taking) left at the Mansion House, or other most notorious Place of the
Premises charged with the Rent, Replevy the same, the Person distraining may
with the Sheriff or Undersheriff of the County, or with the Constable of the
Hundred, Parish or Place where, etc. who are hereby required to assist, cause
the Distress to be appraised by Two sworn Appraisers (whom such Sheriff, etc.
shall swear to Appraise them truly, according to the best of their
Understanding, and after such Appraisement may Sell the same, toward the
satisfaction of the Rent, and the Charges of the Distress and Appraisement,
leaving the Overplus, if any be, in the hands of the said Sheriff, etc. for the
Owners Use.

II. It shall be Lawful to Distrain for Rent arrear, as aforesaid, any Sheaves
or Cocks of Corn, or Corn loose or in the Straw, or Hay in any Barn or Granary,
or upon any Hovel, Stack or Rick or otherwise; and to lock up and detain the
same in the Place where it shall be found, till it be Replevied, as aforesaid;
and in default thereof, within the time aforesaid, to Sell the same after
Appraisement, as aforesaid; so nevertheless that it be not removed to the
damage of the Owner, but kept where it shall be found and seized, as Impounded,
till it be Replevied, or Sold.

III. Upon any Pound-breach or Rescous of Goods Distrained for Rent, the Person
grieved shall have a special Action upon the Case, and Recover treble Damages
and Costs of Suit, against the Offenders, or against the Owners of the Goods,
if they come to his Use or Possession.

IV. If any such Distress and Sale, as aforesaid, shall be made, where there is
no Rent due, the Owner of the Goods Distrained, may by Action of Trespass, or
upon the Case against the Persons distraining, Recover double the Value of the
Goods Distrained, with full Costs of Suit.

Excise.
I. STat. 1. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 24. From the 24th day of July 1689. there
shall be paid to Their Majesty's for Three years, for Beer, Ale, Cider and
other Liquors herein after mentioned, by way of Excise, over and above the
Duties already Charged; That is to say, For every Barrel of Beer or Ale, above
6 s. price, 9 d. For every Barrel of Beer or Ale of 6 s. or under, 3 d. For
every Barrel of Vinegar or Vinegar-Beer, made of English Materials, 1 s. 6 d.
For every Barrel of Vinegar, or Liquor prepared for Vinegar, made for Sale of
Foreign Materials, 4 s. For every Barrel of Beer, Ale or Mum, Imported, 3 s.
For every Tun of Cider or Perry Imported 4 l. For every Gallon of Single
Brandy, Spirits or Aqua vitae Imported, 2 s. For every Gallon of Brandy Spirits
or Aqua vitae above Proof, Imported, 4 s. For all Cider and Perry made and sold
by Retail, to be paid by the Retailer, for every Hogshead, 1 s. and 3d. For
Metheglin and Mead made for Sale, to be paid by the Maker, for every Gallon 3 d.

II. If any Distiller or Maker of Low Wines, shall after the 20th Day of July
1689. after an Account taken by the Gauger of the Quantity of his Wines,
dispose of the same, without drawing them off a second time, he shall Forfeit
for every Gallon so disposed of, 5 s.

III. The Duties hereby Imposed, shall be Raised in Manner and Form, and under
such Penalties as are mentioned in one Act of Parliament, made in the 12th year
of the Reign of the late King Charles 2d, Entitled, An Act for taking away the
Court of Wards and Liveries, etc. and by one other Act made in the 15th year of
the said King's Reign, Entitled, An Additional Act for the better Ordering and
Collecting the Duties of Excise, etc. or by any other Law now in force relating
to the Excise, not otherwise herein and hereby altered and provided against.

IV. Every Thirty four Gallons of Beer or Ale, according to the Standard of the
Ale-Quart, Four whereof shall make the Gallon, shall be reckoned a Barrel of
Beer or Ale. And the Allowances, appointed to be made within the Weekly Bills
of Mortality, for waste, by filling and leakage, shall be Two Barrels and a
half upon every Twenty three Barrels, and no more.

V. When it shall appear to the Gauger, that any Worts are missing, or not let
fairly down into the Tun, and the Gauger cannot find the same, the Gauger shall
charge the Brewer, etc. with so much Beer or Ale as the Worts missing would
reasonably make.

VI. Gaugers may make their Returns and Charges upon warm Worts, and make
Allowance of a Tenth part thereof for Wash and Waste, such Worts not to be
afterward charged with any Duty of Excise.

VII. No Retailer of Beer or Ale, shall, during the continuance of this Act, or
of the Duties hereby imposed, be impleaded for uttering Beer or Ale at any
higher Prices then the Price heretofore appointed.

VIII. In case any Distiller or Maker of Strong Waters, Aqu^vitae, or Spirits,
shall upon request or demand made by the Gauger in the Daytime or the
Nightime, in the presence of a Constable, refuse to permit the Gauger to
enter his House, etc. he shall incur the Penalties by the said former Acts
inflicted, and the Prosecutor shall not be obliged to prove, that such
Offenders delivered out part of their Commodities, before they had cleared the
Duties.

IX. Whereas it is Enacted by the said Act of the 15th of K. Charles II. That
no common Brewer shall be prosecuted for any Misentry, if within one Week after
the delivery of the Copy of the Gauger's Return, he certify his Entry made for
the Week, for which such Copy is delivered, according to such Return, or
otherwise discharge himself: Be it Enacted, That no Brewer shall have any
benefit of that Proviso, upon any Information, if it shall appear upon
Evidence, that he did not bona fide, show to the Gauger all the Beer, Ale, and
Worts of every Guile for such time for which such Copy of the Return was given:
Or, if any apparent Fraud was acted to defraud Their Majesty's of Their Duty.

X. Common Brewers and Retailers of Beer and Ale, who, contrary to the said Act
made in the 15th year of K. Charles II. shall use any private Cellar, etc.
shall forfeit 50 l. for every such Offense, and for mixing, concealing, or
conveying away any Worts, contrary to the said Act, shall forfeit 20 l. a
Barrel.

XI. True Notes in Writing of the last Gauges taken, shall be left by the
Gaugers, with all Brewers, etc. containing the Quantity and Quality of the
Liquors gauged, on pain to forfeit 40 s. for every Neglect.

XII. The Commissioners of Excise or Appeals, or Justices of Peace, upon
Complaint made to them on behalf of the Brewers, etc. of any Overcharge
returned by the Gaugers, shall hear and determ^ne the same, and examine
Witnesses upon Oath, on both sides.

XIII. For the ease of the Inhabitants in the County of Anglesey, living remote
from the Market Town, there shall be Offices kept for making Entries and
Payments, in Holy-head, Newborough and Llanerchthmeth, as well as in Beaumaris.

XIV. No Commissioner, or other Person employed about the Excise, shall demand
or receive any Money or other Reward from any Person but Their Majesty's, on
Pain to forfeit their Offices, and being incapable of executing any Office in
the Excise.

XV. No Information shall be brought against any Brewer or other, for any
Misentry made after the 24th day of July, 1689. but within 3 Months after the
Offense committed; and notice thereof shall be given to the Defendants in
Writing, or left at their Dwelling-houses within a Week after the Information
entered.

XVI. From the 1st day of September, 1689. no Brewer or Retailer of Beer or
Ale, shall use in working any Beer or Ale, any Molossus, course Sugar, Honey, or
Composition or Extract of Sugar, on Pain to forfeit all such Liquors, and the
Sum of 100 l. one Moiety to Their Majesty's, and the other to the Informer; so
as the Suit be commenced within 6 Months after the Forfeiture incurred.

XVII. When Malt or Barley shall be at 24 s. a Quarter or under, and Rye at 32
s. or under, and Wheat at 48 s. or under in Berwick, Merchants and others who
shall export the same in English Shipping, the Master and two Thirds of the
Mariners at least being English, and shall pursue the Methods and Things
prescribed in that behalf in an Act made this Session, Entitled, An Act for
the Encouraging the Exportation of Corn, shall have the benefit and Advantage
of the said Act, as if the said Corn had been shipped from any Port of England
or Wales.

XVIII. If any Merchant or other Person put on Shipboard any Scotch Corn at
Berwick, it shall be forfeited, one Third part to Their Majesty's, another
Third part to the Informer, and a Third part to the Poor of the Town of Berwick.

XIX. Stat. 2. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 3. The several Rates, Duties, and
Impositions upon Beer, Ale, Cider, and other Liquors mentioned in an Act of
Parliament made in the 12th year of the Reign of K. Charles II. Entitled, A
Grant of certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, for the
Increase of His Majesty's Revenue during His Life (except such of them
concerning which it is otherwise provided by any Act of the last Parliament)
shall be paid to Their Majesty's during Their Lives, and the Life of the longer
Liver of Them, in such Manner, and by such Rules, and under such Penalties, as
are directed by the said Act, and by another Act in the 15th year of the said
late Kings Reign, Entitled, An Additional Act for the better Ordering and
Collecting: the Duty of Excise, and preventing Abuses therein; or any other Law
now in force relating to the Excise.

XX. And whereas Their Majesty's are pleased that the Duties and Impositions
hereby granted, shall be a Fond of Credit for the raising a Sum not exceeding
250000 l. Be it Enacted, That if Their Majesty's should die before the 24th day
of December, 1693. the said several Duties and Impositions shall continue to be
paid until the said 24th day of December subject to, and chargeable with the
Sum to be borrowed, as aforesaid.

XXI. Any Persons may advance Money upon the Credit of this Act, not exceeding
250000 l. in the whole, at Interest for Money lent before the 10th of June, of
8 l. per Cent. and for Money lent after, 7 l. per Cent.

XXII. After the 1st day of November. 1690. till the said 24th day of December.
1693. the Commissioners of Excise shall separate and keep apart 3 Parts (the
whole in 4 Parts to be divided) of the moneys arising by this Act: And the
Auditor and Comptroller of the Excise shall keep a distinct Account of the said
3 Parts, to which Persons concerned, may have access without Fee; and the
Commissioners and Governors of the Excise shall pay the same weekly into the
Exchequer every Wednesday, if it be not a Holy Day, and then the next day after
that is not a Holy Day, distinct from other moneys.

XXIII. And there shall be provided in the Exchequer, in the Office of the
Auditor of the Receipts, one Book, in which such moneys shall be entered apart,
and all Persons lending money upon the Credit of this Act, shall have a Tally
of Loan struck, and an Order for repayment, bearing date with the Tally, in
which shall be a Warrant for payment of Interest according to the Rates
aforesaid, to be paid every Three Months, such Orders to be registered in
course, without Preference; and all Persons shall be paid in course, as their
Orders stand entered, and the said money not to be divertible to any other Use
or Purpose; and if the Commissioners or Governors of the Excise, do not pay in
the said moneys, as aforesaid, or misapply any Part thereof, they shall forfeit
their Offices, and be incapable of any Office or Place of Trust, and pay the
full Value of the Sum misapplied, to him that will sue for the same. No Fee,
Reward, or Gratuity shall be demanded or taken for providing or making any such
Registers, Entries, View or Search in or for payment of money lent, or the
Interest, by any of Their Majesty's Officers, their Clerks or Deputies, on Pain
of Payment of Treble Damages to the Party grieved, and Costs of Suit; and the
Officer taking such Fee, etc. shall lose his Place: And if any undue Preference
be made in point of Registry or Payment, the Party offending shall be liable by
Action of Debt, or of the Case, to pay the value of the Debt, Damages and Costs
to the Party grieved, and shall be forejudged his Place, if an Officer, If a
Deputy or Clerk only, he shall for ever after be incapable thereof: And in case
the Auditor shall not direct the Order, or the Clerk of the Pells record, or
the Teller make payment, according to each Persons Order, they shall be
adjudged to forfeit, and their Deputies and Clerks offending, to be liable to
such Action, Damages and Costs as aforesaid. All which Penalties and
Forfeitures to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information,
etc.

XXIV. If several Tallies of Loan, or Orders for payment, bear date, or be
brought the same day, it shall be no undue Preference which is entered first, so
as all be entered the same day. Nor shall it be any undue Preference to direct,
order and pay subsequent Orders of Persons that come and demand their moneys,
and bring their Orders, before others that do not come to demand theirs, so as
there be so much money left as will satisfy precedent Orders (Interest upon
Loan being to cease, from the time that the money is kept in Bank for them.)

XXV. Moneys due by Virtue of this Act, after Order entered in the Register, may
by Endorsement be transferred, and the Assignee may in like manner assign in
toties quoties: but such Endorsement must be notified in the Office of the
Auditor of the Receipt, and an Entry or Memorandum made thereof in the Book of
the Register for Orders.

XXVI. Nevertheless, an Act made in the 1st year of the Reign of the late K.
James, Entitled, An Act for settling the Revenue on His Majesty for his Life,
which was settled on His late Majesty for his Life, is hereby repealed.

XXVII. Their Majesty's by Letters Patents under the Great Seal, may grant to
Princess Anne of Denmark the yearly Sum of 20000 l. to be issuing out of the
Duties hereby granted, during Their Majesty's Lives, and the Life of the
Survivor of them (freed from the Loans by this Act to be made) payable
quarterly at the Four most usual Feasts.

XXVIII. If the said Princess shall depart this life in the lifetime of Their
Majesty's, or either of them, Their Majesty's may grant the said yearly Sum to
the Prince of Denmark, and the Issue of the Princess respectively, in such
proportions as Their Majesty's shall think fit, to be paid quarterly.

XXIX. Stat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 3. An Act for doubling the Duty of
Excise upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors during the space of one Year, EXP.

XXX. Sat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 9. From the 24th day of December. 1690.
until the 25th day of December. 1695. there shall be paid by way of Excise, for
Low-wines or Spirits of the first Extraction, the Rates following, viz.

XXXI. For every Gallon of Low-wines drawn from Foreign or Imported Materials,
8 d.

XXXII. For every such Gallon drawn from English Materials, other then from
Drink prepared from any sort of Malted Corn, or from Perry or Cider, 12 d.

XXXIII. For every such Gallon drawn only from Drink brewed and made, or any
sort of malted Corn, 1 d.

XXXIV. And for every such Gallon drawn from Cider or Perry, 3 d.

XXXV. Such as make Low-wines, Spirits or Brandy from Corn, shall cause their
Corn to be made into wholesome Drink, and from such drink, without any mixture,
shall draw their Low-wines; and the Gaugers of Excise may gauge, and keep an
Account of Liquors, Worts and Drink made for the making Low-wines, etc. and see
that they be made from Drink made of malted Corn entirely: And if Distillers or
others mix other Materials, the Gaugers shall charge the Low-wines drawn from
Drink so mixed, with 12 d. a Gallon.

XXXVI. No Distillers or others drawing Low-wines or Spirits from Corn
prepared, as aforesaid, shall prepare any wash from Molossus, or other
Materials, from any other Person, until he has drawn off, and distilled all the
Liquors made or prepared from Corn, as aforesaid, on pain to forfeit for every
Barrel of such Liquors made of Corn, found undistilled, 5 l.

XXXVII. If any Gauger or other Officer of the Excise, shall wittingly make a
false Charge, by returning any quantity of Low-wines not made from malted Corn,
as made from malted Corn, he shall lose his Employment, and forfeit for every
Gallon so falsely charged, 10 s.

XXXVIII. Distillers and others, upon Oath made before two Commissioners of
Excise, or Justices of the Peace, That any Brandy or Strong waters intended to
be Exported, was drawn from Drink brewed from malted Corn, without any mixture,
and that the same is not mixed with any Low-wines, nor drawn a second time, nor
with any other Spirits or Brandy made from any other Materials, and that the
Duties of the same are entered and paid, and that the same are Exported for
Merchandise, may Export such Spirits or Brandy; and upon a Certificate from the
Officer of Excise for the Place, where they were shipped off, of the quantity,
and the same were shipped in the presence of such Officers, such Exporter shall
be paid by the Commissioners for such Port or Place, 3 d. for every Gallon
shipped off.

XXXIX. The Gaugers shall take an Account of all Wash and other Materials
prepared for making Low-wines, and of all Low-wines, Spirits and Strong Water
found in the Houses, etc. or in any Wash-back, Cask, or other Vessel used by
any Maker of Low-wines or Spirits; and if they miss any Liquor brewed, which
they sound gauged the last time they were there, not exceeding 24 hours before,
and shall not receive Satisfaction what is become of it, they shall charge the
Distiller with so much Low-wines as such Liquor missing would have made.

XL. From the said 24th day of December. no Maker of Low-wines, etc. shall set
their Stills at work, or deliver or carry out any Low-wines, etc. to their
Customers in Cask, or by the Gallon, without Notice given to the Officer of
Excise, for the Place where he lives, unless from the 29th day of September. to
the 25th of March yearly, between 5 in the Morning and 8 at Night; and from the
25th of March to the 29th of September. between 3 in the Morning and 9 at Night,
on pain to forfeit for every such Offense, 10 l.

XLI. The Duties hereby imposed, shall be levied in such manner, and under such
Penalties as are directed by an Act of Parliament made in the 12th year of K.
Charles II. Entitled, An Act for taking away the Court of wards and Liveries,
etc. And by another Act in the 15th year of his Reign, Entitled, An Additional
Act for the better Ordering and collecting the Duties of Excise, and Preventing
the Abuses therein; or by any other Law now in force, relating to the Excise.

XLII. Fines, Penalties and Forfeitures hereby imposed, shall be recovered as
by any Law of Excise is directed, or by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or
Information in any Their Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, one Moiety
to Their Majesty's, and the other to the Prosecutor.

XLIII. Any Persons, during the continuance of this Act, may distill for Sale
any Low-wines or Spirits from Drink brewed from malted Corn, only paying the
Duties, and being subject to the Penalties as other Distillers.

XLIV. Strong Water, Brandy, Aqua vitae, or Spirits brought from Guernsey,
Jersey, Sark, or Alderney, shall be charged with 8 s. a Gallon, to be paid to
the Collector, upon Entry before landing; and other Exciseable Liquors brought
from thence, except Beer, Ale, and Mum, shall be chargeable with the like
Duties as are charged upon the like Liquors made in this Kingdom. And before
the landing of any such Liquor, the Importer or owner shall make oath before
the Collector, or principal Officer of the Customs of the Port where they are
to be landed, That they are of the Growth and Manufacture of the said Islands,
and not mixed with any foreign Materials; and if they be Imported before due
Entry, such Oath made, and the Duties paid, they shall be destroyed, and
Persons concerned in their Importation, shall incur the Penalties mentioned in
an Act made in the 1st year of Their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for
prohibiting all Trade and Commerce with France.

XLV. All Letters Patents made or to be made for the sole making of Brandy,
etc. from Corn of any sorts, as a new Invention, are hereby declared void.

XLVI. Stat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 10. From the 17th day of November, 1691.
there shall be paid during 4 Years for the Liquors hereafter-mentioned, over
and above Impositions already set, as follows, viz.

For a Barrel of Beer or Ale above 6 s. the Barrel, 1 s. 6 d.

For every such Barrel of 6 s. or under, 6 d.

For every Barrel of Vinegar or Vinegar-beer made with English Materials, 3 s.

For every Barrel of Vinegar, or Liquor prepared for Vinegar, made with Foreign
Materials, 8 s.

For every barrel of Beer, Ale or Mum Imported, 6 s.

For every Tun of Cider or Perry Imported, 8 l.

For every Gallon of Single Brandy, Spirits, or Aqua vitae Imported, 4 s.

For every such Gallon above Proof, Imported, 8 s.

For every Hogshead of Cider and Perry made and sold by retail, 2 s. 6 d.

For all Metheglin and Mead made for sale, 6 d. a Gallon.

XLVII. The said Rates and Duties to be levied in such manner, and under such
Penalties as are mentioned in an Act of Parliament made in the 1st year of
Their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for an Additional Duty of Excise upon
Beer, Ale, and other Liquors; or by any Law in force relating to the Excise.

XLVIII. Nothing in this Act shall be construed to continue the Duties granted
by an Act in the 1st year of Their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for an
Additional Duty of Excise, etc. or any other Duties of Excise, for any longer
time then they are granted by the said Act or Acts.

XLIX. Victuallers, Retailers, or Common Brewers, who within a year before the
17th of November last, have not brewed their own Beer and Ale, may brew and
make the Beer and Ale spent or sold in their Houses, etc. paying the Excise,
and on their entering the same at the Excise-Office, and paying the Duty, they
shall not be liable to the Penalty of 100 l. imposed by an Act of this
Parliament, Entitled, An Act for doubling the Duty of Excise upon Beer, Ale,
and other Liquors, for the space of One Year.

L. All Moneys which shall become payable to Their Majesty's by Virtue of the
said Act, Entitled, An Act for an Additional Duty of Excise upon Beer, Ale,
and other Liquors, after the Sum of 600000 l. shall be paid to the States
General of the United Provinces, and all moneys to be levied by Virtue of this
Act, shall be applied to the Uses following, viz. 570000 l. to the building and
furnishing 27 Ships of War, whereof 17 to be of the Third Rate, and to contain
1100 Tuns, and carry 80 Guns apiece; and 10 to be of the Fourth Rate, and to
contain 900 Tuns, and carry 60 Guns apiece. The said Ships to be built and
furnished with all convenient Expedition, and the whole number to be complete
within 4 years from the 25th day of March, 1691.

LI. And that the said Sum of 570000 l. may be applied accordingly, and Their
Majesty's be enabled to borrow upon the Credit of this Act any Sum, not
exceeding 1000000 l. for the Uses of the War, Be it Enacted, That after the
payment of the said 600000 l. to the States General, until the 18th day of
November. 1695. the Commissioners of Excise shall keep apart the Moneys arising
by the said Act, Entitled, An Act for an Additional Duty of Excise, etc. and
the Moneys arising by this Act; and the Auditor or Comptroller of the Excise,
or their Deputies, shall keep a distinct Account of the said Moneys, to which
all persons may have access without Fee; and the said Commissioners of Excise
shall pay the said moneys weekly into the Receipt of the Exchequer, apart from
other moneys.

LII. And the Officers of the Receipt of the Exchequer shall keep the moneys
paid in by Virtue of this Act, or of the said former Act, and the Account
thereof apart, and a particular Account of the building and furnishing the said
Ships.

LIII. Out of the moneys so from time to time paid in, one third Part shall
yearly be paid out toward the building and furnishing the said Ships; and the
Commissioners of the Treasury shall sign no Warrant for issuing out any Part of
the said third Part to any, but the Treasurer of the Navy, or Treasurer or
Paymaster of the Ordnance, expressing therein that the same is for building and
furnishing the said 27 Ships of War; nor shall the Auditor of the Receipt draw
any Order for issuing any Part thereof otherwise then as aforesaid; nor shall
he direct, or the Clerk of the Pells record, or the Teller pay any part
thereof, by Virtue of any Warrant or Order, otherwise then as aforesaid.

LIVE. The Treasurer of the Navy, and Treasurer or Paymaster of the Ordnance,
may transfer any part thereof payable to them upon any Order, by Endorsement
upon such Order; and such Assignee may assign toties quoties.

LV. The Treasurer of the Navy, and Treasurer or Paymaster of the Ordnance,
shall keep such moneys apart, and issue the same by Warrant from the principal
Officers and Commissioners of the Navy or Ordnance respectively, or any three
or more of them, mentioning that it is for building and furnishing the said
Ships. Nor shall the said principal Officers and Commissioners sign any Warrant
for paying any of the said money to any other Use or Purpose.

LVI. Any Persons may lend moneys upon the Credit of two third Parts of the
moneys to be brought in by Virtue of this Act, not exceeding 1000000 l. and
have Interest at the rate of 7 l. per Cent.

LVII. And if the Commissioners or Governors of the Excise refuse or neglect
to pay in the said moneys, as aforesaid, or misapply any part thereof; and if
any Officer belonging to the Exchequer, Navy or Ordnance, shall offend against
any Clause of this Act, or misapply any money contrary to the intent thereof,
they shall lose their Places, and be disabled to execute any Office or Place of
Trust, and shall pay the full Value of any Sum so misapplied, to any person who
will sue for the same in any of Their Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster.

LVIII. And no Stay of Prosecution shall be admitted by any Court in any
Proceeding for the Recovery of any the Penalties by this Act inflicted, or for,
or in order to the Conviction or disability of any person offending against
this Act.

LIX. After the 25th Day of December 1690. during the continuance of the Act
made this Session, Entitled, An Act for Granting to Their Majesty's certain
Impositions upon all East India Goods and Manufactures, and upon all wrought
Silks, etc. and of one other Act, Entitled, An Act for the continuance of
several former Acts therein mentioned, for the laying several Duties upon
Wines, Vinegar and Tobacco, there shall be within London an Office for the
Receipt of the Moneys payable to Their Majesty's by virtue of the said Acts; In
which such Moneys shall be paid to the Receivers General of the Customs, to be
appointed by Their Majesty's; who shall keep apart the Moneys payable by virtue
of the said first mentioned Act, and shall likewise keep apart the Moneys
payable by the said Act next recited; which Moneys shall remain from time to
time, after the Payments, which shall be made thereout by any Laws in force,
upon Debentures for Goods that shall be Reshipt, or for Corn Exported, or upon
Discounts upon Bonds, and of such Allowances of damaged Goods, and of Bills of
Portage as have usually been made. And the Comptroller General of the Accounts
of the Customs, shall keep distinct Accounts of the said respective Sums of
Moneys; to which all Persons may have resort, without Fee; and the said
Receiver or Receivers General, shall weekly pay the same into the Receipt of
the Exchequer, apart from other Moneys; and if they neglect so to do, or
misapply the same, they shall Forfeit their Office, and be incapable of any
Place of Trust, and shall Pay the value of the Sum misapplied, to him that will
Sue for the same.

LX. Out of the Money which shall be paid by virtue of this Act, into the
Exchequer, 700000 l. shall be Appropriated to the Payment of Seamen, that shall
serve in the Navy the Year, 1691. and to the building of Three Ships of the
Third Rate, to contain each 1050 Tuns, and for providing them Furniture; and to
the Paying for Stores and Victuals for the Navy, and to the Expense of the
Office of Ordnance with respect to Naval Affairs, and to other necessary Uses
of the Navy in the Time aforesaid. And out of all other Money that shall be
Paid into the Exchequer upon Loan or otherwise, by virtue of this or any other
Act of this Session, for Granting Aids or Supplies for reducing Ireland, or
Prosecuting the War against France (other then what is Appropriated by this
Act, and the Act For Granting an Aid to Their Majesty's of the Sum of 751702 l.
18 s. for the Payment of Seamen, etc.) the Sum of 1500000 l. shall be
Appropriated to the payment of the Land Forces, and other Charges relating
thereunto. And all other Moneys payable into the Exchequer by virtue of any of
the said Acts, shall be Applied to the Prosecution of the War against France,
and Reducing of Ireland, and the Payment of Debts that shall be incurred by
reason of the War.

LXI. The Three Ships before mentioned, to be built within a year from the
Twentieth Day of March next.

LXII. Their Majesty's may use any Sum or Sums, not exceeding 500000 l. in the
whole, Granted in this Session, and not particularly Appropriated, so as it be
Repaid and Applied to the Carrying on the present War, out of such Moneys as
shall arise from Their Maieslies Revenue, before the 24th Day of March 1691.

LXIII. Stat. 3. u. and M. cap. 1. An Act for Granting to Their Majesty's
certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors for One Year, EXP.

LXIV. Stat. 3. W. and M. cap. 15. No Corn Distiller or Maker of Low-wines,
Spirits or Strong Water for Sale, shall at any Time after the 1st Day of March
1691, Set up, Use or Alter any Tun, Cask or other brewing Vessel for brewing,
or making any Worts, Wash, Low-wines, Spirits or Strongwaters for Sale, or use
any private or concealed Warehouse, or other place for laying of any Wash,
Low-wines, etc. without giving Notice thereof to the next Office of Excise,
within the Limits where he inhabits, on Pain to Forfeit 20 l. for every Tun,
etc. so Set up, Used or Altered; and for every private Warehouse, etc. and
every other Person in whose Occupation any House, or other Place shall be,
where any such private Tun, etc. shall be found, shall Forfeit 20 l. one Moiety
to Their Majesty's, and the other Moiety to the Informer.

LXV. If any such Corn Distiller, etc. shall Conceal or Convey away any
Low-wines, Spirits, etc. from the Sight or View of the Gaugers, he shall
Forfeit for every Gallon so Concealed or Conveyed, 5 s. All which Penalties
shall be Sued for and Recovered, as by an Act made in the 12th Year of the
Reign of the late King Charles 2 d, Entitled, An Act for taking away the Court
of Wards and Liveries, etc. and another Act made in the Fifteenth Year of his
Reign, Entitled, An Additional Act for the better Ordering and Collecting the
Duties of Excise, etc. or by any other Law in force Relating to the Revenue of
Excise on Beer, and Ale is directed.

LXVI. Stat. 4. W. and M. cap. 3. From and after the 25th Day of January 1692.
there shall be paid to Their Majesty's, Their Heirs, etc. during the space of
Ninety nine years, for the Liquors herein after Expressed, over and above all
Duties now Chargeable upon the same,

For every Barrel of Beer or Ale, above 6 s. the Barrel, 9 d.

For every Barrel of Beer or Ale, of 6 s. or under, 3 d.

For every Barrel of English Vinegar, 1 s. and 6 d.

For every Barrel of Vinegar, made with or passing through Foreign Materials,
or any mixture with Foreign Materials, 4 s.

For every Barrel of Beer, Ale and Mum Imported, 3 s.

For every Tun of Cider or Perry Imported, 4 l.

For every Gallon of Single-Brandy Imported, 6 d.

For every Gallon of Double Brandy, 1 s.

For all Cider and Perry made and sold by Retail, upon every Hogshead, 1 s. and
3 d.

For all Metheglin or Mead, made for Sale, by Retail or otherwise, for every
Gallon, 3 d.

LXVII. The said Impositions to be paid to Their Majesty's, etc. in the same
Manner and Form, and by such Rules, and under such Penalties, as are mentioned
in the Act of 12 Car. 2. Entitled, An Act for taking away the Court of Wards
and Liveries, etc. and in another Act made in the same year, Entitled, A Grant
of certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors, for the Increase of
His Majesty's Revenue, during his Life, and in another Act made in the 15th
year of the same Kings Reign, Entitled, An Additional Act for the better
Ordering and Collecting the Duty of Excise, etc. or by any other Law in Force
relating to the Revenue of Excise.

LXVIII. The Commissioners and Governors for the management of the Excise at
the Head Office in London, shall keep apart the moneys arising by the Duties
hereby granted, as the same shall be paid in, and shall pay weekly, every
Wednesday, if it be not a Holy Day, and then the day after, into the Exchequer,
all the said moneys, distinct from the other moneys, which they shall receive
for Their Majesty's Use.

LXIX. There shall be kept in the Office of the Auditor of the Receipts, one
Book, in which all the said weekly moneys shall be entered apart from other
moneys.

LXX. If the said Commissioners and Governors neglect or refuse to pay the
said weekly Sums, as aforesaid, or misapply any of the same, they shall forfeit
their Offices, and be incapable of any Office or Place of Trust, and shall pay
the full Value of any Sum or Sums so misapplied, to any that will sue for the
same.

LXXI. The Sums appointed to be paid in weekly, as aforesaid, shall be the
yearly Fond for the purposes hereafter mentioned.

LXXII. Any persons, Natives or Foreigners, may contribute toward the advancing
the said Sum of 1000000 l. at any time before the 1st day of May, 1693. Sum or
Sums, and upon such Terms as are hereafter expressed, viz. That out of the
moneys arising by this Act, the Sum of 100000 l. yearly, till the 24th day of
June, 1700. be kept apart as the yearly Fond, to be divided amongst the Persons
so contributing; and from and after that day, 70000 l. shall be yearly kept
apart, as the yearly Fond, to be divided as herein-after is mentioned; That
every Contributor shall advance 100 l. at least, for which he is to name his
own or some other life, during which life he shall receive a Share of the said
Fond, as is hereafter expressed; That every Contributor may advance as many
Sums of 100 l. as he please, for which he is to name one or more life or lives
(so as no more lives be named, then there are distinct Hundred Pounds advanced)
during which life or lives he shall receive so many Shares of the said Fond, as
he shall have advanced Hundred Pounds; all the said lives to be named within 14
days after the 24th of June, 1692. That in the Office of the Auditor of the
Receipts, and of the Clerk of the Pells there be kept one or more Book or
Books, in which shall be entered the Contributors Names, and the Names of those,
by whose hands they pay in the said moneys, and the Sums paid, and the time
when, and the Names of the Nominees: To which the Contributors, etc. may have
resort, and inspect the same, without Fee or Reward. The Contributors and
Nominees to be described by their Christian and Sirnames, Additions, Places of
Abode, etc. Every Contributor shall have a Talley levied, importing the Receipt
of the money, and an Order for payment, bearing date with the Tally, signed by
the Commissioners of the Treasury or any three or more of them, or by the
Treasurer of the Exchequer, which shall be valid, notwithstanding the Death or
Removal of the persons signing the same, and shall be irrevocable. And the said
yearly Funds of 100000 l. and 70000 l. (in case the whole Sum of 1000000 l.
shall be advanced) shall be equally divided amongst the Contributors, their
Executors, etc. during the lives of the Nominees, in proportion to the Sums by
them advanced, yearly by two half-yearly payments, viz. on the 24th day of
December, and the 24th day of June; the 1st payment to be on the 24th day of
December. 1693. And upon the Death of every Nominee, the Share payable during his
life, shall be divided amongst the Contributors, whose Nominees shall be
living; and so from time to time the whole respective Fonds shall be divided
among the Contributors, whose Nominees survive, till there be but seven
Nominees living; and then upon the Death of every of the said seven Nominees, a
7th part of the said yearly Fonds shall be answered to Their Majesty's, Their
Heirs, etc. And in case the whole Sum of 1000000 l. shall not before the 1st of
May, 1693. be advanced, then there shall be divided among such as shall before
that day have advanced, as aforesaid, toward the same, yearly, as aforesaid,
so much of the said Fonds as shall bear proportion to the Sum advanced, after
the Rates aforesaid, viz. so much only of the said Fonds as shall, during the
1st 7 years, to commence from the 24th day of June, 1603. answer yearly the Sum
of 10 l. for every 100 l. and after the said 7 years, during the lives of the
said Nominees, and the Survivor of them, the Sum of 7 l. for every 100 l. to be
divided, as aforesaid, with like Benefit of Survivorship, as if the whole Sum
of 1000000 l. were advanced and paid; and from and after the said 1st day of
May none shall advance any money upon the Terms aforesaid.

LXXIII. Every Contributor shall receive out of the said Fonds for all moneys
by him advanced, Interest at the rate of 10 l. per Cent. from the days of
payment, to the said 24th day of June, 1693. which Interest shall be expressed
in the Order appointed to be given upon payment of any such Sums.

LXXIV. Contributors may assign or devise one or more Share or Shares of the
said Fond, during the lives of their Nominees, and so toties quoties, and no
such Assignments to be revocable, so as an Entry be made thereof in Books to be
kept for that purpose, within two Months after such Assignment, or Death of the
Devisor: And upon producing such Assignment, or Will, or Probate thereof to be
entered, the Party producing the same, shall bring an Affidavit taken before
some persons authorized to take Affidavits in Causes depending in any the
Courts at Westminster, of the due Execution of such Assignment or Will, which
Affidavits shall be filed.

LXXV. Guardians or Trustees having the disposal of the money of Infants under
12 years, may, for the use of such Infants, pay 100 l. of the Infant's money to
the purposes aforesaid, and shall name the Infant to be a Nominee, and such
Infant shall thereupon become a Contributor, and the Guardian or Trustee, as to
the said Sum of 100 l. is hereby discharged.

LXXVI. Contributors, upon demanding their half-yearly payments, unless the
Nominee appear in person, shall produce a Certificate of his life, signed by
the Minister and Churchwardens of the Parish where he lives, on the day when
the said half-yearly payment becomes due, if such Nominee be within the Realm;
which Certificates shall be made without Fee, and filed in the Office of
Receipt.

LXXVII. And it any Nominee shall at the time of such Demand, be in Scotland,
or beyond Sea, and one of the Barons of the Exchequer shall certify, That upon
Proof to him made, it seems probable that the said Nominee is living (such
Certificate and Examination to be without Fee) the said Certificate being
filed, shall be a sufficient Warrant for the payment of the said half-yearly
Share to the Contributors.

LXXVIII. If any entitled to receive any half-yearly payment, shall not demand
the same till within 20 days that the next half-yearly payment become due, such
half-yearly payment shall be divided amongst the rest of the Contributors, but
following half-yearly payments shall be saved to him, if demanded in due time.

LXXIX. In the Office of the Auditor of the Receipt, every half year before the
respective days of payment, there shall be made up an Account of the Nominees,
whose Deaths are known, and of the Contributors who have made default in making
demand, that the rest may have the Advantage thereof.

LXXX. If any Person shall receive any half-yearly payments after the Death of
his Nominee, any Contributor may require the same to be repaid into the
Exchequer, for the Benefit of the rest. And in case of Neglect or Refusal to
pay the same within a Month after such Demand, the Person neglecting shall
forfeit treble the Sum received, to be recovered by Action of Debt in the Name
of such Contributor who shall make the Demand.

LXXXI. All things directed by this Act to be performed in the Exchequer, shall
be done without Fee, Gratuity, or Reward; and if any Officer of the Exchequer
demand any Fee, or misapply any of the said weekly Sums, or shall not keep
Books and Registers, and make Entries, and perform other things which by the
Act they are required to perform, they shall forfeit their Offices, and be
incapable of any Office or Place of Trust, and pay treble Damages, with Costs
of Suit, to every Contributor, to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint,
etc. and the Plaintiff in such Action, upon Recovery, shall have his full
Costs, one third part of the Sum recovered, to be paid into the Exchequer for
the benefit of the Contributors, and two Thirds to be to the Use of the
Prosecutor: And in case of Collusion, or faint Prosecution, any other
Contributor may bring another Action, wherein he shall recover, as aforesaid,
to the Uses aforesaid.

LXXXII. If any Officer make payment of any Share upon such Certificate as is
here directed, he shall incur no Penalty, nor be liable to any Action, though
the Certificate be false, or the Nominee be dead, unless such Officer knew it.

LXXXIII. Contributors within a Month after Notice of the Death of their
Nominees, shall certify the same to the Auditor of the Receipt, and within 3
Months after such Notice shall deliver up their Tallies and Orders, if they be
in their Hands and Power, and in Default thereof, shall forfeit 10 l. to the
use of the Prosecutor.

LXXXIV. And if the whole Sum of 1000000 l. be not advanced before the 24th day
of June, 1693. Their Majesty's may borrow by way of Loan, any Sum or Sums,
which together with what shall have been advanced before the 24th of June, on
the Terms aforesaid, or upon the Terms herein after mentioned, shall not exceed
the Sum of 1000000 l. which Sums taken up by way of Loan, shall be charged upon
the Credit of the Exchequer in General, and Tallies of Loan, and Orders of
Repayment levied, which Orders shall be assignable.

LXXXV. All Sums of Money so to be borrowed, with Interest for the same, not
exceeding 7 l. per Cent. or so much thereof as shall not be repaid out of the
Money that shall be advanced upon the Terms herein mentioned, at or after the
24th day of June, 1693. and before the 29th of September following (all which
Moneys to be advanced between the said 24th of June, and 29th of September,
shall be appropriated for the discharging the Loans made upon this Act) shall
be satisfied to the Lenders, out of any of the next Aids to be granted in
Parliament, and shall be transferrable as soon as such Aid shall be granted.
And in case no Aid be granted before the 2d of February, 1693. the said Sums
shall be satisfied out of any of Their Majesty's Treasure not already
appropriated by Act of Parliament.

LXXXVI. And if the Sum of 500000 l. part of the said Sum of 1000000 l. be not
advanced before the 1st of May, 1693. Their Majesty's may borrow upon Interest,
as aforesaid, any Sum, not exceeding 500000 l. to be paid out of such Moneys as
shall be advanced upon this Act, between the said 1st day of May, and the said
29th day of September, in case the Money so advanced be sufficient; or
otherwise so much thereof as the same shall extend to pay; and the residue of
the said Sum of 500000 l. shall be reckoned as part of the said Sum before
directed, to be paid out of the next Aids to be granted in Parliament.

LXXXVII. If the whole Sum of 1000000 l. be not advanced before the said 1st
day of May, any persons after that day, and before the 29th of September next
following, may advance any Sums, not exceeding in the whole, with what shall
have been advanced before the said 1st day of May, the Sum of 1000000 l. upon
the Terms following, viz. That every such Person out of the Duties arising by
this Act, shall have for every 100 l. a yearly Annuity of 14 l. for his own, or
any other Life to be by him nominated, as aforesaid, within 6 days after
Payment; which Annuities shall commence from the 29th of September, 1693. and
be paid at the Four most usual Feasts in the year: And upon Payment of any such
Sums, the Persons paying the same, shall have one or more Tallies importing the
Receipt thereof, and Orders for Payment, etc. to be signed, as aforesaid, and
not to be revocable, and to be assignable. And the Moneys arising by the Duties
hereby granted (besides so much as shall bear proportion, as aforesaid, to the
Sum which shall be advanced before the 1st day of May, 1693.) shall be
appropriated to the Payment of the said Annuities, and not be diverted, under
the like Penalties, as are before appointed in case of misapplying, etc. The
said Officers shall keep Books, and make Entries of their Names, who shall
advance Money after the said 1st day of May, and of the Sums advanced, and the
times of paying in, and the Names of the Nominees, without Reward (to which
Books all Persons concerned shall have access) under the Penalties and
Disabilities aforesaid; and they that shall advance any Sum after the said 1st
of May, shall have Interest for it till the 29th of Septem. 1693. at the rate
of 10 l. per Cent.

LXXXVIII. If any Contributor, who shall have advanced any Sum before the said
1st of May, shall before the said 29th of September be desirous, in lieu of his
Share in the Fonds, to have an Annuity of 14 l. a year for any Sum of 100 l. by
him advanced, during the Life of his Nominee; a Memorial thereof shall be
entered in a Book for that purpose to be kept in the Receipt; and the said Entry
being signed by such Contributor, he shall receive such Annuity, as if the
Moneys by him advanced, had been paid in after the 1st day of May: And such
Contributors Share in the Fonds shall determine for Their Majesty's Benefit.

LXXXIX. The Surplus of any Money arising by this Act, after the several
Proportions of the Fonds, and the Annuities and Interest paid, shall be to the
Use of Their Majesty's.

XC. No Moneys lent or payable by Virtue of this Act, shall be charged with any
Impositions whatsoever.

XCI. Grants, or Dispositions of any Money arising by this Act, to be made by
Their Majesty's, Their Heirs, etc. otherwise then by this Act is appointed,
shall be null and void.

Frauds.
I. STat. 3 and 4 W. and M. cap. 14. All Wills concerning Lands, or any Rents,
Profits, Term, or Charge out of the same, whereof the Devisors shall be seized
in Fee-simple in Possession, Reversion, or Remainder, or have power to dispose
thereof, after the 25th day of March, 1692. shall be deemed (only as against
Creditors upon Bonds, or other Specialties, their Executors, etc.) to be
fraudulent and void.

II. And such Creditors shall have their Actions of Debt against the Heirs at
Law, and such Devisees jointly; and such Devisees shall be chargeable for a
false Plea, as any Heir should have been.

III. Where there shall have been any Devises of Lands for Payment of just
Debts, or Childrens Portions, other then the Heir at Law, in pursuance of any
Marriage Agreement made in Writing bona fide, before such Marriage, they shall
be in force.

IV. Where any Heir at Law shall be liable to pay the Debt of his Ancestor, in
regard of any Lands descending to him, and shall make over the same before any
Action brought, such Heir shall be answerable for such Debts, to the Value of
the Land made over; in which Cases all Creditors shall be preferred, as in
Actions against Executors and Administrators, and Execution upon any Judgment
so obtained, shall be taken out against such Heir, to the Value of the Land, as
if they were his own Debts, saving that Lands bona fide aliened before the
Action brought, shall not be liable to such Execution.

V. Where any Action of Debt upon a Specialty is brought against an Heir, he
may Plead Riens per descent at the time of the Original Writ brought, and the
Plaintiff may Reply that he had Lands from his Ancestor before the Original
Writ brought; and if upon Issue joined thereon it be found for the Plaintiff,
the Jury shall enquire of the Value of the Lands descended, and thereupon
Judgment shall be given and Execution awarded, as aforesaid; but if Judgment be
given against such Heir by Confession, without Confessing the Assets descended,
or upon demurier or nihil dicit, it shall be for the Debt and Damages, without
any Writ to enquire of the Lands.

VI. Devisees made liable by this Act, shall be Chargeable as the Heir at Law
by force of this Act, though the Lands Devised be Aliened before the Action
brought.

VII. This Act to continue for Three Years, and to the End of the then next
Session of Parliament.

VIII. Stat. 4. and 5. W. and M. cap. 16. If any Persons shall borrow any
Money, or for any other valuable Consideration, for the payment thereof, shall
acknowledge or suffer to be Entered against them a Judgment, Statute or
Recognizance, and shall afterward borrow any other Sum of any other Persons,
or for other valuable Consideration, and for securing the Repayment or
Discharge thereof, shall morgage Lands to the Second or other Lender or
Lenders, or to any other Persons in Trust for him or them, and shall not give
notice to the Morgagee of such Judgment, Statute or Recognizance in writing,
before the Execution of the said Morgage, unless such Morgager or his Heirs,
upon notice given by the Morgagee in writing under Hand and Seal, Attested by
Two or more Witnesses, of such former Judgment, etc. shall within Six Months
Pay off and Discharge the same, and cause the same to be vacated or discharged
by Record, such Morgager shall have no Benefit in Equity for Redemption of the
Lands Morgaged.

IX. If any Person, who has or shall once Morgage Lands, for security of
Money, or for other valuable Considerations, shall again Morgage the same
Lands, or any part thereof, to any other Persons (the former Morgage being in
force) and shall not discover to the Second Morgagee the First Morgage in
writing, such Morgager shall have no Relief or Equity of Redemption against the
Second Morgagee.

X. But such Second or other Morgagees may Redeem any former Morgage.

XI. This Act shall not extend to bar any Widow of any Morgager from her Dower.
who did not legally join with her Husband in such Morgage, or otherwise
Lawfully exclude her self.

Game.
I. STat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 23. All Laws and Statutes in Force, for the
better Preservation of the Game of this Kingdom, and every Clause and thing
therein not hereby Altered or Repealed, shall be duly put in Execution.

II. Constables, Head-boroughs and Tything men, by a Justice of Peace his
Warrant, may and are Required to enter into, and search (in such manner as by
An Act for the more effectual Discovery and Punishment of Deer-stealers, made
in the Third and Fourth Year of Their Majesty's Reign is provided, in Case of
Venison or Skin of any Deer or Toils) Houses of Suspected Persons not
qualified; and in Case any Game shall be found, the Offender shall be carried
before a Justice of Peace; and if he do not give a good Account how he came
thereby, or produce the Party of whom he bought it in some convenient Time, or
some Credible Person to depose upon Oath such Sale thereof, he shall be
Convicted of such Offense by the said Justice, and Forfeit for every Hare,
Partridge, etc. or other Game, any Sum not under 5 s. and not exceeding 20, One
Moiety to the Informer, and the other to the Poor of the Parish where the
Offense was Committed, to be Levied by Distress and Sale of his Goods, rendering
the Overplus; and for want of a Distress shall be Committed to the House of
Correction for any time not exceeding a Month, nor less then Ten days, there to
be Whipped and Kept to Labor. And if any Person not qualified by Law, do keep or
use any Bows, Greyhounds, Setting-dogs, Ferrets, Coneydogs, Hays, Lurchers,
Netts, Tunnels, Low-bells, Hare-pipes, Snares or other Instruments for
destruction of Game, and shall be Convicted as aforesaid, he shall be subject
to the Pains and Penalties aforesaid. And if any Person so Charged, shall not
before the same Justice give such Evidence of his Innocence, as aforesaid, he
shall be Convicted thereof in like manner as the Person First Charged therewith
is hereby directed to be, and so from person to person, till the First Offender
be discovered.

III. Lords of Manors and other Royalties, or any Authorized by them, shall and
may Oppose and Resist such Offenders in the Night time, within their respective
Manors and Royalties, as if such Fact had been Committed in any ancient Chase,
Park or Warren Enclosed.

IV. No persons whatsoever shall after the 25th day of March 1693. keep any
Net, Angle, Leap, Piche, or other Engine for taking Fish (other then the Makers
and Sellers thereof, for their better convenience in the Sale thereof, and
other then the Owner or Occupier of a River or Fishery) And Owners or Occupiers
of Rivers and Fisheries, and such as they shall Authorize, may seize and keep
to their own Use any such Engine which shall be found used by, or in the
possession of any Person whatsoever, fishing in any River or Fishery, without
the consent of the Owner or Occupier. And also any Person whatsoever.
Authorized by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of a Justice of Peace, may search
the Houses and other Places of Persons Prohibited and Suspected to have in
their Custody any such Engines, and the same to seize and keep to their own
use, or to destroy.

V. This Act shall not extend to abridge Fishermen or their Apprentices,
Lawfully Authorized to Fish in Navigable Rivers or Waters, with Lawful Nets and
Engines.

VI. No Certiorari shall be allowed to remove any Conviction or other
Proceeding concerning any matter in this Act, unless the Parties against whom
such Conviction shall be, shall before the Allowance thereof become bound to
the Prosecutor in the Sum of 50 l. with Sureties to be Approved of by the
Justice or Justices of Peace, before whom such Offender was Convicted, to pay
to the Prosecutor within a month after such Conviction Confirmed, or
Proceedendo Granted, their full Costs and Charges to be ascertained upon Oath.

VII. Offenders Punished by force of this Act, shall not incur the Penalty of
any other Law for the same Offense.

VIII. Persons prosecuted at Law for any thing done in pursuance of this Act,
may Plead the General Issue, and give this Act or any other special Matter in
Evidence; and if the Verdict pass for the Defendants, or the Plaintiffs become
Nonsuit, or suffer a discontinuance, the Defendants shall recover Treble Costs.

IX. If any inferior Tradesman, Apprentice, or other dissolute Person, shall
Hunt, Hawk, Fish or Fowl (unless in Company with the Master of such Apprentice
qualified by Law) they shall be subject to the Penalties of this Act, and may
be sued for Trespass in coming upon any persons Ground; in which Suit the
Plaintiff shall recover his Damages and full Costs.

X. For the better preserving the Red and Black Game of Growse, commonly called
Heath cooks or Heath-colts, no person whatsoever on any Mountains, Hills,
Heaths, Moors, Forests, Chases or other Wastes, shall burn, between the Second
Day of February and the Twenty fourth of June, any Grig, Ling, Heath, Furz,
Gross or Fern, on pain of being Committed to the House of Correction for any
Time, not exceeding a Month, nor under Ten Days, there to be Whipped and kept to
hard Labor.

Gold and Silver.
I. Sat. 1. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 30. Whereas by a Statute made in the 5th
Year of King Henry the Fourth, It was Enacted, That none from thenceforth
should use to multiply Gold or Silver, or use the Craft of Multiplication; and
if any the same do, they should incur the pain of Felony, Be it Enacted, that
the said Branch, Article or Sentence be Repealed.

II. Provided that all Gold and Silver that shall be Extracted by the Art of
Melting and Refining Metals, and otherwise Improving them and their Ores, shall
be employed for the increase of Moneys, and no otherwise; and that the Place
hereby Appointed for the disposal thereof, shall be the Mint in the Tower of
London; where they shall receive the Value of their Gold and Silver so
Extracted.

III. No Mine of Copper, Tin, Iron or Lead, shall hereafter be adjudged to be a
Royal Mine, though Gold or Silver may be Extracted out of the same.

Government.
I. Stat. 1. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 2. An Act for Impowring His Majesty to
Apprehend and Detain such Persons as he shall find just cause to suspect are
Conspiring against the Government. EXP.

II. Stat. 1. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 7. An Act for Impowring His Majesty to
Apprehend and Detain such Persons as he shall find just Cause to suspect are
Conspiring against the Government.

III. Stat. Ann. 1. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap 19. All Persons that shall be in
Prison the 25th Day of May 1689. or after, by Warrant of Their Majesty's Privy
Council, Signed by Six of the Council, for Suspicion of High Treason or
Treasonable Practices, may be detained in Custody, without Bail or Main-prize,
till the 23d Day of October 1689. And no Judge or Court of Justice shall Bail
or Try any such Persons without Order from Their Majesty's Privy Council,
Signed by Six, till the said 23d of October.

IV. From and after the said 23d of October such Persons shall have the Benefit
of the Habeas Corpus Act, and of all other Statutes providing for the Liberty
of the Subjects.

V. Nothing in this Act shall extend to Prejudice the Ancient Rights and
Privileges of Parliament.

VI. A true Copy of every Warrant for such Commitment, shall be Entered and Kept
by the Clerks of the Privy Council in a Book apart, and Signed by such of the
Privy Council as shall Grant the Warrant; and no Warrant not so Entered, and
Signed and Kept, shall be adjudged to be a Warrant by Virtue of this Act.

VII. Stat. 2. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 6. Whenever and as often as His
Majesty shall be absent out of England, It shall be Lawful for the Queen to
Exercise and Administer the Regal Power and Government, in the Names of both
Their Majesty's, for such time only, during Their Joint Lives, as His Majesty
shall be absent out of England.

VIII. Nothing in this Act shall debar His Majesty, during such absence, from
the Exercise of Administration of any Act or Acts of Regal Power or Government;
and neither the passing this Act, nor His Majesty's Royal Voyage or Absence,
shall Dissolve this present Parliament, or determine any Commissions Granted by
His Majesty; nor avoid any other Act of Government executed, or to be execured
by him.

IX. Provided, That as often as His Majesty shall return into England, the sole
Administration of the Regal Power and Government, shall be in His Majesty only.

Hair-Buttons.
I. STat. 4. and 5. W. and M. cap. 10. No Foreign Buttons made of Hair, nor
other Foreign Buttons whatsoever, shall be Imported or Bartered, Sold or
Exchanged, on pain to Forfeit the Buttons so Imported, Bartered, Sold or
Exchanged, and under such farther Penalties as are expressed in an Act made in
the 14th year of the Reign of the late King Charles 2d, Entitled, An Act
Prohibiting the Importation of Foreign Bone lace, Cut-work, Imbroidery, etc.
One Moiety to Their Majesty's, and the other to the Informer.

II. The Justices of Peace within their respective Divisions, shall have the
same Authority and Power, to issue their Warrants to seize all Foreign Buttons
whatsoever, that by the said Act is given them to seize Foreign Buttons made of
Thread and Silk.

Hearth-Doney.
I. Stat. 1. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 10. An Act made in the Parliament begun at
Westminster the 8th of May, in the 13th year of King Charles 2d, Entitled, An
Act for the Establishing an Additional Revenue upon His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors, for the better Support of His and Their Crown and Dignity; And
another Act made in the Second Session of the said Parliament, in the 15th year
of the said King's Reign, Entitled, An Additional Act for the better Ordering
and Collecting the Revenue arising by Hearth-Money; And another Act made in the
16th year of the said King's Reign, Entitled; An Act for Collecting the Duty
arising by Hearth-Money, by the Officers to be Appointed by His Majesty, are
hereby Repealed and made Void.

II. Nothing in this Act shall hinder or prejudice the Levying the said Revenue
arising by Hearth-money, which shall grow due on the 25th of March, 1689. and
all Arrears of the said Duty now due and payable by the said Acts.

Highways.
I. Stat. 3 and 4 W. and M. cap. 12. The Laws and Statutes in force touching
the High ways, not hereby altered or repealed, shall be put in Execution.

II. Upon the 26th day of December. yearly, unless that day be Sunday, and then
on the 27th day, the Constables, Headboroughs, Tything-men, Churchwardens,
Surveyors of the Highways, and Inhabitants in every Parish, shall assemble,
and the major Part of the Assembly shall make a List of the Names of a
competent Number of the Inhabitants, who have an Estate in Land in their own
Right, or their Wives, of 10 l. per annum, or a personal Estate of 100 l. or
are Occupiers of Houses, Lands, etc. of the yearly value of 30 l. if such there
be, and if not, then a List of the most sufficient Inhabitants, and return it
to Two or more Justices of the Peace at a Special Sessions to be held for that
purpose, on the third day of January next following, or within Fifteen days
after: For which purpose the Justices are required to hold a Special Sessions,
and to give notice to the Constables, Headboroughs, etc. of every Parish within
the Division Ten days before the holding of the same; and out of the said Lists
by Warrant under their Hands and Seals, they shall nominate One, Two, or more,
to be Surveyor or Surveyors of the Highways of every Parish within the
Division, or for any Hamlet, Precinct, Town, etc. of and in the same, for the
year ensuing. Which Nomination shall by the Constables, etc. be notified to the
persons nominated, within six days, by serving them with the Warrants, or
leaving the same, or a Copy thereof at their Houses: And if the Persons so
nominated shall refuse or neglect to take upon them the said Office, they shall
forfeit 5 l. to be on their Goods by Distress and Sale thereof, by Warrant of
Two Justices of the Peace; which Warrant the Justices are required to make upon
the Information of One Credible Witness upon Oath; the Moiety of such
Forfeiture to the Informer, the other to go toward the Repairing of the
Highways; and in such case the Justices shall nominate some other fit Persons
to perform the Office, who shall, upon like notice, take upon them the Office
under the same Penalty: And Constables, Headboroughs, etc. or some of them, who
shall not return such Lists of Names, every one of them so neglecting, shall
forfeit 20 s. to be levied in the manner, and employed to the Uses aforesaid.

III. No Persons shall lay in any Highway not 20 Foot broad, any matter
whereby the same may be obstructed or annoyed, on pain to forfeit 5 s. to be
levied and disposed, as aforesaid.

IV. If any Timber, Stone, Hay, Straw, Stubble, or other Matter for making Dung
or on any other Pre^ence, shall be laid in any such Highway, the Possessors of
the Lands next adjoining, shall remove and dispose of the same to their own
Use: And if they neglect to clear the way, or to cleanse their Ditches, etc.
adjoining thereunto, or to cause the earth taken thereout, to be carried away,
and to lay sufficient Trunks or Bridges where there are Cart-ways into the said
Grounds, by the space of Ten days after notice given by any of the Surveyors,
they shall sorfeit 5 s. for every such Offense, to be levied and disposed as
aforesaid.

V. No tree, Bush, or Shrub shall be permitted to grow in any High way, not 20
Foot-broad, but shall be cut down by the Owner of the Land where it stands,
within Ten days after notice given by any of the Surveyors, on pain to forfeit
5 s. to be levied and disposed, as aforesaid.

VI. The Possessors of Lands adjoining to Highways, not 20 Foot broad, shall
keep their Hedges pruned right up from the Roots.

VII. Surveyors appointed, as aforesaid, shall within Fourteen days after their
Acceptance of this Office, and so from time to time, every Four Months, view
the Roads, Watercourse, Bridges, Cawseys, etc. within the Parish, etc. where
he is a Surveyor, that are to be repaired by the Parish, etc. and present upon
Oath in what Condition they find them, to some Justice of Peace, or to incur
the same Penalty, as if they had refused to execute the Office, unless they
have some reasonable Excuse to be allowed of by Two Justices of the Peace: And
what Defaults they shall find, they shall the next Sunday after Sermon ended,
give public notice of, in the Parish Church; and if the same be not amended
within Thirty days after, such Surveyors shall within Thirty days amend the
same, and dispose of the Annoyances for the Repair of the Highways, and shall
be reimbursed their Charges by the party who should have done the same: And in
case of refusal by the Party to pay such Charges, the Surveyors shall apply
themselves to a Justice of Peace, and upon Oath before him made of notice to
the Defaulter given, as aforesaid, the Surveyors shall be repaid such Charges
as the Justice of Peace shall think reasonable, to be levied, as aforesaid.

VIII. The Justices of Peace shall once in Four Months hold a Special Sessions,
and summon thereunto all the Surveyors of the Highways, and declare to them
what they are obliged to do by Virtue of this, or any former Act: After which
the Surveyors shall make a Presentment to them upon Oath, of the state of the
Highways within their respective Parishes, etc. and what Offenses and Neglects
any are guilty of: And before any Surveyor be discharged of his Office, he
shall at some such Special Sessions give an Account upon Oath, of all Money
that has come to his hands, which ought to be employed in amending the
Highways, and how it has been disposed; and if any remain in his hands, he
shall deliver it to the next Surveyors, or in case of Failure, shall forfeit
double the Value, to be levied and disposed as aforesaid.

IX. Surveyors neglecting their Duty in any thing required by this Act, shall
forseit for every Ofence, 40 s., to be levied and disposed as aforesaid.

X. If any Justice of Peace shall neglect or refuse to do what this Act
requires, he shall forfeit 5 l. one Moiety to the Prosecutor, the other to be
employed for the Amendment of the Highways, where the Person who sues shall
inhabit, to be recovered in any of Their Majesty's Courts of Record, by Action
of Debt, etc.

XI. Surveyors of the Highways, where the Ditches and Drains already made, are
not sufficient to carry off the water, may make new ones through the Lands
adjoining, and keep them open, and come upon the Grounds with Workmen for so
doing.

XII. Upon notice given by the Surveyors to the Justices at their Special
Sessions, and Oath made of what Sums they have expended in Repairing the
Highways, the Justices, or any Two of them may by Warrant cause an equal Rate
to be made to reimburse them, where they are forced to lay out their Money,
according to the Methods prescribed in an Act made the 43 of Eliz. Entitled,
An Act for the better Relief of the Poor of this Ringdom; and if any refuse to
pay what shall be assessed on him, the Surveyors shall levy the same by
Distress or Sale of Goods.

XIII. No Fine, Issue, Penalty, or Forfeiture for not amending Highways, shall
be returned into the Exchequer, or other Court, but shall be levied into the
hands of the Surveyors to be applied toward the Amendment of such Highways:
And if any such Fine, etc. imposed on any Parish, etc. for not repairing the
Highways, shall be levied on one or more of the Inhabitants, upon Complaint to
the Justices of the Peace at their Special Sessions, they, or any two of them
may by Warrant cause a Rate to be made to reimburse them, which the Surveyors
shall levy and pay within a Month after the making thereof.

XIV. The Surveyors shall make every Cart-way leading to any Market Town Eight
Foot wide at least, and as near as may be, level.

XV. Inhabitants within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, Brewers, Scavengers, and
others employed in carrying away the Dirt and Soil of the Streets, etc. may use
any Cart, Carr, or Dray, with Wheels shod with Iron, and narrower then 6 Inches
in the Fellies, and drawn with more then Two Horses, any Act, Law, or Usage to
the contrary notwithstanding.

XVI. Where the Justices of Peace at their General Quarter Sessions shall be
satisfied, that the Highways, etc. cannot be sufficiently amended without the
help of this Act, Assessments upon Persons usually rateable to the Poor shall
be made, and levied by such Persons, and in such manner, as the Justices at
such Sessions shall direct and appoint; the Money to be raised, to be employed
according to their Orders for repairing the Highways, etc. The said
Assessments, if not paid within Ten days after Demand, to be levied by Distress
and Sale of Goods, rendering the Overplus, Charges deducted.

XVII. No such Assessments to be made in any one year, shall exceed 6 d. in the
Pound of the yearly Value of Lands, etc. nor of 6 d. for 20 l. in personal
Estate.

XVIII. If any Persons find themselves aggrieved by such Assessments, or any
Act by the Justices of Peace, the Justices of Peace at their General
Quarter Sessions, shall take order therein, which shall conclude all Parties.

XIX. None shall be punished for any Offense against this Act, unless he be
prosecuted within six Months after the Offense committed; nor shall any person
punished by Virtue of this Act, be punished for the same Offense by Virtue of
any former Law.

XX. No Horse-cawsey shall be under Three Foot in breadth.

XXI. The Justices of Peace for Middlesex, may at their Quarter Sessions make
Rates for paving Kensington, in such manner as is directed by an Act made in
the second Year of Their Majesty's Reign, for Paving and Cleansing the Streets
of London and Westminster.

XXII. All matters concerning Highways, etc. shall be determined in the County
where they lie, and not elsewhere; and no Presentment, Indictment, or Order
made by Virtue of this Act, shall be removed by Certiorari out of the County.

XXIII. The Justices of Peace of every County, at their Quarter Sessions after
Easter, yearly, shall assess the Prices of all Land-Carriage of Goods to be
brought into any place within their Jurifdictions, by any common Waggoner or
Carrier; and shall certify such Rates to the Mayors, or other chief Officers
of every Marke^-Town; and Waggoners or Carriers taking more then what shall be
so assessed, shall forfeit for every such Offense 5 l. to be levied by Distress
and sale of Goods, by Warrant of Two Justices, to the Use of the party grieved.

XXIV. In Actions commenced against any persons authorized to put this Act in
Execution, the Defendants may plead the General Issue, and give this Act and
the special Matter in Evidence; and if the Plaintiff be Nonsuit, or forbear
prosecution, or discontinue, or a Verdict pass against him, the Defendant shall
recover his double Costs.

XXV. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 9. The Toll mentioned in the Act made in the
15th year of the Reign of K. Charles II. Entitled, An Act for Repairing the
Highways in the Counties of Hertford, Cambridge and Huntington; And in an Act
made in the 16th and 17th years of the said late King, for Continuance of the
said Act, to be taken at Wades Mill in Hertford-shire, shall be revived, and
taken again in the manner by the said Acts mentioned, for Fifteen years, the
Moneys thereby arising, to be employed according to the Tenor of the said Acts.

XXVI. Provided, that if the said High ways before the end of Fifteen years be
in sufficient Repair, and an Adjudication be made thereof at the Assize or
General Quarter Sessions of the County, as is provided by the said Statute of
16 and 17 Car. II. the said Toll shall from thenceforth cease.

XXVII. The several Officers and Persons empowered by the said former Acts, so
far as relates to the County of Hertford, shall have the like Powers by Virtue
of this Act; and all Clauses in the said Acts concerning the Collecting,
Paying, Engaging or Accounting for the said Toll, shall by Virtue of this Act
be renewed, and put in Execution, as if here again repeated.

High-way-men.
I. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 8. Every Person who shall apprehend one or
more High-way-men, and prosecute them till they be convicted, shall have from
the Sheriff of the County, where such Conviction shall be, without paying any
Fee, 40 l. within a Month after such Conviction, and Demand thereof made, by
Certificate under the Judges Hand, before whom such Conviction shall be; and if
any Dispute arise between the persons apprehending such Felons, touching their
Right to the said Reward, the Judges certifying, shall in their Certificate
direct the Reward to be paid amongst them in such Proportion, as they shall
think reasonable: And if any such Sheriff shall die or be removed before the
end of the Month, the Reward being unpaid, the succeeding Sheriff shall pay it
within a Month after Demand and Certificate, as aforesaid. The Sheriff in case
of Default of payment, shall forfeit double the Sum he ought to pay, to the
Persons to whom the Reward is due, to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint, or Information, etc. with treble Costs of Suit.

II. If any person shall happen to be killed by such High-way-man, endeavoring
to apprehend him, his Executors or Administrators (upon Certificate under Hand
and Seal of a Judge of Assize for the County, or of two next Justices of Peace)
shall receive the said Sum of 40 l. and in Failure of payment, shall recover
double the Sum, with treble Costs of Suit, as aforesaid.

III. The Sheriffs to be Allowed the said Sums of 40 l. upon their Accounts,
without Fee or Reward.

IV. If upon the Account of any Sheriff there shall not be sufficient in his
Hands to Reimburse him, the same shall be Paid by the Commissioners of the
Treasury out of the Revenue of the Crown, upon Certificate from the Clerk of
the Pipe.

V. Persons Apprehending or Convicting such Robbers, as a farther Reward, shall
have their Horses, Furniture, Arms, Money and other Goods taken with them.
Provided, that this Clause shall not take away the Right of any Persons, from
whom the same were before Feloniously taken.

VI. If any Persons out of Prison shall Commit any Robbery, and shall
afterward discover Two or more Robbers, who have or shall Commit any Robbery,
so as Two or more of them shall be Convicted, such discoverer is hereby
^ntituled to Their Majesty's Pardon; which shall likewise be a good bar to any
Appeal.

Informations.
I. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 18. The Clerk of the Crown of the
King's Bench, shall not without express Order in open Court, Receive or File
any Information for Trespasses, Batteries and other Misdemeanors; or issue any
Process thereupon, before he shall have taken, or shall have delivered to him a
Recognizance from the Informer, with the Place of his Abode, Title or
Profession, to be Entered to the Person Prosecuted, in 20 l. Penalty, to
Prosecute with Effect, and abide by such Order as the Court shall direct; which
Recognizance the Clerk of the Crown, or a Justice of Peace of the Place, where
the Cause of any such Information shall arise, may take, and the Clerk of the
Crown shall Enter the same upon Record, and File a Memorandum thereof in some
public Place in his Office, that all persons may resort thereunto without Fee.
And if the persons, against whom such Informations shall be exhibited, appear
and plead to Issue, and that the Prosecutor shall not at his own Charge, within
a year after Issue joined, procure a Trial; or if upon such Trial a Verdict
pass for the Defendant, or the Informer procure a noli prosequi to be Entered,
the Court shall award the Defendant Costs, unless the Judge before whom it
shall be Tried, shall at the Trial in open Court certify upon Record, that
there was a reasonable Cause for such Information. And in case the Costs be nor
paid within Three Months after they are Taxed, the Defendants shall have the
Benefit of the said Recognizance to compel the payment thereof.

II. No persons who are or shall be outlawed in the said Court for any thing
(except Treason or Felony) shall be compelled to appear in Person to Reverse
the same, but may appear by Attorney and Reverse the same without Bail, except
where Special Bail shall be Ordered by the Court.

III. And if any person so Outlawed be taken upon a Cap. Utlagatum, the Sheriff
who has taken him (in all Cases where Special Bail is not required by the said
Court) may take an Attorneys Engagement under his Hand to appear for him, and
to Reverse the Outlawry, and thereupon may discharge the Defendant; and where
Special Bail is required, the Sheriff may take Security of the Defendant by
Bond, with one or more Sureties, in double the Sum for which Special Bail is
required, and no more for his Appearance at the Return of the Writ, and to do
and perform such things as shall be required by the Court, and after such Bond
taken, may discharge him.

IV. If any person so Outlawed and Taken upon a Cap. Utlagatum, shall not be
able within the return of the said Writ, to give Security, whenever such
Prisoner shall find Surety for his Appearance by Attorney at some return in the
Term then next following, to Reverse the Outlawry, etc. the Sheriff may
discharge him.

V This Act shall not extend to Informations in the Name of Their Majesty's
Coroner or Attorney, commonly called the Master of the Crown-Office.

VI. Upon the Demise of any King or Queen of this Realm, all Pleas to
Informations shall stand, without calling the Defendants to plead anew, unless
the Defendants request the Court for that purpose within Five Months after such
Demise.

Ireland and Irish-men.
I. Stat. 1. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 29. No Ecclesiastical person Promoted or
Beneficed in Ireland, and who has been forced to forsake that Kingdom, being
of the Protestant Religion, who is or shall be presented, etc. to any Benefice
or Promotion in England, shall by acceptance thereof lose any Benefice or
Promotion in Ireland; but may hold the same till he may and shall be restored
to his Promotion or Benefice in Ireland, so as he may enjoy the same as before
the troubles.

II. Provided that if such Ecclesiastical person so promoted here, shall not
within Three Months after the Courts of Justice in Ireland shall be open, and
furnished with Protestant Judges, resign his Benefices and Preferments here,
and give notice thereof to the Patrons, the same shall be void, and the Patrons
may Present or Collate again.

III. Such Ecclesiastical person so Promoted to any Benefice, etc. here, shall
be exempted from First Fruits and Tenths.

IV. Stat. 1. W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 9. The persons now or of late Assembled
at Dublin, without any Authority derived from Their Majesty's, calling
themselves a Parliament, were not, nor are a Parliament, but an Unlawful and
Rebellious Assembly; and all Acts and Proceedings, whatsoever Made, Done or
Passed in the said pretended Parliament, shall be adjudged null and void; and
no Act, Statute, Judgment, Outlawry, Decree, Sentence, Order or other
Proceedings, since the 13th Day of February 1688. Had, Made, Passed, Pronounced
or Done, or to be Had, Made, Passed, Pronounced or Done, by any persons
whatsoever, by color of any Commission, Writ, Power or Authority in Ireland
(other then such as have been, or shall be given by or derived from Their
Majesty's) shall be of any Force or Effect.

V. All Cities, Boroughs and Towns, and all Bodies Corporate, Ecclesiastical or
Temporal in Ireland, are hereby declared to be Restored to all Intents and
Purposes, as they were upon the 24th Day of June 1683. any Proceedings against
them by Quo warranto, Scire facias, etc. on any Proceedings, Judgments or
Executions thereon, or any New Charter, Grant, Commission, or any Surrender, or
other Acts since that time to the contrary notwithstanding. All which Writs,
Suits, Proceedings, Judgments, Seizures, Executions, Charters, Grants,
Commissions and Surrenders, are hereby declared Void.

VI. No persons whatsoever of the Protestant Religion, shall be liable to any
Loss, Forseiture or Prejudice in Estate, Office, Person or otherwise, by reason
of their absence out of Ireland, at any time since the 25th of December, 1685.
or for Non-payment of Rent, or any other Duty due to Their Majesty's, or the
Crown, out or by reason of any Lands, Tenements, Rectories, Tithes or Church
Livings since the 25th of December 1688. till such time as the said Kingdom
shall be declared by Their Majesty's to be Reduced to Their Obedience.

VII. The Protestants of Ireland shall be, and are hereby Restored to all their
Possessions Ecclesiastical and Temporal, in such manner as they, or those under
whom they Claim, had the same on the 25th Day of December 1688. and Pesons
detaining such Possessions after a Demand by the Party grieved, may be
proceeded against, as in a Case of a forcible Detainer.

VIII. Stat. 3. and 4. W. and M. cap. 2. No person Residing in Ireland, shall
be obliged to take the Oath of Supremacy by virtue of the Statute of primo
Eliz. but the Statute and every other Statute, for so much as concerns the said
Oath, are hereby Repealed.

IX. The Oaths Required by this Act to be taken after the 1st Day of January
next 1691. shall be taken by the Persons herein after mentioned, and such
others as were Required by the said Act, or any other Statute made in Ireland,
to take the said Abrogated Oath, before such Persons, and in such Court as is
hereafter expressed, viz. Archbishops and Bishops, and others, of or above the
Degree of a Baron of Parliament there, and others having any Promotion, Office
or Employment Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military, or receiving any Pay, Salary,
Fee or Wages by reason of any Grant from the Crown, or being Master, Governor,
Head or Fellow of the University of Dublin, or Master of any Hospital or
School, or Barrister at Law, Clerk in Chancery, Attorney or Professor of Law,
Physic or other Science, residing in Dublin or within thirty Miles thereof, in
Hillary-Term next, in the Court of Chancery or Kings Bench there, between 9 and
12 in the Forenoon; and all the said Persons inhabiting at a greater distance,
at the General Quarter Sessions where they reside, between 9 and 12, before the
25th of July next, and shall make, subscribe and repeat the Declaration herein
after mentioned; all which to be put upon Record, paying 1 s. And Archbishops,
Bishops, and others, having any Ecclesiastical Promotion, or being a Lecturer
or Curate, neglecting so to do, shall be ipso facto deprived, and be incapable
to be Lecturer or Curate any where; and others having any Office, or receiving
any Pay, Salary, Fee or Wages, as aforesaid, or being Master, Governor, etc.
and others aforesaid, neglecting so to do, shall be ipso facto adjudged
incapable to enjoy any such Office, Pay, Salary, Fee or Wages, Mastership,
Governors Place, Headship, Fellowship, Employment, or any Matter aforesaid of
Profit appertaining thereunto; and such Office and Place shall be adjudged void.

X. Barristers at Law, Attorneys, Clerks and Officers in Chancery, and other
Courts, and their Deputies, or that shall Practice as such in Ireland, after
the last day of Hillary-Term next, shall take the said Oaths, and make and
subscribe the said Declaration in the Kings Bench at Dublin before they be
admitted to exercise any Place or Office, or to Practice or Plead in any Court;
and all Persons that after the first day of March next, shall be admitted into
any Office or Employment, or come into any Capacity, by reason of which they
should have been obliged to take the said abrogated Oaths, shall take the said
Oaths, and make and subscribe the Declaration hereby appointed, at such times,
and before such Persons as they ought to have taken the said former Oath, by
virtue of the said Act.

XI. No Person that is or shall be a Peer of Ireland, shall Vote or make his
Proxy in the House of Peers, or sit there during any Debate; nor shall any
Member of the House of Commons vote or sit there during any Debate, after the
Speaker is chosen, unless he first take the said Oaths, and make, subscribe and
repeat this Declaration; viz. I A. B. do solemnly and sincerely in the presence
of God, profess, testify and declare, That I do believe that in the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, there is not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of
Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, at or after the Consecration
thereof by any Person whatsoever; and that the Invocation or Adoration of the
Virgin Mary, or any other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now
used in the Church of Rome, are Superstitious and Idolatrous. And I do solemnly
in the presence of God profess, testify and declare, That I do make this
Declaration, and every part thereof, in the plain and ordinary sense of the
Words read unto me, as they are commonly understood by Protestants, without any
Evasion, Equivocation or mental Reservation whatsoever, and without any
Dispensation already granted me for this purpose from the Pope, or any other
Authority or Person whatsoever, or without Dispensation from any Person or
Authority whatsoever, or without believing that I am or can be acquitted before
God or Man, or absolved of this Declaration, or any part thereof, although the
Pope or any other Person or Persons or Power whatsoever should dispense with,
or annul the same, or declare that it was null and void from the beginning.

XII. Which said Oaths and Declaration shall in the next and every Parliament
in Ireland, be made and subscribed between 9 in the Morning and 4 in the
Afternoon, by the Peers, at the Table in the middle of the House, before they
take their Place, and whilst a full House is present, and their Speaker in his
Place; and by the Members of the House of Commons at the Table in the middle of
their House, when a full House is sitting, with their Speaker in his Chair, in
such method, as each House is called over; during which time all Business to
cease, and the Clerks are to Record the same, taking of every Member of each
House 1 s.

XIII. Peers and Members of the House of Commons, Barristers at Law, Attorneys,
Clerks or Officers in Chancery, or other Courts, and Deputies in any Office,
offending contrary to this Act, shall be disabled to hold any Office or Place
of Profit, or Trust Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military there or here, or in any
of their Majesty's Islands or Plantations, and shall be disabled to sit in
Parliament, or make a Proxy, or to sue at Law or in Equity, or to be Guardian
or Executor or Administrator, or to take a Legacy or Deed or Gift, and shall
forfeit 500 l. to be recovered by them that will sue for the same.

XIV. The Oaths required to be taken by this Act, are these, viz. I A. B. do
sincerely promise and swear that I will be faithful, and bear true Allegiance
to their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary.

So help me God.

I A. B. do swear, That I do from my Heart abhor, detest and abjure as Impious
and Heretical, that damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes excommunicated
and deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome, may be deposed
or murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do declare, That
no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, has or ought to have
any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority Ecclesiastical
or Spiritual within this Realm.

So help me God.

XV. This Act shall not extend to any now Chaplain, Secretary or Attendant to
any of their Majesty's Ambassadors, Envoys or Ministers in any foreign Courts,
or Preacher to any English Factory, or to any Chaplains in their Majesty's
Service by Sea or Land out of Ireland, so as they take the said Oaths, and make
and subscribe the said Declaration within three months after their return; nor
to any Protestant now in Office or Place of Trust or Profit out of Ireland or
England, who shall return into Ireland and take the same before the 25th of
December 1692. in the Kings Bench there the next Term after their arrival there.

XVI. Archbishops and Bishops of Ireland, and others, having any Ecclesiastical
Office or Promotion, or being a Lecturer or Curate there, that shall be in
England the first day of Hillary-Term 1691. shall take the said Oaths, and make
and subscribe the said Declaration before the end of the said Term in the
Chancery or Court of Kings Bench here, and again, before the 25th day of July
1692. in the Chancery or Court of Kings Bench there, as aforesaid; and if they
neglect or refuse so to do, they shall be ipso facto deprived, and become
incapable to be Lecturers or Curates any where; and all other the Persons above
mentioned, who shall be here on the first day of the said Hillary-Term, shall
take the said Oaths, and make and subscribe the said Declaration in Chancery or
the Kings Bench in England, or elsewhere, shall be adjudged ipso facto
incapable and disabled to hold and enjoy such Office, pay, etc. Employment, or
any part of them, which taking the said Oaths, etc. in England, shall be as
effectual as if they had taken the same in Ireland.

XVII. This Act shall not extend to disable any Persons, who on the third of
October 1691. were residing in Lymerick, or in any Garrison then in the
possession of the Irish, or any Officers or Soldiers then in Arms by virtue of
any Commission from the late King James, or any commissioned Officers then in
their Majesty's Quarters, that did belong to the Irish Regiments then in being,
or were then treated with, or who were not Prisoners of War, or who had not
then taken Protection, and have since submitted to their Majesty's Obedience,
from using their Profession, or calling of Barrister at Law, Clerk in Chancery,
Attorney or Practiser of Law or Physic.

XVIII. Provided that every such Barrister at Law, etc. who shall claim any
benefit hereby, to be exempt from taking the said Oaths, etc. shall make out
his claim thereto, according to the qualifications herein before expressed,
before the Court of Kings Bench in Ireland, on or before the last day of
Michaelmas-Term next, for the recording whereof 1 s. shall be paid and no more,
and in default of such claim to be excluded.

XIX. If any Person before he have taken the said Oath in the Kings Bench in
Ireland, or at the General Quarter Sessions in the place where he inhabits, and
procured the same to be recorded, and obtained a Certificate thereof, shall
practice his Calling or Profession, he shall forfeit 500 l. to such as will sue
for the same, and be incapable to use or exercise such Profession or Calling.

XX. Two or more Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, shall
direct their Warrants to any Constable, Tythingman, or other Officer, to summon
any Person of eighteen years of Age or upwards, to appear before such Justices
to the Oath abovementioned to be faithful, etc. and for want of appearance,
having no lawful let, or in case of appearing and refusing to take the said
Oath, the Justices shall commit such Persons to the common Gaol or House of
Correction for three months, unless they shall pay down any Sum not exceeding
40 s. as the Justices shall require, which Money shall be paid to the
Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poor of the Parish or Place where the
Offender last inhabited; and after the three months ended, two or more Justices
shall direct their Warrant to summon such Offender before them to take the said
Oath; and for want of appearance, or in case of refusal to take the said Oath,
he shall be committed, as aforesaid, for six months, unless he pay down what
Sum the Justices shall require, not exceeding 10 l. nor under 5 l. to be
disposed as aforesaid; and unless he become bound with two Sureties, to appear
at the next Assizes or General Jail-deliver, and in the mean time to be of the
Good Behavior; and in case of refusal, at the Assizes or General
Jail-deliver, such Offender shall incur a Praemunire, unless such Offender be a
Feme Covert, who upon such refusal shall be committed only to the Common Gaol,
till she takes the said Oath.

XXI. It shall be sufficient for Quakers producing a Certificate under the
Hands and Seals of six or more of the Congregation to which they belong, to
make and subscribe the following Declaration, viz.

I A. B. do sincerely promise, and solemnly declare before God and the World,
That I will be true and faithful to King William and Queen Mary.

And I do solemnly profess and declare, That I do from my Heart, etc. verbatim,
as in the Oaths aforementioned.

XXII. But no Quakers shall thereby be capable of holding any Office,
Employment, Salary, etc. whereunto any Person taking the said Oaths, etc. shall
or may be entitled.

XXIII. This Act shall not be dispensed with by any Warrant or Letters Patents
under the Great Seal of England or Ireland, but such Dispensations shall be
null and void.

Judicial Proceedings.
I. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 4. Whereas the Term of St. Hill. 1688.
could not be kept; Be it enacted, That all Pleas, Writs, Bills, Actions, Suits,
Plaints, Process, Precepts or other Things whatsoever, that were returnable or
had day or days in the Chancery, Kings Bench, Common Pleas or Exchequer, in
Oct. Hill. Quind Hill. Crast. Pur. or Oct. Pur. last past, or at any day
certain after any of the said Returns, shall stand and be revived, and are
hereby continued and adjourned to the Return of Quind. Pasch. next ensuing; and
Parties that had day at any time in Hill. Term, shall appear on the said Return
of Quind. Pasch. under the same Penalties that might have incurred for not
appearing in Hill. Term, if it had been held.

II. Writs of Error upon Judgments in the Kings Bench, returnable, or upon
which day was given in the Exchequer Chamber at any time in Hill. Term, and all
Proceedings thereupon, shall be revived and adjourned to the 20th day of Apr.
1689. and all Parties are to appear then under the same Penalties that would
have incurred, if they had made default in Hill. Term.

III. Writs of Error upon Judgments in the Court of Exchequer, upon which day
was given before the Lord Chancellor, and the Lord Treasurer in Hill. Term, and
Proceedings thereupon, shall be revived and adjourned to the 23d day of Apr.
1689. and all Parties are to appear then under the same penalty that would have
incurred, if they had made any default in Hill. Term, etc.

IV. Fines upon which Proclamation ought to have been made in Hill. Term, shall
be good, as if such Proclamation had been made; and if the fourth and last
Proclamation was to have been made in Hill. Term, the five years shall be
accounted from the 12th day of Febr. 1688.

V. Where any Judgment was by Warrant of Attorney to have been entered in Hill.
Term, the same may be entered in Easter Term, if the Parties be then living.

VI. Any Persons before the 17th day of Apr. 1689. may prosecute any Precept,
Writ, mean Process or Execution, returnable in the said Courts on some return
or day in Easter-Term next; and the said Writs in the Kings Bench, Common Pleas
and Exchequer shall be dated on the day they are actually sued out, which Writs
and Process shall be good, notwithstanding the want of any Original Writ or
being attested.

VII. It shall be lawful before the said 17th day of April to prosecute any
Writ of Habeas Corpus in Civil Causes, to be dated as aforesaid, returnable
immediately before any of the Justices of the Kings Bench, Common Pleas or
Barons of the Exchequer, who may proceed thereupon as if the said Term of St.
Hill. had been kept.

VIII. All Pleas, Writs, Bills, Actions, Suits, Plaints, Process, Pleadings,
Proceedings, Indictments and Informations, Causes and Things whatsoever,
pleaded, returned, depending or being in the Court of the Dutchy-Chamber at
Westminster, in the Great Sessions of Wales, or in the Courts within the
Counties Palatine of Chester, Lancaster or Durham, or in any other Court of Law
or Equity, upon the 11th day of December 1688. shall be continued and revived,
and may be proceeded upon, without any continuance or adjournment.

IX. Persons that since the said 11th day of December 1688. and before the 13th
day of February following, have committed any Murder, Manslaughter, Burglary,
Perjury or Forgery, or any other Crimes for which they were in custody, or
stood upon Bail on the said 13th day of February shall be proceeded against as
if the said Crimes had been committed before the said 11th day of December; and
all Persons for any Matter arisen since the said 11th day of December, and
before the said 13th day of February shall be liable to any Action; and it
shall be sufficient in all Indictments and Informations for any such Crimes,
and in all Actions and Declarations for any such Cause, to allege the Year of
our Lord, instead of the Year of the King; and in such Indictments,
Informations or Actions, wherein Conclusions used to be contra Pacem Domini
Regis, to conclude contra Pacem Regni; and Indictments for Felonies committed
within that time shall be good, having the words contra Pacem Regni, though the
words Domini Regis Coronam and Dignitatem be omitted.

X. Recognizances, Statutes and Obligations made since the said 11th day of
December, and before the said 13th day of February, in the Name of and to the
late King James II. shall be good, and may be sued in their Majesty's Names;
and all Persons, who were bound by Recognizance to the said late King, to
appear in the Court of Kings Bench, at any time in Hill. Term, or at the next
Assizes, Oyer and Terminer, General Jail-deliver, or of the Peace, shall be
obliged to appear in the said Court of Kings Bench on the first day of
Easter-Term 1689. and at the next Assizes, Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, etc.
under the Penalty of forfeiting the said Recognizance, etc.

XI. Writs and Process issuing out of any of the Courts of Westminster, as of
Mich. Term 1688. that have been executed before they were returnable, and all
Bills, Plaints, Judgments and Proceedings in any Inferior Court, and Executions
thereupon since the said 11th day of December, and before the said 13th day of
February shall be good, as if the said late King had continued so.

XII. Bail Bonds taken by Sheriffs, etc. though not lawfully qualified since
the first day of November 1687. and Recognizances of Bail taken since the said
11th day of December before any Person, who upon the first day of December
last, was Justice of the Kings Bench, Common Pleas or Baron of the Exchequer
shall be good, and may be enrolled in Easter-Term 1689. and all Commitments to
prison on any Writ or Process, by the said Judges since the said 11th day of
December shall be good in Law.

XIII. No part of the time from the 10th of December 1688. until the 12th of
March 1688. shall be accounted as part of the six months, from the time of the
avoidance of any Church in which any Person is bound to bring his darrein
Presentment or Quare impedit, or as any part of the time in which any Person by
virtue of any Statute of Limitation ought to bring his Action.

Judgments.
I. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 20. The Clerk of the Essoins of the Court of
Common Pleas, every Clerk of the Doggets of the Court of Kings Bench, and the
Master of the Office of Pleas in the Exchequer, shall before the end of every
Easter-Term put into an Alphabetical Dogget by the Defendants Names, a
particular of all Judgments for Debt by Confession, non sum Informatus or nihil
dicit entered in the said respective Courts of the Term of St. Hillary
preceding, containing the Names of the Plaintiffs and Defendants, their Places
of Abode, Title, Trade or Profession (if any such be in the Record) and the
Debt, Damages and Costs recovered thereby, and where the Actions were laid and
the Number-roll of the Entry thereof; and every Clerk of the Judgments, and
other Clerk of the Courts of Common Pleas and Kings Bench, shall within ten
days before the said time, bring to the Clerks of the Doggets, Notes in Writing
of all the Judgments by them entered of the said Term of St. Hillary upon
Verdicts, Writs of Enquiry, Demurrer and every other Judgment for Debt or
Damages in all things as aforesaid; and that the Clerk of the Judgments and
every other Clerk of the Exchequer, shall within the time aforesaid, bring unto
the Master of the Office or Pleas, the like Note in Writing of all the like
Judgments by him entered, to the end they may be respectively entered; and the
respective Officers and Clerks shall before the last day of the Term of St.
Michael, make the like Doggets, containing all Judgments of the Terms of Easter
and Trinity, in all things, as aforesaid; and before the last day of every
Hillary-Term, the like Doggets of Judgments in Michaelmass-Term; The said
Doggets to be kept in Books in Parchment, to be searched and viewed by all
Persons at reasonable times, paying for every Terms search 4 d. and no more, on
pain that every Clerk of the Essoins of the Court of Common Pleas, Clerk of the
Doggets of the Kings Bench and Master of the Office of Pleas in the Exchequer,
and every Clerk beforementioned, shall for every Term in which he shall
neglect his Duty, forfeit 100 l. one moiety to the Party grieved, and the other
moiety to the Prosecutor.

II. No Judgment not doggetted as aforesaid, shall affect any Lands as to
Purchasers or Mortgagees, or have any preference against Heirs, Executors or
Administrators in the administration of their Ancestors, Testators or
Intestates Estates.

III. The Plaintiffs in every of the said Judgments shall pay to the Clerks of
the Judgments, for every Judgment entering 4 d. over and above the Fees now due.

IV. This Act to continue for one year from the 25th day of March 1693. and
from thence to the end of the next Session of Parliament.

King and Queen.
I. STat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 1. The Lords and Commons publish, declare
and enact in Parliament, that they do recognize and acknowledge that their
Majesty's are and of Right ought to be by the Laws of this Realm their
Sovereign Liege Lord and Lady, King and Queen of England, France and Ireland,
etc. in and to whose Princely Persons the Royal State, Crown and Dignity of the
said Realms, with all Honors, Prerogatives, etc. are fully, rightfully and
entirely invested, incorporated, united and annexed.

II. All and singular the Acts made in the Parliament assembled the 13th day of
Febr. 1688. were and are the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, and as such
ought to be reputed, taken and obeyed.

Leather.
I. STat. 1. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 23. Whereas an Act made in the 20th year
of King Charles II. Entitled, An Act for giving liberty to buy and export
Leather and Skins tanned or dressed, was revived by another Act made in the
first year of the Reign of the late King James II. Entitled, An Act for
reviving a former Act for exporting Leather, which Act will expire at the end
of this Sessions. Be it enacted that the said two Acts be revived and continue
in force from the end of this Session of Parliament for seven years, and from
thence to the end of the Session of Parliament then next ensuing.

II. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 33. Every Hide, Skin or Piece of tanned
Leather, shaved or liquored, and well curried according to the Statute of 1
Jac. 1. shall be adjudged to be the made Ware and Manufacture of the Currier,
and subject to the view, search and seizure of the Master of the several
Mysteries of the Cordwainers, Curriers, Girdlers and Sadlers of the City of
London, or the major part of them, as by the said Statute is provided, and
shall be liable to be seized and subject to the same Penalties, as other Wares
insufficiently made of tanned Leather are liable and subject by the said
Statute.

III. Nothing in this Act shall give any Power to the Master and Wardens of the
Company of Curriers to search or seize any Leather, Hide or Skin, but such as
shall be curried in London, or within three Miles thereof, by some Members of
their own Company, nor in any other Place, but the open Marketplace, or in the
Shops, Houses or Warehouses of such Curriers.

IV. All Persons whatsoever dealing or working in Leather, may buy all sorts of
Red tanned Leather in any open Fair or Market, curried or uncurried, the same
being first searched and sealed according to Law, and may sell the same again
in their Shops, or convert it into other made Ware.

V. Any Persons may buy or sell Leather, Hides or Skins by weight.

London.
I. Stat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 8. Whereas a Judgment was given in the
Kings Bench in Trinity-Term, in the 35th Year of King Charles II. in a Quo
Warranto against the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of London, that the
Franchise of the said City should be seized into the Kings Hands as forfeited,
which Proceedings were illegal and arbitrary; Be it enacted, That the said
Judgment and every other Judgment given or recorded in the said Court, for
seizing the Franchise of the said City into the Kings Hands be reversed and
made void, and Vacats entered upon the Rolls.

II. The Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of London to remain a Body Politic by
the Name of Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, etc.
without any Seizure or Forejudger of the said Franchise, etc. upon pretense of
any Forfeiture or Misdemeanor done or to be done, and to have and enjoy all
their Rights, Charters, etc. which they lawfully had at the time of the
recording or giving the said Judgment.

III. All Charters, Letters Patents, etc. for incorporating the Citizens and
Commonalty of the said City or any of them, and all Charters, etc. concerning
any of their Liberties, etc. Lands and Tenements, etc. Rights, Title or Estates
made since the said Judgment by the late King Charles II. or King James II. are
hereby declared void.

IV. Yet no Recoveries, Verdicts, Judgments, Statutes, Recognizances,
Inquisitions, Indictments, Presentiments, Informations, Decrees, Sentences,
Executions, nor any Plaints, Process or Proceedings in Law or Equity, had in
any Court within the said City or Liberties thereof, since the said Judgment,
shall be avoided for want of any legal Power in such as acted as Judges or
Officers belonging to the same.

V. This Act shall not extend to discharge any Persons from any Penalties for
not duly qualifying themselves to act upon such Charters, Grants or Commissions.

VI. All Officers and Ministers of the City, that rightfully held any Office or
Place therein, or in Southwark, when such Judgment was given, are hereby
confirmed, as fully as they held them then; except such as have voluntarily
surrendered, or been removed for just cause; and Persons admitted since the said
Judgment, into any Office or Employment within the said City, upon the death,
surrender or removal, as aforesaid, of the former Officers, are hereby
confirmed, as if they had been admitted therein according to ancient Custom.

VII. Leases and Grants of Lands and other things, before the said Judgment
belonging to the City, made since the said Judgment, by the said late King
Charles II. or King James II. or any taking upon them to be Trustees for the
City, upon pretense of any Commission from either of the said late Kings, being
made for a just and valuable consideration, and whereupon the accustomed yearly
Rent or more has been reserved, shall be good upon the Terms therein
contained, and the Commonalty and Citizens shall have all benefit and advantage
thereof.

VIII. All Judgments, Decrees and Sentences obtained by any Persons taking upon
them to be Trustees, as aforesaid, concerning any Interests belonging to the
City, shall stand in force and be prosecuted and executed by and to the use of
the City; and all Persons natural-born Subjects or Denizens, that have been
admitted into the Freedom of the City since the said Judgment shall be free
thereof, as if admitted before.

IX. The present Mayor, Sheriffs, Chamberlain and Common Council shall continue
till new Elections, and the Persons to be elected sworn; the Election of a
Mayor, Sheriffs and Chamberlain, to be on the 26th day of May 1690, and of the
Common Council on the 10th day of June 1690. Persons so elected to continue
till the usual time of electing such Officers according to usage, and from
thence to continue for the year ensuing.

X. If the Mayor, Sheriffs, Chamberlain and Common Council shall not be elected
as aforesaid, the Mayor, Sheriffs, Chamberlain and Common Council, which were
in being at the time of the said Judgment, shall be and continue in those
respective Offices, till new Elections be made according to ancient usage.

XI. All Persons so to be restored and continued, shall take the Oaths
appointed by an Act made in the first year of their Majesty's Reign, Entitled,
An Act for the abrogating the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and appointing
other Oaths, the next Term after such restitution, under the Penalties and
Disabilities in the said Act provided.

XII. The Mayor, Sheriffs and Chamberlain so to be elected, shall be sworn in
usual manner, on or before the 20th day of June next.

XIII. The several Companies and Corporations of the City, shall stand and be
incorporated by such Names and in such manner as they were at the time of such
Judgment given, and are hereby restored to the Lands, etc. Rights and Liberties
which they lawfully had then: And all Surrenders and Charters for new
incorporating any of them, and concerning any of their Liberties granted by
either of the said late Kings since the said Judgment, shall be void; but no
Person shall be prosecuted for any thing by him lawfully done in pursuance of
such Charters, etc.

XIV. Provided that all Leases, Terms and Estates granted by any of the said
Companies since the said Judgment, for just and valuable considerations, and
whereupon the accustomed yearly Rents, or more are reserved, shall be of force,
as if they had been granted by the said several Companies, as hereby restored;
and the said Companies shall have all benefits and advantages thereof.

XV. Persons since the said Judgment admitted into the Freedoms or Liveries of
the said Companies, according to the Custom of the City, shall enjoy the Rights
and Privileges of a Freeman and Livery-man.

XVI. This present Act shall be reputed a General and Public Act of
Parliament, of which all Judges in all Courts shall take notice, as if it were
a Public Act relating to the whole Kingdom.

XVII. Stat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 8. From the 15th day of Dec. 1690. All
Persons within the Parishes within the Weekly Bills of Mortality in Middlesex
and Westminster, and the Liberties thereof, and in Southwark, or in any
Streets, etc. comprised in the said Weekly Bills, and in Kensington, shall on
every Wednesday and Saturday sweep and cleanse all the Streets, etc. before
their Houses, etc. that the Dirt may be ready for the Scavenger, on pain to
forfeit 3 s. and 4 d. for every neglect; and none shall lay or suffer to be
laid any Sea-Coal Ashes, Dust, Dirt, etc. in any open Street, Lane or Alley
before their own Houses, or any public Places, on the Penalty of 5 s. and none
shall lay any Ashes, Dirt or Soil before the Houses or Walls of any Persons
Inhabitants of the City, Parishes or Places aforesaid, or before any Church,
Churchyard Wall, or any of their Majesty's Palaces or Places; or shall throw
or cause to be thrown into any Common Shewer or Highway within the Parishes
and Places aforesaid, or any private Vault of any of the said Inhabitants, any
noisome thing whatsoever, but shall keep the same in their respective Houses,
Yards or Backsides, till the Scavenger or other Officer come to take them away,
on pain to forfeit 20 s. for every such Offense.

XVIII. The respective Churchwardens, and the Housekeepers and other Keepers
of White Hall, Somerset House, St. James's- house and St. James's- Park, and
the Guard-houses and Stables, etc. And the Ushers, Porters or Keepers of Courts
of Justice, and other public Places, shall suffer the like Penalties for
Offenses or Neglects done or suffered before any such Places.

XIX. None shall hoop, wash or cleanse any Vessels in any the said Streets,
Lanes or open Passages; nor shall set any Dung, Soil, Rubbish or empty Coaches
to make or mend, or rough Timber or Stones to be sawn or wrought, on the
penalty of 20 s. for every Offense.

XX. The Rakers, Scavengers, etc. shall every day in the Week, except Sundays
and Holydays, bring Carts, and by a Bell or otherwise give notice of their
coming, and carry away the Dirt, etc. daily, on pain to forfeit 40 s. for every
Offense or Neglect.

XXI. Open Streets, Lanes and Allies now paved, shall be kept so at the Charge
of the Inhabitants; and where Houses are unoccupied, at the charge of the
Owners, that is to say, every Householder or Owner to amend the Streets, etc.
before his own House, etc. on pain to forfeit 20 s. for every Perch or Rod, for
every Default, and of 20 s. a Week for every Week after, till the same be
amended.

XXII. One or more Justices of the Peace may view and inspect new ways made or
to be made; and if they find them fit to be paved, shall certify the same to
the next General Quarter Sessions, where the Justices of Peace shall take such
order for paving them as they shall think fit; and Owners and Inhabitants of
Houses now built, or hereafter to be bullt adjoining to any new Streets or Ways
adjudged to be paved or amended, pave with Stone or Gravel, or otherwise amend
the Ground before their Houses and Buildings to the middle of the Way, and in
default thereof shall forfeit 40 s. for every Perch not paved or amended, and
the like Sum for every Week till it be paved, etc. and when paved, the like Sum
as those that shall not pave or repair open Streets, etc. by virtue of this Act.

XXIII. Such ancient Streets, Lanes and Allies as by Custom or Order have been
repaired in any other order or manner, shall hereafter be paved and maintained,
as heretofore has been used.

XXIV. Within the Parishes of St. Anne and St. James within the Liberty of
Westminster, Scavengers shall be chosen as by the said Acts is directed; and
the Assessments for Scavengers and such like Officers, shall be assessed and
raised according to the Custom of the said City, where it is not otherwise
provided by the said Acts; and the Receivers of such Moneys to be accountable
as by the said Acts, or otherwise by Law new Houses now or hereafter to be
built, within the said Limits and Parishes, shall pay proportionable with
others; and in all other Places and Parishes aforesaid, upon every Monday or
Tuesday in Easter-week the Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor
and Surveyors of the Highways, calling such Parishioners as are usually
present at choosing Parish Officers, shall appoint two Tradesmen of their Parish
to be Scavengers for the next Year, and till others be chosen, who within seven
days after their election and notice thereof, shall take the Office upon them,
on pain to forfeit 10 l. for every refusal; and in case of refusal, others
shall be chosen within seven days, who shall take upon them the Office under
the same Penalty; the said Penalties to be paid to the Surveyors of the
Highways, and employed toward the repairing the same, and to be levied by
distress and sale of Goods by Warrant from a Justice of Peace; and for want of
a distress or non-payment within six days after demand and notice left at the
Offenders House, the Offender to be committed till payment.

XXV. Within twenty days after the Election of the Scavengers, the Constables,
Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor and Surveyors of the Highways, calling
to them the Inhabitants, as aforesaid, shall settle a Tax, according to a
Pound-rate, for the next Year, which being allowed by two Justices of the
Peace, shall be quarterly paid by the Inhabitants upon demand; and in case of
refusal shall be levied by distress and sale of Goods, and for want of a
distress, by imprisonment till payment, if the Offender be not a Peer.

XXVI. The Money yearly assessed and collected for cleansing the Streets shall
be yearly accounted for by the Scavengers, to two or more of the next Justices
of Peace within twenty eight days after the Election of new Scavengers, and
what remains in their Hands shall be paid over to their Successors; and two
such Justices may commit Scavengers refusing to account, till they make a true
account and pay over, as aforesaid, what remains in their Hands.

XXVII. The Scavengers shall have liberty by order of the Justices at their
Petit Sessions, or any two of them, to lodge their Dirt, etc. in such vacant
and public Places near the Streets as shall be thought convenient, giving
satisfaction to the Owners; and in case of unreasonable Demands, the Justices
shall moderate the same; and Persons aggrieved by any Tax made by virtue of
this Act, or by the determination of the Justices, etc. may have recourse to
the General Quarter Sessions, whose determination therein shall be final.

XXVIII. And whereas there are many common Highways in the said Parishes, which
cannot be sufficiently supported without the help of this Act, Be it enacted,
That one or more Assessment or Assessments upon the Inhabitants and Occupiers
of Lands, etc. and Persons usually ratable to the Poor, shall from time to time
be made and allowed by such Persons as the Justices at their Quarter Sessions
shall direct, and the Money thereby raised to be employed and accounted for
according to their direction, toward the supporting such Highways; such
Assessments to be levied by distress and sale of goods, in case of non-payment
within fourteen days after demand, rendering the overplus, Charges deducted.

XXIX. No such Assessments to be made in any one Year, shall exceed 4 d. in the
Pound of the yearly value of Lands, etc. nor 8 d. for every twenty pound in
personal Estate.

XXX. New Sewers made since the 12th Year of King Charles II. in any the said
Parishes, shall be subject to the Commissioners of Sewers; and the said
Commissioners may direct the making of new Sewers, and alter or take away any
Nusances therein, and any cross Gutters and Channels in any of the Streets and
Lanes in the said Parishes.

XXXI. Householders within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, whose Houses adjoyn to
the Street, from Michaelmas to Ladyday, yearly, shall hang out Candles or
Lights from the time that it grows dark, till twelve a Clock at night, on pain
to forfeit 2 s. for every default, except such as shall agree to make use of
Lamps, to be placed at such distances as shall be approved of by two or more
Justices of the Peace.

XXXII. Every Truss of old Hay bought or offered to sale within the Weekly
Bills of Mortality, between the last of August and the first of June, shall
weigh 56 pounds at least; and between the first of June and the last of August
being new Hay of that Summers growth, shall weigh 60 pounds; and being old Hay
of any former years growth, shall weigh 56 pounds; the Person offering any Hay
to be sold of less weight, to forfeit for every Truss 18 d.

XXXIII. No Persons shall suffer their Wagons, Carts, etc. to stand in any
place within the Weekly Bills of Mortality laden with Hay or Straw to be sold,
from Michaelmas to Lady Day, after two a Clock in the Afternoon, nor from
Lady Day to Michaelmas after three a Clock, on pain to forfeit 5 s. for every
such Offense.

XXXIV. Justices of Peace in the Places aforesaid, within their respective
Limits, may upon their own View, Confession of the Party, or proof of one
credible Witness upon Oath, convict Persons of the said Offenses; one moiety of
the Forfeitures to the Poor, and the other to the Prosecutor; and in case of a
Conviction by the View of a Justice of Peace, one half to the relief of the
Poor, and the other half, if for a default of payment, toward the repairing
and cleansing the Streets, to be paid to the Scavengers, to be employed to that
use, or otherwise to the relief of the Poor, as aforesaid; all the said
Penalties to be levied by distress and sale of Goods, by a Justices Warrant to
the Constable, etc. and for want of a distress, or in case of non-payment
within six days after demand, or notice in Writing left at the Offenders House,
by the Constable, etc. the Offender, not being a Peer, shall be committed to
the Common Gaol till payment.

XXXV. The Wheels of Carts, Carriages or Drays within the said Places, where
the Streets are paved, shall contain six Inches in the Felley, and shall not be
wrought about with any Iron-work, nor drawn with above two Horses after they
are up the Hills by the Waterside. Owners of Carts, etc. the Wheels whereof
shall not be of that breadth, or shod with Iron, or drawn with above two
Horses, as aforesaid, shall forfeit 40 s. for every time such Cart, etc. shall
be used, for the Uses, and to be levied, as aforesaid.

XXXVI. This shall not extend to Country Carriages bringing Goods to the said
Places, or carrying any Goods half a Mile beyond the paved Streets.

XXXVII. No Persons shall keep Swine within the Houses or Back-sides of the
paved Streets, where the Houses are contiguous, upon pain of forfeiting the
same to the use of the Poor of the Parish: And Churchwardens, Overseers of the
Poor, Constables, Beadles, Headboroughs and Tythingmen, may in the daytime by
Warrant from the Lord Mayor of London, or any Justice of Peace of the place,
search for Swine, and drive them away to sell, the Money to be delivered to the
Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poor of the Parish, for the use of the Poor.

XXXVIII. The cleansing the Streets Lanes and Passages within London and the
Liberties thereof, shall be managed according to the ancient usage of the City.

XXXIX. The Lord Mayor or any Alderman may upon his own knowledge or view, in
the General Quarter Sessions, make presentment of any such Offense within the
City and Liberties thereof; and the Lord Mayor and Justices of the City shall
at the same Sessions assess Fines for the same, not exceeding 20 s. for every
Offense, to be paid to the Chamberlain of London for the use of the City.

XL. In Actions, etc. commenced for what any Person shall do in pursuance of an
Act made in the 22 and 23 Years of King Charles II, Entitled, An Act for the
better paving and cleansing the Streets and Sewers in and about the City of
London, or this Act, the Defendant may plead the General Issue, and give the
said Act, and the Special Matter in Evidence; and if the Plaintiff or
Prosecutor become Nonsuit, or suffer a Discontinuance, or a Verdict pass
against him, the Defendant shall recover treble Costs.

XLI. The Highway leading from the East Side of Clerkenwell-Green to St. John's
Street, shall be paved according to the direction of this Act.

Militia.
I. Stat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 2. c. 12. An Act for the raising the Militia of
this Kingdom for the Year 1691. though the Months Pay formerly advanced be not
paid.

II. Stat. 3 and 4 W. and M. cap. 7. An Act for raising the Militia of this
Kingdom for the Year 1692. although the Months Pay formerly advanced be not
repaid.

III. Stat. 3 and 4 W. and M. cap. 6. If at any time before the 25th day of
March 1694. their Majesty's shall think it necessary for the safety of this
Kingdom, to draw out the Militia into actual Service, and the same be signified
to the Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants and Warden of the Cinque Ports, It shall
be lawful for them, notwithstanding that one or more Months Pay before that
time advanced, be not reimbursed, to draw out the Soldiers of the Militia into
actual Service, and to cause the Persons charged, to provide each their
Soldier with pay in Hand, not exceeding one Months Pay, as if all the Pay
before advanced and provided had been re-imbursed.

Oaths.
I. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 6. The Oath herein after mentioned, shall
be administered to King William and Queen Mary at the time of their Coronation,
viz.

The Archbishop or Bishop shall say; Will you solemnly promise and swear to
Govern the People of this Kingdom of England, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, according to the Statutes in Parliament agreed on, and the Laws and
Customs of the same?


The King and Queen shall say; I solemnly promise so to do.


Archbishop or Bishop. Will you to your Power cause Law and Justice in mercy to
be executed in all your Judgments?


King and Queen. I will.


Archbishop or Bishop. Will you to the utmost of your Power maintain the Laws
of God, the true Profession of the Gospel, and the Protestant reformed Religion
established by Law? And will you preserve unto the Bishops and Clergy of this
Realm, and to the Churches committed to their charge, all such Rights and
Privileges as by Law do or shall appertain unto them, or any of them?


King and Queen. All this I promise to do.


After this the King and Queen laying his and her Hand upon the Holy Gospels,
shall say:

King and Queen. The Things which I have here before promised, I will perform
and keep.

So help me God.


Then the King and Queen shall kiss the Book.

II. The said Oath shall be in like manner administered to every King or Queen,
who shall succeed.

III. Stat. Anno 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 8. Henceforth no Persons shall be
obliged to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, or either of them, by
force of the Acts of 1 Eliz. or 3 Jac. or any other Statute; and the said Oaths
are hereby abrogated.

II. The Oaths appointed by this present Act to be taken, and the Declaration
appointed by this Act to be made, etc. shall be taken, made, repeated and
subscribed by such as were required by any Act to take the said abrogated Oaths
or either of them before such Persons as hereafter is expressed, viz.
Archbishops and Bishops, and all above the Degree of a Baron of Parliament, in
the Court of Chancery or Kings Bench between the hours of 9 and 12 in the
Forenoon before the end of Trin. Term next, or at the General Quarter Sessions
for that County or Place where they shall be or reside, between the said hours,
before the first day of August next.

IV. Other such Persons shall take the said Oaths and make and subscribe the
said Declaration before such Persons as by any Act were authorized to tender
the said abrogated Oaths.

V. All Persons (other than such, concerning whom other provision shall be made
in this Act or Session of Parliament) that shall be admitted into any Office or
Employment Ecclesiastical or Civil, or come into any capacity, by reason
whereof they should have been obliged to take the said abrogated Oaths, or
either of them, shall take the Oaths hereby appointed in such manner as they
ought to have taken the former Oaths, and under the same Penalties,
Forfeitures, Disabilities and incapacities.

VI. If any Person now having any such Office or Employment, neglect or refuse
to take the said Oaths before the first day of August next, or sooner, if
required by order of Council, such Office and Employment shall be void.

VII. Archbishops or Bishops and other Persons now having any Ecclesiastical
Dignity, Benefice, etc. neglecting or refusing to take the said Oaths before
the first day of August next, shall be suspended for six months from the said
first of August; and if they shall not within the said space of six months take
the said Oaths, they shall be ipso facto deprived, and are hereby adjudged to
be deprived.

VIII. Governors, Heads or Fellows of Colleges or Halls in either University,
or of any other College, Masters of Hospitals or Schools, Professors of
Divinity, Law, Physic or other Science in either University, or in London,
neglecting or refusing as aforesaid before the first day of August next, shall
be suspended six months, to be accounted as aforesaid; and if they shall not
within the said space of six months take the said Oaths, their Offices,
Employments, Masterships, Governments, Fellowships and Professorships shall be
void.

IX. Other Persons refusing to take the said Oaths, being lawfully tendered,
shall be committed by the Persons tendering the same, to the Common Gaol or
House of Correction for three months without Bail or Mainprize, unless such
Offenders shall pay down 40 s. or such lesser Sum as the Persons tendering the
said Oaths shall require, which Money shall go to the relief of the Poor of the
Parish or Place where such Offender did last reside; and if at the end of three
months such Persons shall again refuse, etc. they shall be committed as
aforesaid, for six months, unless they shall pay down such Sum of Money as the
Persons tendering the said Oaths shall require, not exceeding 10 l. nor under 5
l. (the said Money to be disposed as aforesaid) and unless such Offenders shall
become bound with two Sureties to be of the Good Behavior, and appear at the
next Assizes or General Gaoldelivery for the place where they shall reside; at
which Assizes or Jail-deliver the said Oath shall be again tendered in open
Court; and upon refusal the Persons refusing shall be adjudged incapable of any
Office Civil or Military, and be bound to their Good Behavior, till they take
the said Oaths; and if such Persons shall refuse to make and subscribe the
Declaration mentioned in the Statute of the 30th Year of King Charles II.
Entitled, An Act for the more effectual preserving the Kings Person and
Government, etc. they shall be taken and deemed Popish Recusants convict, to
all intents and purposes.

X. Commission-Officers and Non-Commission or Warrant-Officers now employed by
Sea or Land, shall take the said Oaths and make and subscribe the last
mentioned Declaration before the Lord Admiral or Commissioners of the
Admiralty, or their Deputies, or such as their Majesty's shall appoint to
administer them: And all Persons hereafter to be put into any such Employment,
shall before the delivery of their Commission or Warrant, take the said Oaths,
and make and subscribe the said Declaration before the Lord Admiral or
Commissioners of the Admiralty, or their Deputies, or such as shall issue such
Commission or Warrant, or such as shall be authorized to administer the same as
aforesaid; and in case of refusal, shall be incapable of taking or executing
such Office or Employment.

XI. The Oath appointed by the Statute of 13 Car. 2. Entitled, An Act for the
ordering the Forces in the several Counties of this Kingdom; And so much of a
Declaration prescribed in another Act made in the same Year, Entitled, An Act
for the Uniformity of Public Prayers, etc. as is expressed in these Words, viz.

I A. B. declare, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take up
Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that traitorous Position of taking
Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those that are
commissioned by him;

Shall not from henceforth be required or enjoined.

XII. The Oaths required and intended by this Act, are in these Words
following, viz.

I A. B. do sincerely promise and swear, That I will be faithful and bear true
Allegiance to their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary.

So help me God, etc.

I A. B. do swear, That I do from my Heart abhor, detest and abjure, as impious
and heretical, that Damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes excommunicated
or deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome, may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects or any other whomsoever.

And I do declare, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate,
has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence or
Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm.

So help me God, etc.

XIII. The Names of Persons and Officers that shall take the said Oaths in the
Chancery, Kings Bench or Quarter Sessions, shall in the said respective Courts
be enrolled, with the day and time of their taking the same. The Rolls for the
Court of Chancery to be publicly hung up in the Petty-bag-Office; for the
Kings Bench, in the Crown Office, and in some public place in every
Quarter Sessions every Term, and every Quarter Sessions; No Fee or Reward above
12 d. to be given to any Officer belonging to any of the said Courts for such
Entries.

XIV. Whereas since the 11th day of December 1688. the said abrogated Oaths
could not be taken by Persons elected into Offices of Magistracy, Places of
Trust, etc. Be it enacted, That if any such Officer shall before the first of
August 1689. take the Oaths herein mentioned and required before such Persons
who ought to have administered the said Abrogated Oaths, the same shall be
adjudged as good and effectual as if he had taken the said Abrogated Oaths.

XV. And whereas since the Feast of St. Michael last past, diverse Persons have
been admitted into Offices, Employments, or Places of Trust, and could not take
the said Abrogated Oaths, and subscribe the Declaration at such time, and in
such manner as is appointed by the Act of 25 Car. 2. Entitled, An Act for
preventing of Dangers that may happen from Popish Recusants; Be it enacted,
That if any such Person shall before the end of Trinity-Term next in the
Chancery or Kings Bench, or before the first of August 1689. at the
Quarter Sessions, etc. take the Oaths hereby appointed to be taken, and repeat
and subscribe the said Declaration, and take the Sacrament according to the
usage of the Church of England, and procure Certificate thereof, as by the said
Act is directed, that such Person shall be indemnified from any Penalty or
Disability that he might have incurred by the said Act.

XVI. It shall be left to the King to allow to such of the Clergy as shall
refuse the Oaths prescribed by this Act, as he shall think fit, not exceeding
twelve, an allowance out of their Ecclesiastical Benefices, etc. for their
Subsistence, not exceeding a third part, to continue during the Kings Pleasure.

XVII. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 25. If any Commission for Military
Employment, shall be granted to any Person at more than twenty Miles distance
from London, such Persons may take the Oaths, and make and subscribe the
Declaration mentioned in an Act of this present Session of Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for the abrogating the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and
appointing other Oaths, at the next Muster after the receipt of the said
Commission, before the Commissary of the Musters or his Deputy, who shall send
up a Certificate thereof under his Hand and Seal, to the Person who issued such
Commission.

XVIII. If any Person receiving such Commission, shall refuse to take the said
Oaths, etc. he shall not be allowed upon the Musters, but his Commission shall
be void.

XIX. Nothing in this Act contained shall extend to the Militia.

Papists.
I. STat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 9. The Lord Mayor of London for the time
being, and every Justice of Peace of London, and for Westminster and Southwark,
and of the Counties of Middlesex, Surry, Kent and Sussex within their
respective Limits, shall cause to be brought before him every Person, not being
a Merchant Foreigner within the said Cities, or within ten miles of the same,
as are reputed to be Papists, and tender them the Declaration mentioned in the
Statute of 30 Car. 2. Entitled, An Act for the more effectual preserving the
Kings Person and Government, etc. And if any such Person, after refusal to make
and subscribe the same, shall continue to be within the said City or Cities, or
within ten miles distant from the same, he or she shall forfeit and suffer as a
Popish Recusant convict.

II. The Justices of Peace shall certify the Subscriptions taken before them
by virtue of this Act, and the Names of Refusers upon tender, under their Hands
and Seals, into the Court of Kings Bench the next Term, or else at the next
Quarter Sessions; and if Persons so refusing and certified, shall not within
the next Term or Sessions after such refusal, appear in the Court of Kings
Bench or Sessions, and in open Court make and subscribe the said Declaration,
and indorse his so doing upon the Certificate, they shall be adjudged from the
time of such their refusal, as Popish Recusants convict.

III. This Act shall not extend to such as use any Trade or Manuel Occupation;
nor to such as within six months before the 13th of Febr. 1688. had their
places of abode within the said Cities, or ten miles compass, not having any
place of abode elsewhere, so as before the said first day of August 1689. they
certify their Names, Additions and Places of Abode at the Sessions of the
Peace to be held for the said respective Cities, Counties or Places; the Clerk
of the Peace to take but 2 d. for the entry of such Name, Addition and Place of
Abode.

IV. Nothing in this Act shall have any effect upon such Foreigners, as are or
shall be menial Servants to Ambassadors or Public Agents.

V. Foreigners, Servants to the Queen Dowager, are likewise excepted, not
exceeding the number of thirty at any one time.

VI. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 15. It shall be lawful for any two or more
Justices of the Peace, who shall know or suspect any Person to be a Papist, or
shall be so informed, to tender to such Person the Declaration expressed in an
Act of Parliament made Anno 30 Car. 2. Entitled, An Act for the more effectual
preserving the Kings Person and Government, etc. And if such Person shall not
make and subscribe the said Declaration, or shall refuse to appear upon notice
left at his Place of Abode by any Person authorized in that behalf, by Warrant
under the Hands and Seals of the said two Justices, such Person shall be liable
to all the Penalties, Forfeitures and Disabilities herein after mentioned.

VII. The said Justices of the Peace shall certify the Name, Surname and usual
Place of Abode of Persons so refusing or neglecting, and of all who shall make
and subscribe the said Declaration, at the next General Quarter Sessions to be
holden for the Shire, Riding, etc. for which they shall be Justices, to be
there Recorded, etc.

VIII. No Papist or reputed Papist, so refusing or making default, shall keep
in his House or elsewhere at his disposition, any Arms, Weapons, Gunpowder or
Ammunition (other than such as shall be allowed him by order of a General
Quarter Sessions for the defense of his House and Person) and any two or more
Justices of the Peace may from time to time, by Warrant under their Hands and
Seals authorize Persons in the daytime, with the assistance of the Constable
or his Deputy, Tythingman or Headborough, to search for Arms, etc. in the
House, Custody or Possession of any such Papist or reputed Papist, and seize
the same for their Majesty's use, and shall at the next General
Quarter Sessions deliver them in open Court for the use aforesaid.

IX. Every Papist or reputed Papist, who shall not within ten days after such
refusal or making default as aforesaid, discover and deliver to some Justice of
the Peace all Arms, Weapons, Gunpowder or Ammunition whatsoever, which shall
have in his House, or elsewhere, or shall hinder any Persons authorized to
search as aforesaid, to search and seize the same, shall be committed to the
Common Gaol by Warrant of any two Justices of Peace, for three months without
Bail or Mainprize, and shall forfeit the said Arms and pay treble the value of
them to the Kings use, to be appraised by the Justices of Peace at their next
General Quarter Sessions.

X. Persons concealing or privy to the concealing of such Arms, or that shall
hinder any Persons authorized as aforesaid, in searching for and seizing the
same, shall be committed to the Common Gaol, by Warrant as aforesaid, for three
months without Bail or Mainprize, and shall forfeit the treble value of the
said Arms to their Majesty's, etc.

XI. If any Persons shall discover any concealed Arms, etc. belonging to any
refusing or making default, as aforesaid, so as the same may be seized, the
Justices of Peace upon delivery of the same at the General Quarter Sessions
shall allow as a Reward for such discovery the full value of the Arms, etc. so
discovered, the Sum to be by the said Justices of Peace at their Sessions, and
to be levied by distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, rendering the overplus
above the Sum assessed, and the Charges of the Distress to the Owner.

XII. Persons having refused or made default, as aforesaid, who shall afterward
in open Court at the General Quarter Sessions, where their refusing or making
default shall be certified, make and subscribe the said Declaration, and take
the Oaths contained in an Act made in this Parliament, Entitled, An Act for
removing and preventing all Questions and Disputes concerning the assembling
and sitting of this present Parliament, shall from thenceforth be discharged of
and from all Disabilities and Forfeitures, which for the future they might be
liable to for such refusal or default.

XIII. No Papist or reputed Papist so refusing or making default, shall after
the 15th of May, 1689. keep in his possession or to his use any Horse or Horses
above the value of 5 l. to be sold; and any two Justices of the Peace may from
time to time by Warrant as aforesaid, and with the assistance aforesaid,
authorize any Persons to search for and seize such Horses as aforesaid to their
Majesty's.

XIV. Persons concealing or aiding in the concealing any such Horses, shall be
committed by Warrant, as aforesaid, for three months without Bail or Mainprize,
and shall forfeit treble the value of such Horses, to be settled, as aforesaid.

XV. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 17. Whereas in an Act of this Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for the amoving Papists and reputed Papists from the Cities
of London and Westminster, etc. the County of Sussex is by mistake inserted for
the County of Essex, Be it enacted, That the Powers and Authorities by the said
Act given to the Justices of the Peace of the County of Sussex, be extended to
the County of Essex, and the Justices of Peace of the said County of Essex.

XVI. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 26. Persons refusing or neglecting to
repeat and subscribe the Declaration mentioned in one Act of this present
Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the better securing the Government by
disarming Papists and reputed Papists, when tendered by two or more Justices of
the Peace, or forbearing to appear before them upon notice given, as the said
Act directs, and shall thereupon have their Names and Places of Abode certified
and recorded at the General Quarter Sessions, as by the said Act is appointed,
shall be disabled to make any Presentation, Collation, Nomination or Donation,
or grant of any avoidance of any Benefice or Ecclesiastical Living, as if such
Person were a Popish Recusant convict; and the Chancellors and Scholars of the
two Universities respectively, shall have the Presentation, Nomination, etc. of
and to every such Benefice, etc. being within their respective Counties, Cities
and other the Places and Limits mentioned in the Act of the third of King James
I. Entitled, An Act to prevent and avoid Dangers which may grow by Popish
Recusants, as in and by the said Act is directed and appointed.

XVII. Persons seized or possessed of any Advowson, right of Presentation,
Collation, etc. to any such Ecclesiastical Living, Free School or Hospital, in
trust for any Papist or Popish Recusant convicted or disabled according to the
intent of the said Act of 1 Jac. 1. or of this Act, shall likewise be disabled
to present, nominate or collate to any such Ecclesiastical Living, etc. or to
grant any avoidance thereof; and the Chancellors and Scholars of the
Universities respectively, shall have such Presentations, etc. as they should
have in case such Recusant convict or disabled were seized or possessed
thereof; and if any Trustee, Mortgagee or Grantee of any avoidance, hereafter
present, etc. or cause to be presented, etc. any Person to any such Living,
Free School, etc. whereof the Trust shall be for a Recusant convict or
disabled, without giving notice in Writing to the Vice Chancellor of the
University, to whom such Presentation, etc. shall belong, according to the
intent of this Act, within three months after the avoidance, he shall forfeit
500 l. to the respective Chancellors and Scholars of either University, to be
recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, etc.

XVIII. Provided that the said Chancellor and Scholars shall not present or
nominate any person that shall then have any Benefice with cure of Souls; but
that such Presentation shall be void.

XIX. Provided that if any person so presented, etc. to any Benefice with cure,
shall be absent from the same above sixty days in one year, that such Benefices
shall be void.

XX. Provided nevertheless, That if any such person shall at the General
Quarter Sessions, where his Name is recorded, repeat and subscribe the said
Declaration, and take the Oaths contained in an Act of this Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for the abrogating the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance,
etc. he shall be discharged from the said Disability, and be enabled to make
such Presentation, etc. as if this Act had not been made.

Pardon.
I. Stat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 10. All Subjects of this Realm of England,
Wales, and the Town of Berwick, All Bodies Politic and Corporate, Cities,
Buroughs, Shires, Ridings, Hundreds, etc. shall be pardoned and discharged of
and from all Treasons, Felonies, Misprisions of Treason, Treasonable or
Seditious Words or Libels, Misprisions of Felony, seditious and unlawful
Meetings, Offenses of Praemunire, Ryots, Routs, Offenses, Contempts, Trespasses,
Entries, Wrongs, Deceits, Misdemeanors, Forfeitures, Penalties and Sums of
Money, pains of Death, pains Corporal and Pecuniary, and of and from all Things,
Causes, Quarrels, Suits, Judgments and Executions, not hereafter excepted,
which by their Majesty's in any wise can be pardoned before the 16th day of May
1690.

II. All their Majesty's Subjects and Bodies Corporate, may by themselves,
their Deputies or Attorneys, plead this for any thing hereby pardoned or
discharged without any Fee or other Thing, paying to any person for writing or
entry of the Judgments or other Cause concerning such Plea, Writing or Entry,
but only 16 d. to the Officer or Clerk that shall enter the same.

III. This Pardon to be expounded most beneficial and available to the Subject.

IV. If any Officer or Clerk of any of their Majesty's Courts shall after
Easter-Term next, make out any Process, whereby any of the Subjects or Bodies
Corporate aforesaid, may be inquieted for any thing hereby pardoned; or if any
Sheriff, Escheator or their under Officers levy or withold any thing
discharged by this Act, they shall pay to the party grieved treble Damages and
Costs of Suit; and forfeit to their Majesty's 10 l. for every such Offense, and
such Process to be void.

V. Except Treasons and other Offenses against the King and Queens persons or
either of them, and all Conspiracies and Confederacies against their Majesty's
most Royal Persons: And all Treasons committed in Ireland, or any Parts beyond
the Seas since the 13th day of Febr. 1688. And all Offenses in forging and
counterfeiting the Great or Privy Seal, Sign Manuel or Privy Signet, or of
Moneys; and all Offenses of unlawful diminishing Moneys; and all Misprisions
and Concealments of the Treasons above excepted, and abetting, aiding,
comforting and procuring the same.

VI. And except all Murders, Petit Treasons and wilful Poysonings, and the
Accessaries thereunto.

VII. And except Robberies and Pyracies upon the Seas, procuring and abetting
such Offenders, and receiving them or Goods taken by Pyracy.

VIII. And except all Burglaries and breaking into and stealing out of any
Dwelling-houses in the day, and Accessaries thereunto.

IX. And except Robberies of Churches, and Robberies committed on the Highway.

X. And except Buggery with Mankind or Beast, and Rapes of Women.

XI. And except the wilful taking away or marrying any Maid, Widow or Damsel
against her will, or the assent of her Parents or Guardians, and Accessaries
thereunto.

XII. And except all Offenses of Perjury and Subornation of Witnesses, and of
forging and counterfeiting Deeds, Writings or Records; or Examinations of
Witnesses, tending to bring any Persons in danger of Life, and all procuring or
counselling the same.

XIII. And except all Offenses committed in any Forest since the 13th day of
Febr. 1688.

XIV. And except Forfeitures now due, or which may be be due to their Majesty's
by reason of any Offense, etc. contrary to any Statute (other than using a
Trade without serving seven years) or contrary to the Common Law; and whereof
any Action, Bill, Plaint or Information within six days next before the day of
holding this present Parliament, viz. the 20th day of March 1689. has been
commenced in any of their Majesty's Courts at Westminster, and is there
depending; or whereupon any Verdict, Judgment or Decree is already given or
entered; or whereof their Majesty's have made any Assignment before the said 16
day of May.

XV. And except all Proceedings concerning Highways and Bridges, and Issues
returned upon any such Process since the 20th day of March. 1679.

XVI. And except all Offenses in imbezeling and purloining their Majesty's
Goods, Moneys, Chattels, Jewels, Armor, Munition, Stores, Naval Provisions,
Shipping, Ordinance and other Habiliments of War; and all Offenses in conveying
to the French King any Naval Stores or contraband Goods.

XVII. And except all Conditions and Covenants, and all Penalties, Titles, etc.
accrued to their Majesty's by the breach of them.

XVIII. And except all Offenses of Incest, Simony and Dilapidations, for which
any Suit is, or was depending the first day of this Parliament.

XIX. And except Adultery, and other Enormous Crimes by Persons in Holy Orders,
punishable in Ecclesiastical Courts.

XX. And except First Fruits and Tenths, Pensions, Procurations, Synodals and
other Payments out of any Ecclesiastical Benefice; other than Tenths due out of
small Livings not worth 30 l. a year improved value, and which shall be so
certified by the Bishop or Guardian of the Spiritualties before the last of
Michaelmas-Term; but this Act shall not discharge Bishops from answering any of
the said Arrears by them received.

XXI. And except the Moneys and Duties following, and Concealments thereof,
viz. of any Custom or Subsidy, Excise, Hearth-mony, Imposition upon Wine or
other Liquors, Duties arising by Wine-licences, or the Post Office, or any
other Duty due to their Majesty's by Act of Parliament, and Forfeitures for
non-payment thereof, and Misdemeanors in Ministers concerning the same.

XXII. And except all taking from their Majesty's, or the late King Charles II.
or King James II. Goods forfeited for Treason, Petit Treason, Murder or Felony;
or the Issues and Profits of Lands of Traitors or Felons attainted; or of the
Possessions of any Bishopric, the Temporalties whereof upon the 20th day of
March 1679. were or ought to have been in their Hands; and except all Arrears
of Rent due from any Farmer of any part of the Revenue, and of Fee-farms and
other Rents.

XXIII. And except the accounts of Collectors, Commissioners or Receivers of
any Subsidy, Custom, Tunnage and Poundage, additional Duty, Prize Goods, or
other things grown due since the 25th of March 1673. and of all other
Accountants to their Majesty's, in respect of any receipt or other charge grown
since the said 25th day of March, and all untrue Accounts made since then.

XXIV. And except Recognizances and other Securities given by any Accountant in
the Exchequer, and their Sureties; and all Recognizances and Conditions for the
payment of Money.

XXV. This Act shall not discharge any Recognizance, etc. not yet forfeited;
nor any forfeited Recognizanc, etc. whereof the Farmers of the Excise, or any
part of the Revenue, ought to receive benefit; nor any Debt due by
Recognizance, etc. to any Persons endebted to their Majesty's, which has been
seized in Aid; nor any Debt, whereupon any enstalment or seizure has been
made, upon which any thing is, or since the 25th of March has been answered
and paid; nor to discharge any Forfeitures or Sums of Money due to their
Majesty's by any Statute, which Forfeitures, etc. since the said 25th of March
are converted into the nature of a Debt; or have been installed or any seizure
made for them, upon which any thing has been paid since the said 25th of March.

XXVI. But all Recognizances, etc. forfeited since the said 25th of March for
non-payment in any Court or other place, or not keeping the Peace, or not being
of the Good Behavior, are discharged, except Recognizances granted to or in
trust for the Lord Almoner.

XXVII. And except all Issues, Fines and Amerciaments lost or assessed since
the said 25th day of March, being totted or received by any Officer before the
last day of this Session of Parliament; and all Issues, etc. lost or assess'd
since the said 25th day of March, affeered, taxed, estreated or entered
severally touching any one or more Persons, jointly or severally, above 6 l.
and except Issues, Fines, etc. set in any Court of Record at Westminster within
a year before the first day of this Parliament.

XXVIII. But all other Fines, as well pro lic. concord. as others, set or
entered before that time; and Issues and Amerciaments, as well real as others,
set or entered before the time aforesaid, and which do not exceed 6 l. whether
estreated or not estreated, whether turned into Debt or not, and not being
totted or received by any Officer before the first day of this Parliament,
shall be discharged; yet nevertheless the estreats of such Fines, etc. already
estreated out of the Exchequer, and remaining in the Sheriffs Hands, shall upon
the return of such Estreats be charged and delivered by Scrowes into the
Pipe-Office, as has been accustomed; and yet Sheriffs and other Accountants,
upon Petition to have allowance for such Fines, etc. as are pardoned, shall
have their Petition allowed without Fee.

XXIX. This Act shall not pardon any who by Name are excepted out of the Act of
Oblivion made 12 Car. 2. nor to those two Persons, who appeared in Vizors upon
the Scaffold, when King Charles I. was murdered.

XXX. Nor shall this Act restore any Ability to exercise Offices, or to serve
in Parliament, etc. to persons disabled by any other Laws.

XXXI. Nor shall this Act discharge any person, who if he after the first day
of September 1660. has exercised any Office, is by the said Act of 12 Car. 2.
to stand as if excepted out of the said Act by Name.

XXXII. And except all persons attainted by Act of Parliament, or otherwise,
for any Rebellion, levying of War, or any Conspiracy thereof, in any of their
Majesty's Dominions; and all persons attainted or outlawed for any other
Treason, Petit Treason, Murder, wilful Poisoning or Burglary.

XXXIII. And except all persons who by any former Act are by Name made liable
to any penalties whatsoever.

XXXIV. And except persons who after conviction or attainder for any Felony,
have desired to be transported.

XXXV. And except persons who being excepted out of the said general Act of 12
Car. 2. have had any pains or penalties imposed on them by any subsequent Act.

XXXVI. And except all penalties of 500 l. which shall by any Act of this
Session be inflicted for holding Offices contrary to an Act of Parliament made
in the 25th of King Charles II. Entitled, An Act for preventing Dangers which
may happen from Popish Recusants.

XXXVII. And except William Marquess of Powis, Theophilus Earl of Huntington,
Robert Earl of Sunderland, John Earl of Melfort, Roger Earl of Castlemain, the
Lord Thomas Howard, Nathaniel Lord Bishop of Durham, Thomas Lord Bishop of St.
David's, Henry Lord Dover, William Molineux, Sir Edward Hales, Sir Edward
Herbert, Sir Francis Wythens, Sir Richard Holloway, Sir Edward Lutwich, Sir
Richard Heath, Sir Thomas Jenner, Sir Roger l'Estrange, Sir Nicholas Butler,
Edward Petre, Thomas Tindesley, -- Townly, Rowland Tempest, Edward Morgan,
Obadiah Walker, Robert Brent, Richard Graham, Philip Burton, Robert Lundy,
Matthew Crone and George Lord Jefferies deceased.

XXXVIII. And also except all Offenses committed by Jesuits and Romish Priests,
contrary to the Statute made in the 27th year of Queen Elizabeth, Entitled, An
Act against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and other disobedient Persons; and
except all Convictions of Popish Recusants.

XXXIX. No Process of Outlawry at the Suit of any person Plaintiff shall by
virtue of this Act be stayed, unless the Defendant appear and put in Bail,
where the Law requires it, and take out a Seirs Fac Nor shall this Pardon
discharge any Outlawry after Judgment, till satisfaction or agreement with the
party.

XL. Persons hereby pardoned may plead the Ceneral Issue, and give this Act in
Evidence.

XLI. This Act shall be of as good force to pardon and discharge the Premises
against such as claim the same by any Grant from the Crown, as against their
Majesty's themselves.

XLII. Nothing in this Act shall discharge any person from abetting or
procuring the raising War or Rebellion against their Majesty's, or adhering to
their Enemies, since the 13th day of February 1688. unless such person shall
before the 20th day of July next, or sooner, if required, take this Oath in
such Court as shall have power to administer the same, viz. I A. B. do
sincerely promise and swear, That I will be faithful, and bear true Allegiance
to their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary.

So help me God.

Parliament.
I. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 1. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons convened at Westminster the 22th day of January 1688. and there sitting
on the 13th day of February following, are the two Houses of Parliament, to all
intents and purposes, notwithstanding the want of any Writs of Summons or other
defect of Form; and this Act and all other Acts to which the Royal Assent shall
be given before the next Prorogation, shall be adjudged to commence upon the
said 13th day of February.

II. The Act made in the 30th year of King Charles II. Entitled, An Act for
the more effectual preserving the Kings Person and Government, by disabling of
Papists from sitting in either House of Parliament, and all other Acts of
Parliament as to so much of them as concerns the taking the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, or either of them, by any Member of either House of Parliament,
with relation to their sitting and voting there, are hereby repealed.

III. And the taking the Oaths herein after mentioned, and the making and
subscribing the Declaration in the said Act of the 30th year of King Charles
II. mentioned, by the Members of each House, from and after the first day of
March next, shall be effectual, as if the said Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, had been taken, etc. And in all future Parliaments the Oaths herein
after mentioned, and the said Declaration shall be taken, made and subscribed
by every Member of either House, as the said Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
and the said Declaration by the said Act of the 30th year of King Charles II.
are appointed to be taken, to enable them to sit and vote in Parliament.

IV. The Oaths above appointed by this Act to be taken instead of the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, are these, viz.

I A. B. do sincerely promise and swear, That I will be faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary.

So help me God.

I A. B. do swear, That I do from my Heart abhor, detest and abjure as Impious
and Heretical, that damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes excommunicated
or deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome, may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do declare, That no
Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, has or ought to have any
Power, Jurisdiction, Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual within this Realm.

So help me God.

V. This present Parliament may be dissolved after the usual manner, as if
summoned by Writ.

VI. Stat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 7. Whereas the late Lord-Wardens of the
Cinque Ports have claimed a Power of nominating and recommending to each of the
said Cinque Ports, the two ancient Towns and their Members, one person whom
they ought to elect as a Member of Parliament; be it declared and enacted, That
all such Nominations and Recommendations were and are contrary to the Laws and
Constitutions of this Realm, and for the future shall be so deemed, and they
are hereby declared to be void.

Poor.
I. Stat. 3 and 4 W. and M. cap. 11. The Act made in the 13th and 14th years of
the late King Charles II. Entitled, An Act for the better Relief of the Poor
of this Kingdom, (except what relates to the Corporations therein mentioned)
which was revived and continued with Alterations by an Act made in the first
year of the late King James II. shall be in force from the first day of March
1691.

II. The forty days continuance of a person, intended by the said Acts to make
a Settlement, shall be accounted from the publication of a notice in writing,
which he or she shall deliver of the House of his or her Abode, and number of
his or her Family, to the Churchwarden or Overseer of the Poor, which shall be
read immediately after Divine Service, in the Church or Chapel of the Place on
the next Lords Day where there shall be Divine Service in the same; the
Churchwarden or Overseer to Register such notice in the Book kept for the Poors
Accounts.

III. No Soldier or other Person in their Majesty's Service, by delivery and
publication of notice as aforesaid, unless they be dismissed the Service.

IV. Churchwardens or Overseers refusing to read, or cause to be read such
notice, as aforesaid, (upon proof thereof by two Witnesses upon Oath before a
Justice of Peace) shall forfeit 40 s. to the use of the party grieved, to be
levied by distress and sale of Goods by Warrant of a Justice of Peace to the
Constable; and for want of a Distress, shall be committed to Gaol for a month;
and if any Churchwarden or Overseer shall neglect or refuse to Register such
notice, as aforesaid, they shall forfeit 40 s. to be levied as aforesaid; and
for want of a Distress, shall be committed as aforesaid.

V. If any person coming to inhabit in any Town or Parish, shall on his own
account execute any Public annual Office, or charge in the same during a year,
or pay his share toward the public Taxes or Levies of such Town, etc. he
shall be adjudged to have a legal Settlement without notice in Writing
delivered, etc.

VI. If any unmarried person not having Child or Children shall be lawfully
hired for a Year, such Service shall be deemed a good Settlement without
notice, etc.

VII. Being bound Apprentice and inhabiting in a Town or Parish, shall be
adjudged a good Settlement.

VIII. Persons agrieved by the determination of any Justices of the Peace, may
appeal to the next Quarter Sessions, who shall finally determine the same.

IX. If any person be removed by virtue of this Act from one place to another,
by Warrant of two Justices of Peace, the Churchwardens or Overseers of the
place to which he shall be removed, shall receive him, and in case of refusal
(upon proof by two Witnesses upon oath before a Justice of Peace of the County,
Riding, etc. to which he shall be removed) shall forfeit 5 l. to the use of the
Poor of the Parish from which he shall be removed, to be levied by distress and
sale of Goods, etc. by Warrant of a Justice of Peace of the County, etc. to
which he shall be removed, to the Constable of the place where such Offender
dwells; and for want of a Distress shall be committed to Gaol for forty days.

X. Persons agrieved by the Judgment of the said two Justices may appeal to the
next General Quarter Sessions of the place from which the said person was
removed.

XI. There shall be kept in every Parish, at the Parish Charge, a Book or
Books, wherein the Names of persons receiving Collections, shall be registered,
with the time when they were first admitted to have relief, and the occasion of
their necessity; and yearly in Easter-Week, or oftener, the Parishioners shall
meet and have such Books produced before them, and the persons receiving
Collections shall be called, and the reasons of their taking relief examined,
and a new List be made and entered of such as they shall think fit to allow to
receive collection; and no other shall be allowed to receive Collection, but by
Authority under the Hand of a Justice of Peace residing in the Parish, and if
there be none, in the Parts next adjoining, or by order of the Justices of
Peace in their Quarter Sessions, except in cases of Pestilential Diseases,
Plague or Smallpox, in respect of Familes infected only.

XII. In all Actions to be brought in the Courts at Westminster, or at the
Assizes, for Moneys misspent by the Churchwardens or Overseers, the Evidence
of the Parishioners (other than such as receive Alms) of the Parish where the
Defendants are Inhabitants, shall be taken and admitted.

Prisoners.
I. Stat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 15. All persons in prison upon the 28th day
of November 1690. for Debt or Damages, or upon any Action, or mean Process for
Debt, Account or Trespass upon the Case, or who may have Judgments entered upon
Record against them, or are charged in Execution, or imprisoned upon
Attachments for Debt, or upon Outlawries for Debt, or upon any Process in Law
or Equity, for Debt, Damages or Costs only, who shall take the Oath mentioned
in the Act of 22 and 23 Car. 2. Entitled, An Act for the Relief and Release of
poor distressed Prisoners for Debt, and the Oath in this Act following, shall
be released in manner and form as is mentioned in the said Act, and in one
other Act made in the 30th year of the said late King Charles II. Entitled, An
Act for the farther relief and discharge of Poor distressed Prisoners for Debt.

II. Justices of Peace, who pursuant to the said Acts, or to this present Act,
shall make any Order for the discharge of any poor Prisoner for Debt, shall
cause to come before them any Sheriff, Jailer or Keeper of Prison, where such
Prisoners are, and administer to them this Oath, viz. I A. B. do swear that J.
S. was really and truly my Prisoner, in my custody, without any fraud or deceit
in me, or by any other to my knowledge, at or upon the 28th day of November
1690.

So help me God.

III. If any Sheriff, Jailer, etc. refuse to appear and take the said Oath, he
shall forfeit to such Prisoner so about to be discharged, the value of the Debt
for which he is imprisoned, to be recovered by Action of Debt in any their
Majesty's Courts of Record; and if any such Sheriff, Jailer, etc. shall
forswear himself, he shall suffer as a person convicted of perjury.

IV. Prisoners taking the benefit of this Act, and taking the Oath in the first
recited Act mentioned, shall also before such Justice or Justices by whom such
Oath is to be given, take this Oath, viz. I A. B. do swear, That on the 28th
day of November 1690. I was actually a Prisoner in the custody of the Jailer or
Keeper of D. Prison in the County of C. at the Suit of J.S. without my consent
or procurement, or by any Fraud or Collusion; whatsoever.

So help me God.

V. Such Prisoners forswearing themselves, besides the penalties now in force
against persons convicted of Perjury, shall suffer seven years imprisonment.

VI. This Act shall not extend to persons in Execution for a Fine imposed for
any Offense.

VII. Taking the Oaths and giving the Creditors notice as by this Act is
required, in all other things for the discharge of any poor prisoner, it shall
be observed in form and method as is directed by the two before mentioned Acts.

VIII. None shall have the benefit of this Act, who shall stand charged with
more than 100 l. principal Money or Damages, or who shall stand charged with any
Debt to their Majesty's.

IX. Notwithstanding the discharge of such Prisoners, Judgments against them
shall be good in Law against their Lands and Goods; their wearing Apparel,
Bedding for them and their Familes, and Tools for their Trade, etc. only
excepted.

X. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 21. If any Defendants taken or charged in
custody upon any Writ or Writs, out of any of the Courts at Westminster, and
detained for want of Sureties for their appearance, the Plaintiffs may before
the end of the next Term after such Writ or Process shall be returnable,
declare against such Prisoners in the Court out of which the Writ shall issue,
and cause a Copy thereof to be delivered to such Prisoners, or the Jailer in
whose custody he shall remain; to which if the said Prisoners shall not appear
and plead, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment, as if they had appeared and
refused to answer or plead.

XI. In all Declarations against Prisoners detained by virtue of any Process
out of the Kings Bench, it shall be alleged in custody of what Sheriff,
Bailiff, etc. such Prisoners are at the time of such Declaration, which
allegation shall be as effectual as if such Prisoners were in the custody of
the Marshal or the Marshalsey, etc.

Prizes.
I. Stat. 3 and 4 W. and M. cap. 4. An Act for preserving two Ships lading of
Bay Salt taken as Prize for the benefit of their Majesty's Navy.

Religion.
I. SEat. Anno 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 18. Neither the Statute made in the
23th year of Queen Elizabeth, Entitled, An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's
Subjects in their due Obedience; nor that of the 29th of the said Queen,
Entitled, An Act for the more speedy and due execution of certain Branches of
the Statute made in the 23th year of the Queens Majesty's Reign; nor that
Clause of a Statute made in the first year of the said Queens Reign, Entitled,
An Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, etc. whereby all persons are
required to resort to their Parish Church or Chapel, or some usual place of
Common Prayer, etc. Nor the Statute made in the third year of the Reign of King
James I. Entitled, An Act for the better discovering and repressing Popish
Recusants; nor that other Statute made in the same year, Entitled, An Act to
prevent and avoid Dangers which may grow by Popish Recusants; nor any Statute
made against Papists or Popish Recusants, (except the Statute made 25 Car. 2.
Entitled, An Act for preventing Dangers which may happen from Popish
Recusants; and except the Statute made Anno 30 Car. 2. Entitled, An Act for
the more effectual preserving the Kings Person and Government, etc.) shall be
construed to extend to any persons dissenting from the Church of England, that
shall take the Oaths mentioned in a Statute made this Parliament, Entitled, An
Act for removing and preventing all Questions and Disputes concerning the
assembling and sitting of this Parliament, and shall make and subscribe the
Declaration mentioned in a Statute made in the 30th year of King Charles II.
Entitled, An Act to prevent Papists from sitting in either House of
Parliament, which Oaths and Declaration the Justices of Peace at their General
Quarter Sessions are hereby required to administer, and thereof to keep a
Register; no Fee or Reward to be paid above 6 d. for such Entry, and that but
once; nor above the farther Sum of 6 d. for a Certificate thereof.

II. Persons already convicted or prosecuted in order to Conviction of
Recusancy, that shall take the said Oaths mentioned in the said Statute made in
this Parliament, and make and subscribe the Declaration aforesaid, in the Court
of Exchequer, or Assizes, or General Quarter Sessions, etc. to be thence
certified into the Exchequer, shall be discharged from all Penalties, etc.
incurred by any the aforesaid Statutes.

III. All persons that shall take the said Oaths and make and subscribe the
said Declaration, shall not be liable to any penalties mentioned in an Act of
the 35th of Queen Elizabeth, Entitled, An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's
Subjects in their due Obedience; nor in an Act made in the 22th year of King
Charles II. Entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles;
nor shall be prosecuted in any Ecclesiastical Court for not conforming to the
Church of England.

IV. Provided always that if any Assembly of Persons dissenting from the Church
of England, shall be had in any place for Religious Worship, with the Doors
locked, barred or bolted, the persons that shall be at such Meetings shall
receive no benefit from this Law.

V. Nothing herein contained shall exempt any Persons from paying Tithes or
other Parochial Duties to the Church or Minister, nor from any prosecution in
any Ecclesiastical Court, or elsewhere, for the same.

VI. If any person dissenting from the Church of England, shall be chosen or
appointed to any Parochial or Ward-Office, and shall scruple to take it upon
him in regard of the said Oaths, or any other thing required by Law, such
person may execute his Office by a Deputy that shall comply with the Laws in
that behalf; such Deputy to be allowed and approved as such Officer himself
should have been.

VII. No person dissenting from the Church of England in Orders, or pretended
Orders, nor any Preacher or Teacher in any Congregation of Dissenting
Protestants, that shall make and subscribe the Declaration, and take the Oaths
aforesaid, at the General Quarter Sessions held for the Parts where he lives,
and shall declare his approbation of, and subscribe the Articles of Religion
mentioned in a Statute made in the 13th year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
except the 34th, 35th and 36th Articles, and these words of the 20th Article,
viz. [The Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in
Controversies of Faith, and yet] shall be liable to any of the Pains or
Penalties mentioned in an Act made in the 17th year of the Reign of King
Charles II. Entitled, An Act for restraining Non-conformists from inhabiting
in Corporations, nor the Penalties mentioned in the said Act of the 22th of the
said Kings Reign, for preaching at any Meeting for exercise of Religion; nor to
the penalty of 100 l. mentioned in an Act made in the 13th and 14th of King
Charles II. Entitled, An Act for the uniformity of Public Prayers and
administration of Sacraments, etc. for officiating in any Congregation allowed
by this Act.

VIII. The making and subscribing the said Declaration, and taking the said
Oaths, and making the Declaration of approbation and subscription to the said
Articles, shall be recorded at such Quarter Sessions, for which 6 d. shall be
paid and no more.

IX. Such persons shall not preach in any place, but with Doors not locked,
barred or bolted.

X. And whereas some dissenting Protestants scruple the Baptizing of Infants;
Be it enacted, That every person pretending to Holy Orders, who shall subscribe
the said Articles of Religion, except before excepted, and also except part of
27th ARticle touching Infant Baptism, and shall take the Oaths, and make and
subscribe the Declaration aforesaid, as aforesaid, shall enjoy all the
Privileges, Benefits and Advantages which any other dissenting Minister might
enjoy by virtue of this Act.

XI. Ministers, Preachers or Teachers of Congregations that shall take the
Oaths, and make and subscribe the Declaration aforesaid, and subscribe such of
the Articles of the Church as are hereby required, shall be exempt from serving
upon Juries, or from being chosen or appointed to any Parochial or Ward-Office,
or any other Office in any Hundred, Shire, City, Town, etc.

XII. Every Justice of Peace may require any person that goes to any Meeting
for exercise of Religion to make and subscribe the said Declaration, and take
the said Oaths or Declaration of Fidelity hereafter mentioned, in case such
person Scruple the taking an Oath, and upon refusal shall commit such person to
prison, and certify his Name at the next General or Quarter Sessions; and if
upon a second tender at next General or Quarter Sessions he refuse as
aforesaid, he shall be recorded and taken for a Popish Recusant convict.

XIII. And whereas there are other Dissenters who scruple the taking any Oath,
such persons shall make and subscribe the said Declaration, and this
Declaration of Fidelity, viz. I A. B. do sincerely promise and solemnly declare
before God and the World, That I will be ture and faithful to King William and
Queen Mary; And I do solemnly promise and declare, That I do from my Heart
abhor, detest and renounce as Impious and Heretical, that damnable Doctrine and
Position, That Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, or any Authority
of the Sea of Rome, may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other
what soever. And I do declare. That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State
or Potentate, has or ought to have any Power, Jurisdiction, Superiority,
Pre-eminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm, and
shall subscribe a profession of their Christian Belief in these Words, viz. I
A. B. profess Faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his eternal Son, the
true God, and in the Holy Spirit, one God blessed for evermore; and do
acknowledge the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, to be given by
Divine Inspiration, which Declarations and Subscriptions shall be recorded at
the General Quarter Sessions; and Persons making and subscribing the two
Declarations and Profession aforesaid, shall be exempted from the penalties of
the Laws against Popish Recusants or Protestant Non-conformists, and from the
penalties of an Act made in the 5th year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
Entitled, An Act for the assurance of the Queens Royal Power over all Estates
and Subjects within her Dominions, by reason of their refusing to take the Oath
mentioned in the said Act; and from the penalties of an Act made in the 13th
and 14th years of King Charles II. Entitutled, An Act for preventing Mischiefs
that may arise by certain Persons called Quakers, refusing to take lawful
Oaths; and enjoy the Benefits, Privileges and Advantages which other
Dissenters ought to enjoy by virtue of this Act.

XIV. Persons refusing to take the said Oaths, when tendered, shall not be
admitted to make and subscribe the said two Declarations, though required by a
Justice of Peace, at a General o^ Quarter Sessions, unless within 31 days after
such tender of the Declarations to them, they produce two Protestant Witnesses
to testify upon Oath that they believe him to be a Protestant Dissenter, or a
Certificate under the Hands of four Protestants, who are conformable to the
Church of England, or have taken the Oaths, and subscribed the Declaration
aforesaid, and a Certificate under the Hands and Seals of six or more of the
Congregation to which he belongs, owning him to be one of them.

XV. Till such Certificate or Witnesses be produced, the Justice of Peace shall
take a Recognizance with two Sureties, in 50 l. for producing the same; and for
want of security, shall commit him to prison, till he produces the same.

XVI. All the Laws made for frequenting Divine Service on the Lord's Day, shall
be still in force against all persons, except they come to some Assembly of
Religious Worship, allowed by this Act.

XVII. This Act shall give no ease to Papists or Popish Recusants, nor to any
that in preaching or writing shall deny the Trinity.

XVIII. If any persons after the 10th day of June come into any Church, Chapel
or Congregation permitted by this Act, and disturb the same, or misuse the
Teacher, upon proof thereof by two Witnesses before a Justice of Peace, they
shall find two Sureties to be bound by Recognizance in 50 l. and in default
thereof be committed to prison till the next Quarter Sessions; and upon
conviction of such Offense at the General or Quarter Sessions, shall forfeit 20
l.

XIX. No Assembly for Religious Worship shall be allowed by this Act, till the
place of meeting be certified to the Bishop of the Diocese, or the Archdeacon,
or to the Justices of Peace at the General or Quarter Sessions, and registered
or recorded there respectively, and a Certificate thereof given without Fee,
etc.

Revenue.
I. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 14. The Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage and
other Sums of Money payable upon Merchandise, and the several Impositions,
Duties and Charges upon Liquors, Manufactures and other Things; and all and
singular the Revenue and Revenues, except Hearth-mony, other than the Duties
thereby arising at or before the 25th of March 1689. granted and payable to the
two late Kings, or either of them, which remained and had continuance on the
5th day of November last, and all Arrears of the same, shall be answered and
paid to their Majesty's until the 25th day of December 1689.

II. All persons who have received or collected any part of the public Revenue
since the said 5th day of November are hereby indemnified against all persons,
of whom they received or collected the same; to be answerable nevertheless to
their Majesty's.

III. Seizures and Distresses made or to be made by any persons authorized, and
all Forfeitures and Penalties for any Offense against any Law, concerning the
Customs or Excise, or relating to the Transportation of Wool, or importation or
exportation of prohibited Goods, incurred since the 11th day of December, and
before the 13th of February 1688. shall be prosecuted as well by any Informer
for the King and Queen and himself, as by the Attorney General, in manner and
form as if such Seisures, Distresses and Offenses had been made and committed
after the said 13th day of Febr.

IV. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 28. Part of the Money accruing to their
Majesty's by one Act of Parliament, made in the first year of the Reign of the
late King James II. Entitled, An Act for granting to his Majesty an Imposition
upon all Tobacco and Sugar imported between the 24th day of June 1685. and the
24th day of June 1693. not exceeding in the whole 60000 l. shall be applied to
the payment of the Wages due to the Servants of the late King Charles II. which
were his Servants at the time of his decease, to be paid them within three
years from the 24th day of Dec. 1689. by three equal payments and in such
manner and proportion, and to such of them as his Majesty shall direct; and the
residue of the Money arising by the said Act, and the Money arising by two other
Acts of the said first year of the said late King James, the one entitled, An
Act for granting his Majesty an imposition upon all Wines and Vinegar imported
between the 24th day of June 1685. and the 24th of June 1693. and the other, An
Act for granting an aid to his Majesty by an imposition on all French Linnens,
and all East India Linen, and several other Manufactures of India, and on all
French wrought Silks and Stuffs, and on all other wrought Silks; and on all
Brandies imported after the first day of July 1685. and before the first day of
July 1690. and by one other Act of this Parliament, Entitled, An Act for an
additional Duty of Excise upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors, shall be applied
from the 29th of September 1689. during the continuance of the said Acts; in
the first place toward the payment of 600000 l. to the States of the United
Provinces for their assistance to his Majesty in coming into this Nation, in
such manner as his Majesty shall direct, and the residue toward the subduing
the Rebellion of Ireland, and other Charges of the War against France.

V. Accounts of the said Moneys to be kept apart from other Moneys payable to
their Majesty's, that such as the States of the United Provinces shall appoint,
and other persons concerned, may see how the said additional Duty and other
Impositions are from time to time paid into the Exchequer.

VI. No Money shall be paid to any of the late King Charles II's Servants, but
to such as before the first day of February next, shall have taken the Oaths,
and made and subscribed the Declaration mentioned in an Act of this present
Parliament, Entitled, An Act for abrogating the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, and appointing other Oaths, at the General Quarter Sessions of the
County or Place where they reside, and shall produce a Certificate thereof
attested by the Clerk of the Peace.

VII. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 3. An Act for preventing all Doubts and
Questions concerning the collecting the public Revenue. Exp.

Rights and Liberties.
I. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 2. Whereas the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons assembled at Westminster, lawfully, fully and freely
representing all the Estates of the People of this Realm, did upon the
thirteenth day of February in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred
eighty eight, present unto their Majesty's, then called and known by the Names
and Style of William and Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange, being present in
their proper Persons, a certain Declaration in Writing, made by the said Lords
and Commons in the Words following, viz.

Whereas the late King James II. by the assistance of diverse evil Counselors,
Judges and Ministers employed by him, did endeavor to subvert and extirpate
the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom;

By assuming and exercising a Power of dispensing with, and susspending of
Laws, and the Execution of Laws, without consent of Parliament.

By committing and prosecuting diverse worthy Prelates, for humbly petitioning
to be excused from concurring to the said assumed Power.

By issuing, and causing to be executed a Commission under the Great Seal, for
erecting a Court called, The Court of Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes.

By levying Money for and to the use of the Crown by pretense of Prerogative,
for other time, and in other manner than the same was granted by Parliament.

By raising and keeping a standing Army within this Kingdom in time of Peace,
without consent of Parliament, and quartering Soldiers contrary to Law.

By causing several good Subjects, being Protestants, to be disarmed at the
same time, when Papists were both armed and employed, contrary to Law.

By violating the freedom of Election of Members to serve in Parliament.

By prosecutions in the Court of Kings Bench, for Matters and Causes cognizable
only in Parliament; and by diverse other arbitrary and illegal Courses.

And whereas of late years partial, corrupt and unqualified Persons have been
returned and served on Juries in Trials, and particularly diverse Jurors in
Trials for High Treason, which were not Freeholders.

And excessive Bail has been required of Persons committed in criminal Cases,
to elude the benefit of the Laws made for the Liberty of the Subjects.

And excessive Fines have been imposed.

And illegal and cruel Punishments inflicted.

And several Grants and Promises made of Fines and Forfeitures before any
Conviction or Judgment against the Persons upon whom the same were to be
levied.

All which are utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws and Statutes,
and Freedom of this Realm.

And whereas the said late King James II. having abdicated the Government, and
the Throne being thereby vacant,

His Highness the Prince of Orange, (whom it has pleased Almighty God to make
the Glorious Instrument of delivering this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary
Power) did (by the Advice of the Lord Spiritual and Temporal, and diverse
Principal Persons of the Commons) cause Letters to be written to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, being Protestants; and other Letters to the several
Counties, Cities, Universities, Boroughs and Cinque Ports, for the choosing of
such Persons to represent them, as were of Right to be sent to Parliament, to
meet and sit at Westminster, upon the two and twentieth day of January, in this
year one thousand six hundred eighty and eight, in order to such an
establishment, as that their Religion, Laws and Liberties might not again be in
danger of being subverted; upon which Letters Elections having been accordingly
made,

And thereupon the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, pursuant to
their respective Letters and Elections, being now assembled in a full and free
representative of this Nation, taking into their most serious consideration the
best means for attaining the ends aforesaid, do in the first place (as their
Ancestors in like case have usually done) for the vindicating and asserting
their ancient Rights and Liberties, declare,

That the pretended Power of suspending of Laws, or the Execution of Laws by
Regal Authority, without consent of Parliament, is illegal.

That the pretended Power of dispensing with Laws, or the Execution of Laws by
Regal Authority, as it has been assumed and exercised of late, is illegal.

That the Commission for erecting the late Court of Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Causes, and all other Commissions and Courts of like nature, are
illegal and pernicious.

That levying Money for or to the use of the Crown, by pretense of Prerogative,
without grant of Parliament, for longer time, or in other manner, than the same
is or shall be granted, is illegal.

That it is the Right of the Subjects to petition to the King, and all
Commitments and Prosecutions for such petitioning are illegal.

That the raising or keeping a standing Army within the Kingdom in time of
Peace, unless it be with consent of Parliament, is against Law.

That the Subjects which are Protestants may have Arms for their Defense
suitable to their conditions, and as allowed by Law.

That Election of Members of Parliament ought to be free.

That the freedom of Speech, and Debates or Proceedings in Parliament, ought
not to be impeached or questioned in any Court or Place out of Parliament.

That excessive Bail ought not to be required, nor excessive Fines imposed, nor
cruel and unusal Punishments inflicted.

That Jurors ought to be duly impannelled and returned, and Jurors which pass
upon Men in Trials for High Treason ought to be Freeholders.

That all Grants and Promises of Fines and Forfeitures of particular Persons
before Conviction, are illegal and void.

And that for redress of all Grievances, and for the amending, strengthening
and preserving of the Laws, Parliaments ought to be held frequently.

And they do claim, demand and insist upon all and singular the Premises, as
their undoubted Rights and Liberties; And that no Declarations, Judgments,
Doings or Proceedings to the prejudice of the People in any of the said
Premises, ought in any wise to be drawn hereafter into Consequence or Example.

To which demand of their Rights, they are particularly encouraged by the
Declaration of his Highness the Prince of Orange, as being the only means for
obtaining a full redress and remedy therein.

Having therefore an entire Confidence, That his said Highness the Prince of
Orange will perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by him, and will still
preserve them from the Violation of their Rights, which they have here
asserted, and from all other Attempts upon their Religion, Rights and Liberties;

The said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons assembled at Westminster do
resolve,

That William and Mary Prince and Princess of Orange be and be declared King
and Queen of England, France and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, to hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and
Dominions, to them the said Prince and Princess, during their Lives, and the
Life of the Survivor of them; And that the sole and full Exercise of the Regal
Power be only in, and executed by the said Prince of Orange, in the Names of
the said Prince and Princess during their joint Lives; and after their
deceases, the said Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions
to be to the Heirs of the Body of the said Princess; And for default of such
Issue, to the Princess Anne of Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body; and for
default of such Issue to the Heirs of the Body of the said Prince of Orange.

And the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, do pray the said Prince and
Princess to accept the same accordingly.

And that the Oaths hereafter-mentioned be taken by all Persons of whom the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy might be required by Law instead of them; and
that the said Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy be abrogated.

I A. B. do sincerely promise and swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to their Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.

So help me God.

I A. B. do swear, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest and Abjure, as Impious
and Heretical this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes excommunicated
or deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome, may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do declare, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate,
has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence or
Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm.

So help me God.

Upon which their said Majesty's did accept the Crown and Royal Dignity of the
Kingdoms of England, France and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging,
according to the resolution and desire of the said Lords and Commons, contained
in the said Declaration.

And thereupon their Majesty's were pleased, That the said Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons, being the two Houses of Parliament, should continue to
sit, and with their Majesty's Royal Concurrence, make effectual Provision for
the Settlement of the Religion, Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, so that the
same for the future might not be in danger again of being subverted; to which
the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons did agree and proceed to act
accordingly.

Now in pursuance of the Premises, the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in Parliament assembled, for the ratifying, confirming and establishing
the said Declaration, and the Articles, Cla^ses, Matters and Things therein
contained, by the force of a Law made in due form by Authority of Parliament,
do pray that it may be declared and enacted, That all and singular the Rights
and Liberties asserted and claimed in the said Declaration, are the true,
ancient and indubitable Rights and Liberties of the People of this Kingdom, and
so shall be esteemed, allowed, adjudged, deemed and taken to be; and that all
and every the particulars aforesaid, shall be firmly and strictly holden and
observed, as they are expressed in the said Declaration; and all Officers and
Ministers whatsoever, shall serve their Majesty's and their Successors
according to the same in all Times to come.

And the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, seriously considering
how it has pleased Almighty God, in his mavelous Providence, and merciful
Goodness to this Nation, to provide and preserve their said Majesty's Royal
Persons most happily to Reign over us upon the Throne of their Ancestors, for
which they render unto him from the bottom of their Hearts their humblest
Thanks and Praises, do truly, firmly, assuredly, and in the sincerity of their
Hearts, think, and do hereby recognize, acknowledge and declare, That King
James II. having abdicated the Government, and their Majesty's having accepted
the Crown and Royal Dignity, as aforesaid, their said Majesty's did become,
were, are, and of Right ought to be, by the Laws of this Realm, our Sovereign
Liege Lord and Lady, King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging, in and to whose Princely Persons, the Royal
State, Crown and Dignity of the said Realms, with all Honors, Styles, Titles,
Regalities, Prerogatives, Powers, Jurisdictions and Authorities to the same
belonging and appertaining, are most fully, rightfully and entirely invested
and incorporated, united and annexed.

And for preventing all Questions and Divisions in this Realm, by reason of any
pretended Titles to the Crown, and for preserving a certainty in the Succession
thereof, in and upon which the Unity, Peace, Tranquillity and Safety of this
Nation does, under God, wholly consist and depend, The said Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons, do beseech their Majesty's, that it may be enacted,
established and declared, That the Crown and Regal Government of the said
Kingdoms and Dominions, with all and singular the Premises thereunto belonging
and appertaining, shall be and continue to their said Majesty's, and the
Survivor of them, during their Lives, and the Life of the Survivor of them; and
that the entire, perfect and full exercise of the Regal Power and Government,
be only in, and executed by his Majesty, in the Names of both their Majesty's
during their joint Lives; and after their deceases, the said Crown and
Premises, shall be and remain to the Heirs of the Body of her Majesty; and for
default of such Issue, to Her Royal Highness the Princess ANNE of Denmark, and
the Heirs of her Body; and for default of such Issue, to the Heirs of the Body
of his said Majesty; and thereunto the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons, do in the Name of all the People aforesaid, most humbly and faithfully
submit themselves, their Heirs and Posterities for ever; and do faithfully
promise, That they will stand to, maintain and defend their said Majesty's; and
also the Limitation and Succession of the Crown herein specified and contained,
to the utmost of their Powers, with their Lives and Estates against all Persons
whatsoever, that shall attempt any thing to the contrary.

And whereas it has been found by Experience, that it is inconsistent with the
safety and welfare of this Protestant Kingdom, to be governed by a Popish
Prince, or by any King or Queen marrying a Papist, the said Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons, do farther pray that it may be enacted, That all and
every Person and Persons that is, are or shall be reconciled to, or shall hold
Communion with the Sea or Church of Rome, or shall Profess the Popish Religion,
or shall Marry a Papist, shall be excluded, and be for ever incapable to
inherit, possess or enjoy the Crown and Government of this Realm, and Ireland,
and the Dominions thereunto belonging, or any part of the same, or to have, use
or exercise any Regal Power, Authority or Jurisdiction within the same; and in
all and every such Case or Cases, the People of these Realms shall be, and are
hereby absolved of their Allegiance; and the said Crown and Government shall
from time to time descend to, and be enjoyed by such Person or Persons, being
Protestants, as should have inherited and enjoyed the same, in case the said
Person or Persons so reconciled, holding Communion, or Professing or Marrying,
as aforesaid, were naturally dead.

And that every King and Queen of this Realm, who at any time hereafter shall
come to and succeed in the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom, shall on the first
day of the meeting of the first Parliament, next after His or Her coming to the
Crown, sitting in His or Her Throne, in the House of Peers, in the presence of
the Lords and Commons therein assembled, or at His or Her Coronation, before
such Person or Persons who shall administer the Coronation Oath to Him or Her,
at the time of His or Her taking the said Oath, (which shall first happen)
make, subscribe and audibly repeat the Declaration mentioned in the Statute
made in the thirteenth year of the Reign of King Charles II. Entitled, An Act
for the more effectual preserving the Kings Person and Government, by disabling
Papists from sitting in either House of Parliament.

But if it shall happen that if such King or Queen upon His or Her Succession
to the Crown of this Realm, shall be under the Age of twelve years, then every
such King or Queen shall make, subscribe and audibly repeat the said
Declaration at His or Her Coronation, or the first day of the meeting of the
first Parliament, as aforesaid, which shall first happen after such King or
Queen shall have attained the said age of twelve years.

All which their Majesty's are contented and pleased, shall be declared,
enacted and established by Authority of this present Parliament, and shall
stand, remain, and be the Law of this Realm for ever; and the same are by their
said Majesty's, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, declared, enacted and established accordingly.

And be it farther declared and enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from
and after this present Session of Parliament, no dispensation by Non obstante
of or to any Statute, or any part thereof, shall be allowed, but that the same
shall be held void and of no effect, except a Dispensation be allowed of in
such Statute; and except in such Cases as shall be specially provided for by
one or more Bill or Bills to be passed during this present Session of
Parliament.

Provided that no Charter or Grant, or Pardon granted before the three and
twentieth day of October, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred
eighty nine, shall be any ways impeached or invalidated by this Act, but that
the same shall be and remain of the same force and effect in Law, and no other
than as if this Act had never been made.

Silk.
I. STat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 9. The throwing of Silk is not a
Manufacture within the Intention of the Act of 12 Car. 2. for encouraging and
increasing of Shipping and Navigation. And no thrown Silk of the product of
Turkey, Persia, East India or China, or any other Place (except of the
production of Italy, Sicily or Naples, and imported in Vessels navigated as the
said Act directs, and brought from some Port of the Countries, of which they
are the production, and which shall come directly by Sea) shall after the 25th
of May 1690. be imported into England, Wales, Jersey or Guernesey or the Town
of Berwick, on pain to forfeit the same; one moiety to their Majesty's, and the
other to the Informer.

II. Yet this Act shall not extend to any thrown Silk of the production of
Italy, Sicily or Naples, that shall be imported otherwise than by this Act is
directed, before the first day of September 1690. and which shall be proved by
Oath of the Owner or his Agent, to have provided and bought by his Order from
England in some part of Italy, Sicily or Naples before the first day of June
1690. which Oath any two Commissioners of the Customs may administer.

III. And no thrown Silk laden in India, Persia or China, to be imported hither
on or before the 20th day of September 1690. shall be liable to any Forfeiture,
by virtue of this Act.

Symony.
I. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 16. After the Death of a Person
Symoniacally promoted to any Benefice or Ecclesiastical Living, the Offense or
Contract of Symony shall neither by way of Title in Pleading or in Evidence to
a Jury, or otherwise be alleged or pleaded to the prejudice of any Patron
innocent of Symony, or of his Clerk, upon pretense of Lapse, or otherwise,
unless the Person symoniacally promoted, or his Patron were convicted of such
Offense at the Common Law, or in some Ecclesiastical Court in the lifetime of
the Person symoniack.

II. No Leases really and bona fide made or to be made by any Person
symoniacally promoted, for good and valuable consideration to any Person not
being privy to, or having notice of such Symony, shall be impeached or avoided
by reason thereof.

Soldiers.
I. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 5. An Act for punishing Officers or
Soldiers, who shall mutiny or desert their Majesty's Service. Exp.

II. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 4. An Act for punishing Officers or
Soldiers, who shall mutiny or desert their Majesty's Service, and for
punishing false Musters. Exp.

III. Stat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 6. An Act for punishing Officers and
Soldiers, who shall mutiny or desert their Majesty's Service, and for
punishing false Musters. Exp.

IV. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 13. From and after the 10th day of March
1692. every Person being mustered in Pay, as an Officer or Soldier in the
Army, who shall before the first of March 1693. cause or join in any Mutiny or
Sedition in the Army, or desert the Service, shall suffer Death, or such other
punishment as a Court Martial shall inflict; or being a Soldier listed in any
Regiment, Troop or Company, shall list himself in any other Regiment, etc.
without a Discharge from his Officer, shall suffer Death, or such other
Punishment as aforesaid.

V. Their Majesty's or the General of their Army, may grant Commissions to any
Lieutenant General or other Officers, not under the Degree of a Field-Officer
or Commander in Chief of a Garrison, to call and assemble Courts-Martial. No
Court Martial that shall have Power to inflict punishment as aforesaid, to
consist of fewer than thirteen, whereof none to be under the Degree of a
Commission Officer, and the President not to be under the Degree of a
Field-Officer, or the Commander in Chief of the Garrison, where the Offender
shall be tried.

VI. No Field-Officer shall be tried by any under the Degree of a Captain; And
such Courts-Martial shall have power to administer Oaths to Witnesses.

VII. Nothing in this Act shall exempt any Officer or Soldier from the
ordinary Process of Law; nor shall extend to concern any the Militia Forces of
this Kingdom.

VIII. This Act to be in force till the first of March 1693. and no longer.

IX. Every Officer present at Trials of Offenses that may be punished by Death,
shall take this Oath, viz. You shall well and truly try and determine,
according to your Evidence, the Matter now before you, between our Sovereign
Lord and Lady the King and Queens Majesty's, and the Prisoner to be tried. So
help you God. No sentence of Death shall be given unless nine of the thirteen
present concur. And if there be a greater number present, Judgment shall pass
by the Concurrence of the greater part so sworn, such greater part not being
less than nine. No Proceedings, Trial or Sentence of Death shall be had or
given, but between the hours of eight in the Morning, and one in the Afternoon.

X. If any shall make or procure to be made false Certificates to execute
Soldiers for absence from any Muster or other Service, they shall forfeit 50
l. and to be cashiered and disabled to hold any Military Employment.

XI. Officers making salse Musters, and Commissaries, Muster-Masters and other
Officers, allowing the Muster-Roll, wherein such false Muster is contained, or
a duplicate thereof, upon proof thereof by two Witnesses before a
Court Martial, shall be cashiered and disabled to hold any Civil or
Military-Office or Employment, and forfeit 100 l.

XII. Commissaries and Muster-Masters, upon any Muster to be made, shall by a
convenient time before, give notice to the Chief Magistrate of the place where
the Soldiers shall be quartered, who are required to be present at such
Musters, and assist in the discovery of any false Muster. Commissaries and
Muster-Masters neglecting to give such notice, or refusing the assistance of
such Chief Magistrate, shall forfeit 50 l. and be discharged from his Office;
and no Muster-Roll shall be allowed, not signed by such Chief Magistrate.

XIII. If any Person shall be falsely mustered, or offer himself so to be, upon
Oath thereof made before the next Justice of Peace by two Witnesses, or upon
Certificate under Hand of the Commissary of the Musters, or Chief Magistrate as
aforesaid, made to such Justice, shall be committed to the House of Correction
for ten days, and have his Ear cut off by the Jailer or Keeper thereof. If any
Person lend a Horse to be mustered, not belonging to the Troop, such Horse
shall be forfeited to the Informer, if it belong to the Person lending; if not,
the Lender shall forfeit 20 l. upon Oath made by two Witnesses before the next
Justice of Peace.

XIV. The said Forfeiture to be to the Informer, to be paid out of the Arrears
of such Officers Pay as shall so offend, upon Conviction before a
Court Martial, by Order of the said Court to the Play Master, if such Officer
have any Arrears; and if there be no Arrear, the Court Martial shall give order
to seize such Officers Goods and sell them, rendering the overplus; and if he
have no Goods, he shall be sent to the Common Gaol, to remain there six months;
and the Court Martial shall discharge such Informer, if he be a Soldier, from
any farther Service, if he demand it.

XV. If any Play Master, Clerk or Agent of a Regiment, Troop or Company, shall
for a month detain the Pay of any Officer or Soldier (Clothes and other
Allowances deducted) or if any Officers shall refuse to pay each Common
Soldier their respective Pay, when due, if themselves have received it, at the
rate of 17 s. 6 d. a Week for a Corporal or light Horse, 14 s. a Week for a
Trumpeter and private Trooper, 8 s. 2 d. a Week for a Dragoon, 7 s. a Week to a
Sergeant, 5 s. a Week to each Corporal and Drummer, and 4 s. a Week to each
private Soldier of the two Regiments of Foot-guards, and 6 s. a Week to each
Sergeant, 4 s. 6 d. a Week to each Corporal and Drummer, and 3 s. a Week for
each Foot Soldier in the Army; and over and above the said 3 s. a Week, shall
at every two Months end account for 6 d. a Week to each Foot-Souldier, upon
proof thereof before a Court Martial, as aforesaid, such Play Master, etc. shall
be discharged from his Employment, and forfeit 100 l. to the Informer, to be
raised, as aforesaid, and be disabled to hold any Civil or Military Office or
Employment; and the Informer, if a Soldier, shall be discharged of any farther
Service, if he demand it.

XVI. The commanding Officer of every Troop or Company at Musters, shall bring
a Certificate of the Names of such as are sick, or have leave to be absent, of
such as are dead or deserted since the last Muster; and if such Certificate
prove false, the Officer signing it, shall suffer the Penalties hereby
inflicted for making false Musters.

XVII. If any Officer shall Muster any Officers Servant, or any Person by a
wrong Name knowingly, upon conviction thereof before a Court Martial, he shall
suffer the Penalties hereby inflicted for making false Musters.

XVIII. During the continuance of this Act, Constables, Tythingmen,
Headboroughs and other Chief Magistrates of Cities, Towns and Villages, may
Quarter and Billet Officers and Soldiers in Inns, Livery-Stables, Alehouses,
Victualling-houses, Houses selling Brandy, Strong Water, Sider or Metheglin by
retail to be drunk in their Houses, but in no private Houses. Nor shall more
Billets be ordered than there are effective Soldiers present to be quartered.
If any Magistrate shall Billet any Officer or Soldier in any private House,
without consent of the Occupier, such Occupier shall have his Remedy at Law to
recover his Damage sustained thereby. And if any Military Officer shall take
upon him to quarter Soldiers otherwise than is hereby allowed, or shall use
Menace or Compulsion upon any Civil Officers afore-mentioned, to deter them
from performing their Duty herein, upon conviction by the Oaths of two
Witnesses before two or more Justices of Peace, and the said Justices
Certificate thereof to the Judge Advocate, who is hereby obliged to certify
the same to the next Court-Marshal, such Officer shall be taken to the ipso
facto cashiered, and disabled to hold any Military Employment.

XIX. Officers and Soldiers so billetted, shall pay such reasonable prices as
shall be appointed by the Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions; and the
Justices of Peace are required to set Rates for Provisions for one or more
Nights in their marching, and for the first Night only in Places appointed for
their Residence.

XX. Officers taking Money for excusing quartering, shall be cashiered and made
incapable of any Military Employment.

XXI. From and after the 10th of March 1692. no Play Master or other Officer
shall receive any Fees or make any Deductions out of the Pay of any Officer or
Soldier, which shall grow due after the said 10th day of March, other than the
usual Deductions for Clothing, and the 12 d. in the pound to be disposed as
their Majesty's think fit, and one days Pay in the Year for the use of
Chelsey-Colledge.

XXII. This Act shall be read at the Head of every Regiment, Troop or Company
at every Muster, that no Soldier may pretend Ignorance.

XXIII. Officers receiving Pay or Subsistence-Mony for Regiments, Troops or
Companies, shall upon the receipt of every Sum, give notice to all Innkeepers
and other Persons where Officers and Soldiers are quartered, and appoint them
to repair to their Quarters at such times as they shall appoint for
distribution thereof, which shall be within four days after they have received
it, and such Innkeepers and other Persons shall be paid off what Debts are
owing to them before any part of the said Pay or Subsistence be distributed to
the Officers or Soldiers.

XXIV. Provided such Debts exceed not for a Commission Officer of Horse under
the Degree of a Captain, for Diet and small Beer, Hay and Straw, per diem 2 s.
and for such a Commission Officer of Dragoons, 1 s. and 6 d. nor for such a
Commission Officer of Foot, 1 s. and if such Officers shall have a Horse or
Horses, for each Horse 6 d. per diem, nor for one Light-horse-mans Diet and
small Beer, and Hay and Straw per diem, 1 s. nor for one Dragoon 9 d. nor for a
Foot Soldiers Diet and small Beer 4 d. and if any Officer shall not give
notice as aforesaid, and upon producing such Accounts, pay the same; upon Oath
made thereof by two Witnesses at the next Quarter Sessions, the Pay-masters of
their Majesty's Forces are hereby required, upon Certificate of the said
Justices of the Sums due upon such Accounts, and the Persons to whom owing, to
satisfy them out of the Arrears due to such Officer, on pain to lose their
Places, and to be disabled to hold them for the future. And if there be no
Arrear, the Pay-masters shall deduct what they shall pay pursuant to such
Certificate, out of the next Pay or Subsistence-Mony of the Regiment to which
such Officer belongs; and such Officer shall be ipso facto cashiered; and when
the Subsistence due to any Officer or Soldier shall by any accident not be
paid, or such Officer or Soldier shall neglect to pay the same, so the
Quarters cannot be paid, as this Act directs; and where any Soldiers shall be
upon their March, so as no Subsistence can be remitted them, every such Officer
before departure out of his Quarters, where such Regiment, etc. shall remain
for any time whatsoever, shall make up the Account as this Act directs, with
those with whom they have quartered, before he leave that Quarter, and give the
said Certificate to the Person to whom such Money is due, with the Name of such
Regiment, etc. to be transmitted to the Play Master, who shall make payment
thereof, to the end the same may be applied to such Regiment, etc. under pain
as is before directed for non-payment of Quarters.

XXV. No Commistary shall muster any Forces within westminster or Southwark,
and Liberties thereof, but in the presence of two Justices of Peace, not being
Officers in the Army, under the aforementioned penalty.

XXVI. This Act shall extend to Jersey and Gernesey as to mustering and paying.

XXVII. Clothes, Arms and Accoutrements of War belonging to Horse, Foot and
Dragoons, who receive English pay, shall be bought in England, Wales or
Barwick; and Officers offending therein shall be cashiered.

XXVIII. The Commissary General of the Musters, or his Deputies, shall upon
every Muster close the Muster-Rolls upon the place the same the Muster is
taken, and return one of the Rolls in Parchment to the Play Master General the
next day after, if in London or within twenty miles distance; and if at a
farther distance, by the next Post, on pain of losing their Employments.

XXIX. Justices of Peace required by Order of his or her Majesty, shown to them
by any Officer of the Regiment, etc. then marching, shall issue out their
Warrants to the Constables, etc. to make such provision of Carriages as is
mentioned in the Warrant, allowing sufficient time, that the Neighboring Parts
may not always bear the Burden; and the Officer demanding such Carriages,
shall pay to the Constable, to whom the Warrant is directed 8 d. for every mile
any Wagon with 5 Horses shall travel laden; and 8 d. for every mile any
Wagon with 6 Oxen, or 4 Oxen and 2 Horses shall trevel laden; and 6 d. a Mile
for a Cart with 4 Horses, and so in proportion; and if any Officer shall
constrain any Carriage to travel more than one days Journey, or not discharge
them in due time for their return, or shall suffer his Soldiers or Servants
(except sick and wounded) or any Women to ride in such Carriage, or shall force
any Constables, etc. by Threats to provide Saddle-horses, or shall force Horses
from the Owners, he shall forfeit 5 l. for every such Offense, proof thereof
being made upon Oath before two Justices of Peace, who are to certify the same
to the Paymaster General, who shall pay the said Sum of 5 l. according to the
appointment of such Justices, and deduct it out of such Officers Pay.

XXX. If any Officer, Military or Civil, hereby authorized to quarter
Soldiers, shall quarter the Wives, Children or Maidservants of Officers or
Soldiers in any House, against the Owners consent, the Offender, if any
Officer or Soldier of the Army, shall upon proof thereof made to the Commander
in Chief of the Army, or the Judge Advocate, be cashiered; if a Civil Officer,
he shall forfeit 20 s. to the Party grieved, upon proof made to the next.
Justice of Peace, to be levied by distress and sale of Goods, rendering the
overplus.

XXXI. If any Officer or Soldier shall without leave of the Lord of the Manor
under Hand and Seal, take or destroy any Game, and shall be convicted thereof
upon Oath before a Justice of Peace, he shall forfeit, if an Officer, 5 l. to
be distributed among the Poor of the Parish; and every Officer commanding in
Chief, shall forfeit for every such Offense committed by any Soldier under his
Command, 10 s. to be distributed as aforesaid; and for default of payment
within two days after Conviction, and Demand thereof made by the Constable or
Overseer of the Poor, the Officer so refusing or neglecting is hereby declared
to have forfeited his Commission; and his Commission is hereby made null and
void.

XXXII. An account of all Moneys due according to the Muster-Rolls to every
Regiment, shall be made upon the first day of July 1693. or six days after,
between the Play Master General and the Colonel of every Regiment, or his Agent,
authorized to receive the Pay thereof from the first of March 1692. to the last
of April 1693. and so from time to time, when four Months become due, an
Account shall be stated for the two preceding Months; such Accounts being
perfected, to be registered in the Pay-Office, and subscribed by the Play Master
or his Deputy, and the Colonel or his Agent, and Duplicates given to the
Colonel, etc. without Fee, who shall deliver to each Captain an account of so
much as appertains to him and his Troop, etc. and the Balance which shall
remain, and all other Moneys then due to each Regiment, shall be paid to such
Colonel, etc. when their Majesty's shall direct. The Play Master General or any
Colonel offending herein, shall forfeit 100 l. for every Offense to him that
will sue for the same; and his Deputy or any Agent of a Regiment, offending in
the Premises, upon proof thereof at a Court Martial, shall lose his Place.

XXXIII. No Warrant to take off the respits from any Muster-Rolls shall be
allowed by any Play Master, unless countersigned by the Commissioners of the
Treasury, or the Lord High Treasurer.

Suits.
I. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 8. Whereas about the time of his Majesty's
enterprise for delivering this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary Power, and in
Aid of the same, diverse Lords, Gentlemen and others did act as Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, or other Officers, though not
sufficiently authorized thereunto, and did apprehend and put in custody some
suspected Persons, and seize and use Horses, Arms and other Things, and entered
into the Houses and Possessions of several Persons, and quartered Soldiers
there; and since their Majesty's happy Accession to the Crown, by reason of the
Wars and Tumults occasioned by their Enemies, diverse like Matters and Things
have been done, all which were necessary in regard of the exigency of public
Affairs; Be it enacted, That all Prosecutions whatsoever, and Judgments had
thereupon, if any be, for any of the Premises, or any Matter or Thing advised,
commanded, appointed or done in order to the bringing their Majesty's to this
Kingdom, or for their Service, or for the Safety of the Government, are hereby
discharged and made void; and if any such Prosecution shall be, the Party
prosecuted may plead the General Issue, and give this Act and the Special
Matter in Evidence; and if the Plaintiff become nonsuit, or sorbear
Prosecution, or suffer a Discontinuance, or if a Verdict pass against him, the
Defendant shall recover his double Costs.

II. Stat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 13. All personal Actions, Suits,
Indictments, Informations, and other Prosecutions for apprehending and
imprisoning suspected Persons, and seizing and using Horses and Arms, and
causing the greatest part of the Militia of this Kingdom to be raised and
maintained otherwise than is authorized by the Acts made in the Reign of the
late King Charles II. and to march and be quartered in diverse places for their
Majesty's Service and the Safety of the Kingdom, in pursuance of Orders from
the Privy Council, in this present year 1690. about the time that the Coasts of
this Kingdom were invaded by the French, be and are hereby discharged and made
void; and if any Suit has been or shall be prosecuted, the Defendant may plead
the General Issue, and give this Act and the Special Matter in Evidence; and if
the Plaintiff become nonsuit, or forbear Prosecution, or suffer a
Discontinuance, or a Verdict pass against him, the Defendant shall recover his
double Costs.

III. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 19. Whereas in this present year 1692. there
were great Preparations for an Invasion intended from France, the Lords of the
Council, and others by their Authority having imprisoned several suspected
Persons, and seized Horses and Arms, and caused some part of the Militia to be
raised, continued and maintained, otherwise than is authorized by the Acts made
in the Reign of King Charles II. and to march and be quartered in diverse
places, that the Parties concerned in those Proceedings in that extraodinary
juncture, may be indemnified; Be it enacted, That all Prosecutions whatsoever
by reason of the Premises, be discharged and made void; And if any Action or
Suit has been or shall be commenced or prosecuted for the same, the Person so
sued may plead the General Issue, and give this Act and the Special Matter in
Evidence; and if the Plaintiff shall be nonsuit, or forbear Prosecution, or
suffer a Discontinuance, or that a Verdict pass against him, the Defendant
shall recover his double Costs.

Taxes.
I. STat. 1. W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 3. An Act for granting a present Aid to
their Majesty's. Exp.

II. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 13. An Act for raising Money by a Poll, and
otherwise, toward the reducing of Ireland.

III. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 20. An Act for a Grant to their Majesty's
of an Aid of 12 d. in the pound for one year for the necessary defense of their
Realms.

IV. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 31. An additional Act for the appointing
Commissioners for the executing an Act of this present Parliament, Entitled,
An Act for a Grant to their Majesty's, of an Aid of twelve pence in the pound,
for one year, for the necessary defense of their Realms.

V. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 1. An Act for granting to their Majesty's
an Aid of one shilling in the pound for one year.

VI. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 5. An Act for a Grant to their Majesty's
of an additional Aid of twelve pence in the pound for one year.

VII. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 7. An Act for review of the late Poll
granted to their Majesty's, and for an additional Poll toward the reducing of
Ireland.

VIII. Stat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 2. An Act for raising Money by a Poll,
and otherwise, toward the reducing of Ireland, and prosecuting the War against
France.

IX. Stat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 1. A^ Act for granting an Aid to their
Majesty's of the Sum of 1651702 l. 18 s. Exp.

X. Stat. 3 and 4 W. and M. cap. 5. An Act for granting an Aid to their
Majesty's of the Sum of sixteen hundred fifty one thousand seven hundred and
two pounds eighteen shillings, toward the carrying on a vigorous War against
France.

XI. Stat. 3 and 4 W. and M. cap. 6. An Act for raising Money by a Poll payable
quarterly for one year, for the carrying on a vigorous War against France.

XII. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 1. An Act for granting to their Majesty's an
Aid of four shillings in the pound for one year, for carrying on a vigorous War
against France.

XIII. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 14. All Persons who were not at all, or not
fully and duly assessed according to the intent of an Act made the last Session
of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act for raising Money by a Poll, etc.
shall be assessed and taxed, as they ought to have been by the same.

XIV. In order whereunto such as are or shall be qualified to act as
Commissioners for putting in execution an Act of this Session of Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for granting to their Majesty's an Aid of 4 s. in the pound,
etc. shall be Commissioners for executing this Act, within their several
Divisions, and shall have and execute the like Powers, Rules and Directions, as
the Commissioners had or ought to have executed by virtue of the said Poll-Act;
And all Persons concerned in the assessing, collecting, receiving or paying any
Moneys by virtue of this Act, shall have the like Benesits, and be subject to
the like Penalties, in case of neglect or resusal, to pay the Sums assessed, or
to perform their Duties as in such case any Person by virtue of the said
Poll-Act, ought to have or be subject to.

XV. Deputy Lieutenants and other Officers of the Militia, having Estates of
such value as ought to find or contribute to a Horse, shall pay for such
Estates, although they be not actually charged to find or contri^ute to find a
Horse, etc. And all who at the time of the Execution of the said Poll-Act were
or had been Justices of Peace, Sheriffs or Deputy Lieutenants, or who were
appointed Commissioners by virtue of the said Act, being worth 300 l. and were
not assessed 20 s. quarterly, shall pay after that rate, or so much as with
what they have paid will make up 20 s. quarterly. In like manner Clergymen
having in Estate Ecclesiastical or Temporal or both 60 l. per annum shall pay
after the same rate; and in all other things the said Act shall be fully
executed.

XVI. The respective Commissioners shall meet on the 4th of April 1693. and the
said Sums shall be assessed and paid to the Receivers of the Counties on or
before the 24th day of June 1693. and answered into their Majesty's Exchequer
on or before the 12th day of July 1693.

XVII. If upon the return of the Duplicates it shall appear that the said Sums
of Money do not amount to 300000 l. their Majesty's may borrow by way of Loan
any Sum or Sums, which together with the amount of what shall be levied by
virtue of this Act, shall not exceed in the whole 300000 l. which Sum or Sums
shall be charged upon the credit of their Majesty's Exchequer in General, and
Tallies of Loan and Orders for repayment shall be levied, which Orders shall be
assignable.

XVIII. Every Sum and Sums so to be borrowed, with Interest not exceeding 8 l.
per Cent. to be paid every three months, shall be payable to the Lenders out of
any the next Aids or Supplies to be granted to their Majesty's in Parliament,
and shall be transferred thereunto as soon as such Aid shall be granted; and in
case no such Aid or Supply shall be granted before the second day of February
1693. then such Sum or Sums shall be paid to the Lenders out of any of their
Majesty's Treasure, not already appropriated by Act of Parliament.

XIX. Whoever shall refuse to take in payment cracked Money, being the current
Coin of this Kingdom, shall for every such Offense forfeit 5 l. and be liable
to such other Punishments, as by any Law may now be inflicted for such Offenses.

XX. Every Receiver-General appointed by the said Poll-Act, shall prepare a
Duplicate in Parchment of the whole Sum charged in any of the Parishes and
Places, whereof he is Receiver General, to be subscribed by two or more of the
Commissioners, and return it into the Exchequer before the last day of
Easter-Term next, with a Schedule containing the Names, Sirnames and Places of
Abode of every Person within their Collection, that has not paid; and every
Receiver General not making such returns, except the same have been returned
pursuant to the said Poll-Act, shall forfeit 50 l. and be incapable of any
Office or Place of Trust in their Majesty's Service.

XXI. No Fees shall be taken by any Officer of the Exchequer, or in any Office
wherein any Receiver General is concerned, in taking out his Commission,
passing his Accounts, taking out his Quietus for receiving or paying any Money
granted by this or any other Act of this Parliament, for Aids to their
Majesty's, but such ancient Fees as shall be allowed by the Barons of the
Quoif; and the said Barons shall deliver a Table of the Fees by them allowed,
to the Lords and Commons in Parliament at the next Session.

Trade and Commerce.
I. Stat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 34. From the 24th day of August 1689. No
Goods or Commodities of the Product or Manufacture of the Dominions of the
French King, or made of or mixed with any such Goods or Commodities, shall
during three years, or before the end of the first Session of Parliament after
such three years expired be imported into England, Ireland, Wales, Berwick, or
the Isles of Jersey, Guernsey, Alderney, Sark, or the Isle of Man; and all
Importations, vending or uttering of any French or other Commodities, contrary
to this Act, are hereby declared to be a common Nuisance; and the Commodities so
imported, may be seized by any Person and carried into their Majesty's
Warehouse of the Port or Place where they are seized, or to the Warehouse of
the next Port, Member or Creek to the place of Seizure; and Persons claiming
the same, shall tender good Security to answer the Penalties of this Act, and
to make their claim within twenty days after seizure, to the Collector or
Customer, or his Deputy where there is no other Collector established, or to
the Commissioners of the Custom in time of vacation, or within ten days in
Term-time, by delivery of a Bill to such Officer, subscribed with his Name,
Addition and Place of Abode, with the particulars of the Goods claimed, and the
date of the Claim, and the Names of his Sureties, they being worth 500 l.
a-piece at least, and to give Bond to their Majesty's in double the value of
the Goods, and the Penalties in this Act, to answer the value of the Goods and
other the said Penalties, and after such Security given, the Claim and Sureties
Names, and the Sum and date of the Bonds to be registered and subscribed by the
Claimer, Collector or Customer, to whom such Bill shall be delivered; and for
want of giving Security and making Claim, as aforesaid, the Goods shall be
adjudged to be imported contrary to this Act, and be forfeited, and within
seven days after such default, shall be destroyed, as hereafter is appointed;
but if such Security be given and Claim made, as aforesaid, an Information
shall the next Term or sooner be exhibited in the Exchequer; and no Writ of
Delivery or Restitution shall be granted till the Cause be determined by the
Verdict of a Jury, to be returned by the proper Officers in the presence of a
Commissioner of the Customs in London, and of the principal Officer in any
Outport, which Jury upon the taste or view of the Goods, o^ upon proof, shall
judge the quality and value thereof, and whether imported contrary to this Act,
and in what Vessels imported, and by whom imported or sold, and in whose
custody they were when seized; and if the Jury shall find that they were of the
Product or Manufacture of the French Kings Dominions, or mixed with any Goods of
such Product or Manufacture, then all such liquid Commodities shall be adjudged
to be staved and spilt, and other Commodities to be publicly burnt in the
presence of one of the Sheriffs of London, in the Port of London, and of the
chief Magistrate in any other Port, who are required to be present and
assisting in the destruction thereof, and to view, taste and examine them
according to the first Entry made in the Warehouse-Book, and to join with the
Collector, etc. who are also required to be present at the destruction thereof,
in a Certificate, to be entered in the said Book, of the day of the destruction
thereof; no Persons to take away or save any of the said Commodities, on pain
to forfeit 40 s. above the value of the said Goods.

II. Importers thereof shall forfeit the full value, according to the Rates
hereafter mentioned; and Persons in whose custody they shall be found, when
seized, or who shall sell or retail them, shall for the first Offense forfeit
the value thereof, as aforesaid; and for the second Offense double the value,
and be disabled to bear or execute any Office or Employment relating to the
Customs, or any part of the Revenue, or any other Office whatsoever; and if any
such Commodities, imported contrary to this Act, shall within the time
aforesaid, upon any pretense, be sold, retailed or uttered, or be found within
England, Ireland, etc. any Persons may seize them, and like Information and
Judgment for destruction thereof, shall be had and given as aforesaid.

III. They in whose custody such Goods shall be found, shall incur the
Forfeitures and Penalties aforesaid; and if any dispute or doubt shall arise
whether the said Goods were of the Product or Manufacture of the French Kings
Dominions, or imported contrary to this Act, the proof shall lie on the
Importer, Claimer, Vender, etc. and not on the Informer; and if any Informer
shall by Fraud or Collusion desist or delay Prosecution, he shall forfeit 500
l. All Officers belonging to the Customs, and all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs,
Constables, and other Officers, are required to be aiding in the execution of
this Act: No Officer whatsoever relating to the Customs, shall sign, suffer or
allow of any Warrant or Order, for delivering of any Goods prohibited by this
Act, to any Person, or into any Place other than into one of their Majesty's
Warehouses, there to remain till Judgment pass according to this Act; nor
shall any Person whatsoever relating to the Customs, by virtue or color of any
Warrant or Order, take up or deliver any the said Goods, or suffer them to be
carried to any other place, than one of the Kings Warehouses, there to remain,
as aforesaid; And such Goods brought into the Kings Warehouses, shall be
forthwith viewed in the presence of two or more principal Officers of that
Port, whereof the Collector, Customer or Customers Deputy to be one, and the
marks and numbers of each Vessel or Package, and the quality and quantity of
the said Goods, and the time when brought in, and of their delivery out of the
said Warehouses, shall by special direction of the Commissioners, or other
Chief Officers of the Customs, be registered in a Book to be kept for that
purpose, and for entry of Claims, which examination shall be repeated and
entered as aforesaid, after condemnation, at the delivery of them out to be
destroyed, and compared with the first Entry, to prevent Fraud or Imbezilment;
and if any such be found, the same to be entered and subscribed in the said
Book, by the principal Officer of the Port, not having charge of the
Warehouse, and Copies of the Entries, Examinations and Claims, and a true
Certificate of the deduction of the said Goods, shall be transmitted to the
Commissioners of the Customs, with monthly Abstracts of the said Ports, of
which a distinct account shall be kept by the Officers of the Seizures in the
Port of London.

IV. Such Goods shall not be delivered out of any the said Warehouses, till a
Judgment or Condemnation have passed upon them, otherwise than to be produced
at a Trial to be had touching the unlawful importing the same, or for the
recovery of any Penalty incurred thereby.

V. If any Person not being a known Merchant, Vintner or Shopkeeper, shall
after the first day of September 1689. sell or expose to sale any of the
Commodities hereby prohibited, they shall over and above the Penalties
aforesaid, suffer twelve months Imprisonment.

VI. Vessels with all their Guns and Furniture, in which any such Commodities
shall after the said 24th day of August be imported; and every Bark, Lighter,
or other Vessel out of which they shall be put on Shore, shall be forfeited,
and the Master or other Person taking care of such Vessel for the Voyage, or
out of which any of the said Commodities shall be unshipt into any Hoy, etc. to
be put on Shore, shall forfeit 500 l. and also being apprehended by a Justice
of Peace's Warrant, and the Fact proved before one or more Justices by the Oath
of two Witnesses, shall be committed to the next Gaol for twelve months; and
Seamen, Watermen, Carmen and other Persons assisting in the landing or
conveying any of the said Commodities by Land or Water, shall upon examination
and proof, as aforesaid, be subject to like Imprisonment, or be publicly whipped
at the Justices discretion; and the Carts, Teams, Carriages, Horses and Oxen
made use of in such Carriages or Conveyance, may be seized and stayed, and upon
proof before Justice of Peace, by the Oaths of two Witnesses, that they were
made use of in moving or conveying any Goods hereby prohibited to be imported,
they shall be forfeited, the one half to the use of the Poor of the Parish, the
other to his use that shall seize the same; and if the Master or other Person
belonging to any Vessel laden or part laden, with any the said Commodities,
shall after the said 24th day of August unship, or wittingly suffer to be
unshipt any the said prohibited Goods, either at Sea, or in any Harbor, Creek
or Bay of the Kingdoms aforesaid, he shall forfeit 500 l. and suffer
Imprisonment, as aforesaid.

VII. No Brandy, Aqua-vita, Spirits or distilled Waters of any place
whatsoever, shall after the said 24th of August be imported in England or
Ireland or any the said Islands, on pain to forfeit the fame, and the Ship or
Vessel in which it shall be imported.

VIII. The values and prices of the said Goods shall be reckoned, as follows,
viz. A Tun of Wines 30 l. a Tun of Brandy 40 l. and so proportionably: Other
Commodities aforesaid, that are valued in the Book of Rates, shall be esteemed
according to their value there; and the Prices of Commodities not rated there,
shall be determined by the Jury that shall try the cause, or shall be
empannelled to enquire whether the Goods were of the Product or Manufacture of
the French Kings Dominions; and in case of Condemnation by default, the value
to be determined by a Jury returned before the Mayor or Bailiff of the City or
Town Corporate, or before the next Justice of Peace where the Goods shall be
brought.

IX. Persons prosecuting shall be rewarded with one third part of the value of
the Goods prosecuted to condemnation and destruction, to be Owners.

X. And the residue of the Forfeitures and Penalties before mentioned and not
before disposed of, shall be divided into three parts, two thirds to their
Majesty's, and one third to such as shall seize or sue for the same; the Charge
of such Prosecution to be born by their Majesty's, and issued by the Receiver
General of the Customs by Warrant from the Commissioners.

XI. No Foreigner or other Person shall be admitted to claim any of the said
Goods, till security given to the satisfaction of the Collector, to answer to
such Penalties as shall be incurred by him as the Importer, or which the Owner,
Importer or Possessor thereof, is, shall or may be liable to by this Act.

XII. If any Person belonging to the Customs shall connive at the Importation
of any the said Commodities, he shall not only forfeit 500 l. to be recovered
as aforesaid, but be made incapable of any Office or Employment under their
Majesty's, and forfeit the Penalties of their Bonds for true performance of
their Trust.

XIII. Any Persons by Writ of Assistance under the Seal of the Exchequer, may
take a Constable, or other public Officer, and in the daytime enter into any
House, Shop, Cellar, Warehouse, etc. and in case of resistance, may break open
Doors, Trunks or other Package, to seize and bring to their Majesty's
Warehouse any of the said Commodities.

XIV. The Attorney General and other Persons seizing and prosecuting as
aforesaid, may use such method and course of proceeding as may be used about
the seizing, trying and prosecuting any Goods or Commodities for non-payment of
Customs or other Duties, or any Persons for offending against the Laws relating
to Customs; and Persons prosecuted for any thing done about the putting this
Act in execution, may plead the General Issue, etc. and if the Plaintiffs
discontinue or delay prosecution, or become nonsuit, or a Verdict or Judgment
pass against them, the Defendants shall recover their treble Costs.

XV. After the first day of September 1690. none of the Commodities hereby
prohibited, shall be imported from Guernesey, Jersey, Alderney, Sark or Man
into England, Ireland, Wales or Berwick, under the Penalties and Forfeitures
contained in this Act.

XVI. None shall sell at, or demand a greater price for any French Wines, or so
reputed, or other Wines mixed with French Wines, after the 10th day of September
1689. to the 10th day of September 1690. than 12 d. by the Quart, and after the
10th of September 1690. 6 d. by the Quart, and no more, on pain to forfeit for
every Quart 5 l. for the first Offense to the Informer, and 10 l. for the
second, and every other Offense, to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint or Information, etc.

XVII. After the 10th of Sept. 1689. no Retailer of Wines shall utter them
other than in Measures made of Pewter, and sealed according to the Statute, on
pain to forfeit 5 l. for every such Offense, to the Informer, to be recovered
as aforesaid.

XVIII. If any Merchant, Vintner, Wine-cooper or other Persons selling Wines by
wholesale or retail, shall corrupt or adulterate any Wine, or shall utter Wine
corrupted or adulterated, they shall forfeit 300 l. for every such Offense, the
one moiety to their Majesty's, and the other to him that will sue for the same
by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, etc. and shall suffer three
months Imprisonment.

XIX. Stat. 2 W. and M. Sess. 2. cap. 14. If any Officer of the Customs or
Prizes shall knowingly suffer any Goods or Manufactures imported as Prizes or
otherwise, contrary to an Act made in the first year of their Majesty's Reign,
Entitled, An Act for prohibiting all Trade and commerce with France, to be
admitted to an Entry, or to be embezil'd and not stav'd, spilt, burnt or
destroyed, as the said Act directs, he shall forfeit 500 l. one moiety to their
Majesty's, the other to the Informer, and shall be incapable of executing any
Office in their Majesty's Revenue.

XX. If any Persons after the first of February 1690. shall utter by retail by
Glass-Bottles, or by any other Retailmeasure, not made of Pewter, and sealed
according to Law, any Wines or other Liquor, or shall sell the same for a
greater price than by the said Act is appointed, and shall be convicted by
confession or the Oath of two Witnesses before a Justice of Peace, being
prosecuted within thirty days after the Offense committed, they shall forfeit 5
s. for every such Offense, which, if not paid upon demand, shall be levied by
distress and tale of Goods, by such Justices Warrant to the Constable,
Headborough, etc. the Money so levied to be given to the Informer; and for want
of a distress, the Offender to be committed to the common Gaol till payment of
the penalty, and all necessary Costs to be taxed by the Justice or Justices
before whom the Conviction was.

XXI. Offenders punished by virtue of this Act, shall not incur the Penalty of
any former Law for the same Offense; and no Writs of Certiorari shall supersede
or remove any Proceedings by virtue of this Act.

XXII. Persons resisting, abusing, beating or wounding an Officer, Informer or
other Person empowered hereby, or such as shall act in their Aid, shall by the
next Justice of Peace, or other Magistrate be committed to prison till the next
QuarterSessions, where they shall be punished by Fine, not exceeding 5 l. and
the Offender to remain in prison till he be discharged of his Fine and
Imprisonment by Order of the Justices or any two of them.

XXIII. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 17. A joint Stock of 40000 l. at least
shall be raised by Subscriptions by Sir W.S. H.B. R.H. J.S. G.B. F.G. E.P. E.H.
J.J. E.B. B.S. M.A. R.M. J.G. J.K. T.S. W.B. R.B. R.H. J.B. J.B. P.P. T.P. C.M.
S.H. S.N. B.S. N.C. T.C. P.G. J.B. T.K. H.S. R.M. J.P. R.C. P.G. A.B. A.M. J.O.
J.P. and T.G. on or before the first day of May next, and shall be paid to the
use of the Company established by this Act.

XXIV. And be it enacted, That the said Sir W.S. H.B. and the rest of the
Persons aforementioned, and all and every other Person and Persons subjects born
or naturalized or endenizend, who shall have any share in the said Joint Stock
shall be incorporated by the Name of the Company of Merchants of London,
trading to Greenland, and shall have a common Seal, and Ability to purchase
Lands and Tenements in Succession, so as the same exceed nor the yearly value
of 100 l. and to do and execute all Matters and Things which any other Body
Corporate may lawfully do or execute.

XXV. The said Company, during the continuance of the said Joynt-Stock, shall
freely use the Trade and Merchandise of catching Whales into and from Green
land and the Green-land Seas, and in all Seas and Places whatsoever, except in
the Seas belonging to their Majesty's Colonies and Plantations in America,
without interruption or disturbance, any Law, Statute or other thing to the
contrary notwithstanding.

XXVI. A Governor, Deputy Governor and sixteen Committees shall be elected as
follows, who shall have the management and direction of the said Trade.

XXVII. A Book for Subscriptions shall be provided within ten days after the
passing of this Act by the first five of the said Persons, or any three of
them, in which shall be subscribed on or before the first day of May next, by
the Persons abovenamed, or the Survivors of them, the said Joint Stock, which
shall not be less then 40000 l. no Subscriber to subscribe less than 500 l. nor
more than 2000 l.

XXVIII. All Persons subscribing shall on or before the said first day of May
pay down to such as the Persons before-named, or the major-part of them shall
appoint, one fourth part of the Sums they subscribe, and the remainder at such
times and in such manner as shall be appointed by the Governor or
Deputy Governor, and Court of Committees, so as the whole Sum subscribed be
paid within four years after the said first day of May.

XXIX. Defaulters in payment, shall after such default, have no other advantage
by such Subscription, than in proportion to such Sums as they shall have
actually paid; and farther, shall forfeit to the use of the Adventurers in the
said Joint Stock 10 l. for every hundred pounds of such Sum as they shall omit
to pay in, to be deducted out of the Money by them paid in.

XXX. Before the 25th day of May next any thirteen of the said Persons
before-named, shall call a Court of all the Subscribers, and others, who shall
then have any share in the said Joint Stock, who shall meet and choose one fit
Person, having subscribed 1000 l. or upwards, and paid in one fourth part
thereof, to be the Governor; and another Person so qualified to be
Deputy Governor; and sixteen others having subscribed each 500 l. or upwards,
and paid in a fourth part, to be Committees; the said Governor, Deputy Governor
and Committees to continue in Office till the 20th of October. 1694.

XXXI. Every Governor and Deputy Governor, before they be admitted to the
execution of their Offices, shall take this Oath, viz. You swear, That you
shall assist, and with all your Power support and maintain the Company of
Merchants of London trading to Greenland, and the Privileges of the same,
having no respect to your self, in derogation, hinderance or prejudice of the
good Government, Order and Commonweal thereof: The Bylaws and Ordinances
which shall be made by Authority of this Company, and which are not repugnant
to the Laws of this Kingdom, you shall uprightly and duly execute according to
the knowledge thereof; And to every Person you shall minister upright Justice;
And you shall not engage or oblige the said Company in any wise, as Governor or
Deputy Governor of the said Company, without agreement and consent of the Court
of Committees of the said Company.

So help you Almighty God.

XXXII. And every one of the sixteen Committees shall take this Oath, viz. You
shall swear to be faithful and true during the time of your Place of Trust, as
one of the Committees of the Company of Merchants of London trading to
Greenland, and their Successors; The good Estate of the Adventurers in this
present Joynt-Stock you shall favor and affect, and the Privileges granted
unto them (to your Power) endeavor to maintain and preserve: You shall be
careful to see and provide that an equal and indifferent Hand be carried in the
Government of the Company, and in the Affairs thereof, to all the Adventurers
that shall adventure or put in Stock; and that an equal division from time to
time be made to all the Adventurers, according to the proportion of their
several Stocks duly paid in.

So help you God.

XXXIII. No Persons who shall subscribe or have less in the Stock than 500 l.
shall have any Voice at a General Court of the Company; every Person
subscribing or having 500 l. in the Stock, shall have one Vote; and such as
subscribe or have 1000 l. shall have two Votes, and no more, though they
subscribe more than 1000 l.

XXXIV. All Persons subscribing or paying in any Money, shall be admitted into
the Freedom of the Company gratis, and shall take this Oath before the Governor
or Deputy Governor, or any five of the Committees, viz. You shall swear, That
you will assist, and with all your Power support and maintain the Company of
Merchants of London, trading to Greenland: The Bylaws and Ordinances which
shall be made by Authority of this Company, which are not repugnant to the Laws
of this Kingdom, You shall according to your knowledge thereof, uprightly and
duly keep and obey.

So help you God.

XXXV. The Governor or Deputy Governor, or any five of the Committees for the
time being, shall before the said 20th day of October. 1694. between the 1st and
the 20th of the said Month, and so annually call a General Court of all the
Members of the said Company, who shall have subscribed 500 l. and paid in
according to the directions of this Act, and shall have taken the Oath of
Admission to elect a Governor, Deputy Governor, and sixteen Committees for one
year next ensuing; and if any of them happen to die within the year, the
Governor or Deputy Governor, or five of the Committees may call a General Court
to choose another in his place during the remainder of the year.

XXXVI. The Governors, Deputy-Governors and Committees shall also take the
Oaths appointed to be taken in lieu of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance,
by an Act in the first year of their Majesty's Reign: The first Governor to
take the said Oaths hereby appointed to be taken by the Governor, before the
Persons abovenamed, or nine of them; the first Deputy Governor to take his
Oaths before the first Governor; and the first sixteen Committees to take
theirs before the first Governor or the first Deputy Governor; and every
succeeding Governor shall take the said Oaths before the last preceding
Governor, or any five or more of the last preceding Committees; and every
succeeding Deputy Governor before the Governor, or in case of his death and
absence, besore any five of the last preceding Committees; and every Member of
the succeeding Committees, before the Governor or Deputy Governor for the time
being, or any five or more of the last preceding Committees.

XXXVII. After the said 20th of May next, the said General Courts shall be
summoned by the Governor or Deputy Governor, or five of the Committees; at all
which Courts, the Governor, or in his absence the Deputy Governor shall be
present, and in case of equality of Votes, shall have a casting Vote.

XXXVIII. All Members having the Sum of 500 l. in the said Stock, or having
subscribed 500 l. and paid in according to the directions of this Act, may
assemble themselves at a General Court, timely notice being given, and make
Bylaws as to them, or the greater part of them shall seem meet, for the good
Government of the said Company, and of all Persons employed in their Ships and
Voyages, and for the preservation and improvement of the said Trade, which
Bylaws shall be duly kept and observed under the Pains and Penalties therein
limited, so as they be not contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Realm, nor
to any Regulations made by this Act.

XXXIX. No private Contract for the sale of any Goods, shall be made by the
said Company to any Member thereof; but all Goods belonging to the Company
shall be sold publicly by Inch of Candle, once a year at least, of which Sales
public notice shall be given three Weeks before on the Royal Exchange, and no
Lot shall be exposed to sale of more than 300 l. value in the allotment; and
Moneys arising by the sale of the said Companies Goods, shall be applied to the
advantage of the Joint Stock, and of the Persons therein concerned, according
to their proportions therein, and not to the private advantage of any
particular Person.

XL. Dividends of the Profits to be made in Money only.

XLI. Persons interested may transfer their Shares to Subjects born, Persons
naturalized or endenizen'd; such Assignments to be entered in the Books of the
Company, which Books for assigning shall lie open for the view of all Persons
concerned; all other Assignments to be void, except Devises by Will, or where
part of the Stock shall come to a Person as Executor or Administrator.

XLII. No Persons shall agree for, bargain or fell any greater part of the said
Stock, than such Sum only as they shall be possessed of bona fide, and have
standing in their own Names in the Companies Books.

XLIII. All Agreements, Contracts, Bargains or Sales for any part of the said
Stock, not executed within ten days after such Agreement, etc. shall be void.

XLIV. Vessels employed by the said Company for catching Whales, and truly
belonging to England, Wales or Berwick, whereof the Masters shall be
Englishmen, and inhabiting within the said Places, until the first of October.
1697. if navigated during their Voyages with one third of English Mariners at
the least, shall pay no other Custom for Oil, Blubber and Fins imported, than
if they had been navigated with three fourths of Mariners English; provided
such Vessels proceed on their Voyage from England, Wales or Berwick, and were
victualled for the same in some of those Places, to be attested by the
Collectors of the Ports where they were victualled.

XLV. The said Joint Stock to continue, and the said Company to have and enjoy
the said Trade from the first day of October 1693. for fourteen years, and no
longer.

XLVI. This Act declared to be a Public Act, and that it shall be taken notice
of in their Majesty's Courts accordingly.

XLVII. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 25. An Act made in the first year of their
Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for prohibiting all Trade and Commerce with
France; and another Act made in the second year of their Reign, Entitled, An
Act for the more effectual putting in execution, An Act Entitled, An Act for
prohibiting all Trade and Commerce with France, shall continue in force during
three years from the end of this Sesfion of Parliament, and from the expiration
of those three years to the end of the next Session of Parliament, if this War
with France shall so long last.

XLVIII. All Vessels with their Ladings, and all Goods and Merchandises that
shall be taken or seized as Prize, shall be brought into some Port of this
Kingdom, and before breaking of Bulk put into the possession of the
Commissioners for Prizes, their Officers or Agents, who with two or more such
Persons as the Officers or Mariners of the respective Ships shall entrust, and
such as shall be appointed by the Commissioners of the Customs are to preserve
the same till they be adjudged Prize, except where it shall appear to the Judge
of the Admiralty that the Goods are perishable, in which case the Judge shall
take Bail for them, yet so as to be subject to sale and distribution, as is
provided by this Act.

XLIX. Notwithstanding any thing in the said Acts, or either of them, if any
Goods prohibited to be imported, shall bona fide be taken as Prize, and so
adjudged, the Commissioners for Prizes, etc. shall cause them to be entered, and
landed, and brought into their Majesty's Warehouse to be safely kept till they
be sold, as is hereafter directed.

L. After such Goods, etc. shall be adjudged Prize, they shall as soon as
conveniently may be, be sold by the Commissioners for Prizes, etc. in the
presence of such as shall be entrusted by the Commissioners of the Customs, and
the Owners, Officers and Mariners of such Ship of War, publicly by Inch of
Candle, public notice being given fourteen days before of the quantity and
quality of the Things to be sold, and of the time and place of Sale.

LI. Out of the proceed of such Sale, their Majesty's Duties being deducted,
the neat proceed, in case such Prize were taken by a Private Man of War, shall
be divided into five parts, four parts to be answered to the Persons interested
in the Privateer; and the fifth to their Majesty's, and the Ship or Vessel,
with its Furniture, shall be enjoyed by the Persons interested in the
Privateer; and in case such Prize be taken by any of their Majesty's Ships, the
neat proceed shall be divided into three parts, one third whereof to be
answered to the Commander, Mariners and Seamen taking the same, according to
the Custom of the Sea for sharing Prizes, or to such Orders as have or shall be
made by their Majesty's.

LII. Provided that one third part thereof be distributed among the Ships Crew,
one third part to be paid to the Treasurer of the Navy, for the Relief of sick
and woun^^^ Mariners, and the Widows, Children and impotent Pare^ (...) of
Persons slain at Sea in their Majesty's Service, (...) the other third part to
the use of their Majesty's; a (...) case such Prize be taken by any Merchant
Ship en (...) in their Majesty's Service, the proceed thereof sh^^ (...) vided
into three parts, one third part to the C^^ (...) ficers and Mariners taking
the same, one third (...) use of their Majesty's, and one third to the
Treasurer of the Navy for the purposes aforesaid.

LIII. If any who shall take such Prize or Prizes, imbezil or conceal any part
of such Goods or Merchandise, or put the same on Shore in any other place than
their Majesty's Warehouses, they shall lose their share thereof, upon proof
made by one or more Witnesses upon Oath, before the Commissioners of the
Customs in the Port of London, (if such Offense be committed within the said
Port, or within the view and knowledge of any Officer of the Customs belonging
thereunto) and before the Chief Magistrate of the Place, in the presence of the
Chief Officer of the Port, in any other Port; one moiety of such Wares to be to
the use of the Informer, and the other part to the use of their Majesty's.

LIVE. Seamen and others concerned in any Prize, shall be permitted to see and
puruse the Accounts of any Prize, without paying any other Fee than 1 s. for
one Account at one time.

LV. If any Ship or Goods of the Product or Manufacture of the Dominions of the
French King, shall be taken by any Privateer by Collusion, upon proof made
thereof in the Court of Exchequer or Commission of Admiralty, they shall be
adjudged lawful Prize, one moiety thereof to their Majesty's, and the other
moiety to him that shall discover the same; and the Bond given by the Captain
of such Privateer is hereby adjudged to be forfeited: If such Ships or Goods
shall be taken by Collusion, by any Man of War, the Commander shall forfeit
1000 l. one moiety to their Majesty's, and the other to the Discoverer; and
such Commander shall forfeit his Command or Employment, and be incapable of any
Office under their Majesty's during seven years, and such Vessel and Goods
shall be adjudged good Prize to their Majesty's.

LVI. In all cases where such Prize shall not be taken by any Private Man of
War, one tenth part thereof after deduction of their Majesty's Customs, and
before any division of the proceed thereof, shall be paid to the Treasurer of
the Navy, and by him kept apart, to be disposed of by Warrant from the
Commissioners of the Admiralty, or Lord High Admiral, for Medals, and other
Rewards for Officers and Seamen, who shall do any extraordinary Service.

LVII. In case any Man of War or Privateer take or destroy any French Man of
War or Privateer, they shall receive for every Piece of Ordinance in any Ship
so taken or destroyed, 10 l. to be paid by the Commissioners for the Prizes,
out of their Majesty's share of Prizes.

LVIII. Provided that if the Commissioners do not pay the same, or give a Bill
payable out of the first Moneys that shall come to their Hands, by three days
after the same ought to be paid, and demand thereof made, free of all Charges
and Deductions, such Commissioners shall be incapable of any Office in their
Majesty's Service for the future.

LIX. The shares, proportions and rewards given by this Act to Commanders,
Officers and Seamen, shall be in lieu of all Shares in Prizes taken in Fight,
and otherwise, during this War; any thing in an Act made in the 13th Car. 2.
Entitled, Articles and Ordinances for the regulating and Government of their
Majesty's Navy, Ships of War and Forces by Sea, or any Declaration or Order of
their Majesty's to the contrary notwithstanding.

LX. If any Person shall imbezil any thing whatsoever upon or above the
Gun-Deck, or in any other place, in any Ship taken or seized on as Prize, or
retaken from the Enemy, he shall forfeit his share and reward hereby allowed
him; and if he be an Officer he shall forfeit for every such Offense 500 l. one
moiety to their Majesty's, the other to him that will sue for the same, and
shall be incapable of any Office or Employment under their Majesty's for seven
years.

LXI. Ships taken as Prize within the Streights of Gibraltar, may be carried
into Cadiz or Alicant, or Messma or Naplet, and be put into the possession of
such as shall be authorized by their Majesty's to receive and preserve the same
till by the Court of Admiralty of England they be adjudged lawful Prize, or
otherwise legally disposed of, the Captors being hereby required to transmit
with all speed the Papers taken therein, or attested Copies thereof to the said
Court.

LXII. Ships taken as Prize in America may be carried into any of their
Majesty's Ports there, and put into the possession of the Chief Governor, to be
kept as aforesaid, till they be disposed of by such as shall be lawfully
commissioned in that behalf.

LXIII. Ships taken in any place beyond the Cape of Good Hope, may be carried
into the Port or Place where any English Factory is established, and put into
the possession of the Chief Person of the Factory, to be kept as aforesaid,
till condemnation by such as shall be commissioned in that behalf.

LIVE. Where any Vessel shall be taken as Prize by a Privateer, in which Vessel
there shall be no Goods of the growth or manufacture of the Dominions of the
French King, then after condemnation and payment of Customs and other Duties,
the Persons interested in such Privateer shall have the whole to their own use,
without deduction for Tenths, or any other part to their Majesty's, or the Lord
High Admiral.

LXV. Where any Vessel shall be taken within any of their Majesty's Ports,
Rivers or Havens by any Privateer, such Prize shall belong to their Majesty's,
as a Perquisite of the Admiralty of England, and the Captors to have such part
thereof as their Majesty's shall think fit to allow.

LXVI. If any Vessel taken as Prize, or any Goods therein, shall appear to
belong to any of their Majasties Subjects, continuing under their Majesty's
Protection and Obedience, which were before taken by their Majesty's Enemies,
and retaken, such Vessels and Goods, and every such part thereof belonging to
their Majesty's Subjects, shall be restored by Decree of the Court of Admiralty
to the former Owners, they paying in lieu of Salvage, if retaken by a Man of
War, an eighth part of the value, which Salvage shall be answered to the
Captains, Officers and Seamen in the said Man of War, to be divided as in this
Act is directed touching the share of Prizes belonging to them, where Prizes
are taken by any of their Majesty's Ships of War; and if taken by a Privateer
or other Vessel, after having been in possession of the Enemy twenty four
hours, an eighth part of the value; if above twenty four hours, and under forty
eight, a fifth part; if above forty eight hours, and under ninety six, a third
part; if above ninety six hours, a moiety; all which Payments to any Privateer
or other Vessel, to be made without deduction; and if such retaken Ship shall
appear to have been set forth by the Enemy as a Man of War, the former
Proprietors shall pay the full moiety of the true value for Salvage.

LXVII. If any Vessel whereupon Wool is laden to be transported, contrary to
Law, be taken by any Privateer, on proof thereof in the Exchequer, the Persons
interested in the Privateer shall have a moiety of the Vessels and Goods, and
their Majesty's the other moiety.

LXVIII. The Lord High Admiral or Commissioners of the Admiralty shall express
all things by this Act directed to be observed concerning Prizes, etc. in the
Instructions by them to be given to Captains and Commanders of their Majesty's
Ships of War, and to Commanders of Privateers.

LXIX. All Goods of the growth or manufacture of France, imported and seized,
shall be sued for and prosecuted in the Exchequer, in manner and form as is
provided by an Act made in the 14th year of King Charles II. Entitled, An Act
for preventing Frauds in his Majesty's Customs, two thirds thereof to be to the
use of their Majesty's, etc. (they defraying the Charges of the Prosecution)
and one third to the Prosecutor, and no composition to be made for their
Majesty's part; such Goods to be secured and sold as Prize Goods are appointed
by this Act to be secured and sold.

LXX. If the Commissioners of the Prizes or of the Customs, shall detain the
Shares belonging to Persons interested in Privateers two days after the same
ought to be paid, and demand thereof made, free from all Deductions, except for
Ware-house-room, and 2 l. per Cent. for all other Charges, they shall forfeit
double the Sum so detained.

Treason.
I. Stat. 3 and 4 W. and M. cap. 13. If during the present War with France, any
Persons shall send, load, transport or deliver, or cause to be sent, laden,
etc. to or for the Use of the French King, or any of his Subjects residing in
his Dominions, any Arms, Ordinance, Powder, Bullets, Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Masts,
Cordage, Iron, Coals, Lead or Saltpeter, such Offenders shall be adjudged
Traitors.

II. If any during this War shall send, load, etc. to the use of the French
King, or any of his Subjects, residing, etc. any Goods or Merchandises
whatsoever, other than the Goods herein before particularly mentioned, they
shall incur a Praemunire.

III. If any of their Majesty's Subjects shall after the 10th of March 1691.
without their Majesty's License, voluntarily go, or imbark in any Vessel, with
an intent to go into any the Dominions of the French King, he shall be adjudged
to be guilty of High Treason.

IV. If any of their Majesty's Subjects shall after the 25th of March 1692.
voluntarily come or return from any of the French Kings Dominions in Europe,
into England, during the said War, without leave obtained, they shall be kept
in Prison without Bail or Mainprize during their Majesty's pleasure, for any
time not exceeding twelve months.

Tithes.
I. Stat. 3 and 4 W. and M. cap. 3. All Persons that shall sow, or cause to be
sown any Hemp or Flax, shall pay to every Parson, Vicar or Impropriator of the
Parish or Place, for every Acre so sown, pulled or drawn, an annual Sum not
exceeding 4 s. before it be carried off the Ground, and so proportionably; for
the recovery of which, such Parson, etc. shall have the common and usual Remedy.

II. This Act shall not charge any Lands discharged by any modus d^cimandi,
ancient Composition, or otherwise.

III. This Law to continue for seven years, and to the end of the then next
Session of Parliament.

Wills.
I. Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. cap. 2. From and after the 26th day of March 1693.
Persons inhabiting, or who shall have any Goods within the Province of York,
may by their last Wills dispose of all their Personal Estate as they shall
think fit; and their Widows, Children and other Kindred, shall be barred to
claim any part of the Personal Estate in other manner than as by their Wills
shall be appointed.

II. This Act shall not extend to the Citizens of the Cities of York and
Chester, who are or shall be Freemen of the said Cities, inhabiting within the
same, or the Suburbs thereof at the time of their death.

Wool.
I. Stat. 1 W. and M Sess. 1. cap. 32. Owners of Wool or their Agents, that
shall at any time carry, or cause to be carried any Wool to any Port or Place
on the Seacoasts, to be conveyed to any other Port or Place in England, Wales
or Berwick, from whence the same may be transported into Foreign Parts, shall
first cause a due entry thereof to be made at the Port from whence it shall be
intended to be conveyed, containing the Weights, Marks and Numbers thereof,
before they carry it within five miles of any such Port or Place; or else such
Wool found, and the Beasts and Carriages conveying it shall be forfeited; and
the Persons conveying, driving or abetting the same, shall forfeit and suffer
as by the Laws and Statutes now in force against the exportation of Wool.

II. The forgoing Clause shall not extend to hinder any Person from carrying
their Wool from the place of Shearing, to their own Dwelling House, etc. though
within five miles of the Sea, so as within ten days after Shearing, and before
they otherwise dispose of the same, they certify under their Hands to the
Officers of the Customs in the next Port, the quantity thereof, viz. the number
of the Fleeces and where housed, and do not remove the same, without first
certifying the Officer of the next Port under their Hands of their intention to
remove it, three days at least before such removal; the said Officers to keep
and register such Certificate; but Persons neglecting to certify, as
aforesaid, or removing their Wool before such Certificate of their intention,
shall be liable to the Penalties of the former Clauses.

III. Cocquets for carrying Wool from any Port in England, Wales or Berwick,
shall be written upon Paper, and signed by three Chief Officers of such Port at
least; and Certificates of landing them again at any other of the said Ports,
or from Ireland, shall be so signed; and all such Wool, both at shipping and
landing shall be weighed in the presence of the said Officers, giving such
Cocquets and Certificates; and the Weight, Marks and Numbers of such Wool
shipped and landed, shall be expressed in both Cocquet and Certificate.

IV. Officers not observing the Directions of this Act, shall be adjudged
Abettors of the Transportation, and suffer the Penalties contained in the
Statutes of the 12th and 14th years of King Charles II. against Transportation
of Wool.

V. No Wool shall be shipped from Ireland, but from Dublin, Waterford, Youghall,
Kinsale, Cork and Drogheda, nor imported from thence, but into Leverpool,
Chester, Bristol, Minehead, Barnstaple, Bidford and Exeter.

VI. For the better execution of this and other Acts against the Exportation of
Wool, Sir Tho. P. Lord Mayor of London, Sir H. G. Baronet, Sir P. W. Knight. Sir B.
N. Knight. Sir J. M. Knight. Sir P.R. Knight. Sir R.D. Sir W.P. Knight. and Bar. Sir H.A. Bar.
Sir W.A. Knight. Sir R. N. Sir J. F. W. H. J. S. J. S. F. O. J. P. R. B. W. C. E.
M. Esquires, S. H. W. H. Senior, J. P. J. V. J. G. B. C. Gentlemen, Mr. M. of
Horton, Sir T. S. Bar. W. D. Esquire J. A. of Woley Esquire Sir W. L. Sir J. P. Knight. Sir
B. A. Bar. Sir R. J. Knight. Sir J. L. Knight. Sir G. R. Knight. Sir S. D. Knight. Sir T. V.
Knight. N. T. W.H. T.C. W.G. H.S. S.M. J.S. T.F. A.M. W.C. T.H. T.S. W. J.
Esquires, P. S. H. C. J. D. R. S. D. P. T. C. P. B. J. P. R. H. J. B. J. H. E.
B. N. B. W. S. B. J. D. J. A. J. T. T. P. P. H. N. J. P. M. F. W. S. J. K.
Senior, J. M. Junior, W.W. J.Y. R. F. J.L. T. P. W.B. J.U. J. S. J.M. or any
five or more of them, are hereby authorized for putting this and other the said
Laws in execution, and by their Substitutes to be appointed under the Hands and
Seals of five or more of them, to seize all Wools, Woolfels, and other Things
abovementioned, which shall be endeavored to be exported contrary to this
Act, and to prosecute Offenders against this or any the said Laws.

VII. Owners of Ships, Masters or Mariners knowing of the Exportation of any
Sheeps-wool, Wool-fells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Wool-flocks,
Fullers-earth or Tobacco-pipe Clay, contrary to the meaning of this Act, that
shall within three months after their knowledge thereof, or after their return
into England, Ireland, Wales or Berwick, give the first Information thereof,
and by whom, where and in what Vessel, upon Oath before any of the Barons of
the Exchequer in England or Ireland, or any three of the Commissioners
appointed by this Act, or the Head-Officer of the Port, where they shall first
arrive, and shall be ready to justify and prove the same, shall not be subject
to the Penalties of this or any other Act, for the said Offense, but shall
recover and receive such benefit and advantages as are appointed by any
precedent Act.

VIII. The Powers given to the said Commissioners shall not hinder any Persons
lawfully authorized from seizing Wool, or prosecuting Offenders against this or
any former Act.

IX. If any Prosecution shall be against any Person for what he shall do in
pursuance of this Act, he may file a Common Bail, or enter into a Common
Appearance, and plead the General Issue, and give this Act in Evidence; and if
the Plaintiff be nonsuit, or discontinue, or a Verdict pass against him, or
Judgment upon a Demurrer, the Defendant shall recover treble Costs.

X. A Register shall be kept at the Custom-house, London, of all Wool imported
from Ireland; and of all Wool sent from one Port to another in this Kingdom;
the Weights and Numbers, Ship, Masters Name, Owners Name, and to whom
consigned: This Act to continue for three years, and from thence to the end of
the next Session of Parliament.

XI. Any Persons may buy Cloth, Stuffs, Stockings or other Woollen
Manufactures, and export the same, paying the usual Customs.

XII. Nothing in this Act shall be construed to avoid the Charters granted to
the Levant, Eastland, Russia or African Companies.

XIII. It shall be lawful to transport from Southampton only, for the use of
the Inhabitants of Guernsey, Jersey, Alderney and Sark, 1000 Tods of unkemb
Wool for Guernsey, 2000 for Jersey, 200 for Alderney, and 100 for Sark, more
than by the Act made in the 12th year of King Charles II. is provided for, the
same to be done according to the Directions, and under the Penalties therein
appointed and inflicted; and on the farther Penalty of 20 l. for every Tod of
Wool and forfeiture of the Wool it self (one half to the King, one Quarter to
the Informer, and one Quarter to the Poor of the said Islands) in case of
transporting or attempting to transport any of the said Wool from the said
Islands, for every Offense therein; and that every Person so offending, shall
after the first Offense be incapable of any Grant of any Wool from the said
Port of Southampton, nor ever after have any Warrant granted him for that
purpose; the said Penalties to be recovered by him that will sue for the same
by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, etc.

Yarmouth.
I. STat. 1 W. and M. Sess. 1. cap. 11. The Powers, Authorities and Benefits
given to the Mayor, Aldermen, Burgesses and Commonalty of Great Yarmouth by an
Act made in the first year of the late King James, Entitled, An Act for
clearing, preserving, maintaining and repairing the Haven and Rivers of Great
Yarmouth, are hereby vested in the Bailiffs, Aldermen, Burgesses and Commonalty
of the said Borough, that now are and their Successors; And the Powers,
Authorities and Benefits by the said Act given to the said Mayor, are hereby
vested in the Bailiff or Bailiffs for the time being, and their Successors.

II. Officers, Collectors, Receivers and Commissioners to be appointed by the
aforementioned, or this Act, may pursue the several Powers therein given and
directed.

III. Moneys directed by the said Act to be paid into the Hands of the
Chamberlain of the said Borough, shall be paid into the Hands of such as the
Bailiffs, Aldermen, Burgesses and Commonalty in Common Council assembled, shall
direct.

IV. If within the residue of the time by the said recited Act limited, there
shall be any alteration by any new Charters from Bailiffs to Mayors, then the
Mayor, Aldermen, Burgesses and Commonalty shall execute the Powers, etc. in the
recited Act mentioned, as therein is expressed.

AN EXACT ABRIDGMENT Of all the STATUTES MADE In the fifth Session of this
present Parliament, in the fifth and sixth Years of the Reign of their
MAJESTY'S King William and Queen Mary.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF THE STATUTES MADE In the fifth Session of this present
PARLIAMENT.
Accounts.
I. Stat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 17. Commissioners Names for stating
Public Accounts.
Robert Harley Esquire, Sir Thomas Pope Blount Baronet, Paul Foley Esquire, Sir
Thomas Clarges Knight, Charles Hutchinson Esquire, Sir Edward Abney Knight, and
Sir James Houblon Knight, constituted Commissioners for examining and stating
the Accounts of all the Money and Public Revenue of the Crown granted by one
Act of Parliament made in the second year of their Majesty's Reign, Entitled,
An Act for appointing and inabling Commissioners to examine, take and state the
Public Accounts of the Kingdom; Acts of 2d and 4th and 5th of W. and M.
revived.
And one other Act in the 4th and 5th years of their Majesty's Reign,
Entitled, An Act for examining, taking and stating the Public Accounts of
this Kingdom, to be examined and stated by the Commissioners by the said Acts
constituted, or any five or more of them appointed by the said Acts, or either
of them; and that the said Acts be revived from the 24th of April 1694. to the
25th of April, which shall be in the year 1695. and shall be executed with all
the Powers therein contained, by the Commissioners herein named, or any four or
more of them; and Allowances to be made to the said Commissioners, and the
Clerks, and all other Charges from the Commissioners of the Treasury as in the
first recited Act. Commissioners power to examine and state Accounts.
And the said Commissioners have Power to examine and state Accounts of all
Moneys granted to their Majesty's by one Act made in this present Session of
Parliament, Entitled, An Act for granting to their Majesty's an Aid of 4 s. in
the Pound for one Year, for carrying on a vigorous War against France; and of
all Moneys that have or shall be granted their Majesty's in this present
Session; and of all other their Majesty's Treasure, or public Money due to them
on the 5th of November 1688. or at any time between the said 5th of November
and the said 25th of April, which shall be in the year 1695. not yet accounted
for by virtue of the said Acts, or either of them; or the last Clause touching
Public Accounts made in an Act made in the third Year of their Majesty's
Reign, Entitled, An Act for raising Money by a Poll, payable quarterly for one
year, for the carrying on a vigorous War against France.

II. Irish Accounts to be stated against, and presented next Parliament.
And the said Commissioners are hereby required to summon the Commissioners
appointed for the Transport Ships for the War of Ireland, or any other
Contractors or their Owners and Proprietors of the said Ships, to state the
Accounts, and adjust the Debt due for the said Ships, which Accounts so stared
they are to prepare against the next Session of Parliament.

Coaches.
I. Commissioners for Hackney-Coaches.
STat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 16. After the 10th of May 1694. their
Majesty's may appoint Commissioners, not exceeding five in number, for
regulating and licensing Hackney-Coaches within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof, and the Bills of Mortality, and for
regulating and licensing Stage-Coaches throughout England, etc.

II. Licenses not to exceed 700.
The said Commissioners shall give Licenses under their Hands and Seals to all
Persons that shall keep any Coach or Coach-Horses within the Cities of London
and Westminster, or the Suburbs of the same, or within the Weekly Bills of
Mortality; and that the number of all Hackney-Coaches so to be licensed shall
not exceed 700, and for every such License so to be granted for each Coach,
there shall be paid to the Commissioners, or some other Person to be appointed
by their Majesty's to receive the same for their Majesty's use, the Sum of 50
l. and no more, 50 l. for each License, and not to exceed 21 years, and 4 l.
Rent per Ann. at four quarterly Payments.
by way of Fine for such License, which said 50 l. shall be paid by the Person
so licensed, before the License delivered to him; the said Licenses to continue
for twenty one years, and no longer; nor to be granted in Reversion after the
determination of others: And upon every the said Licenses there shall be
reserved to their Majesty's the yearly Rent or Sum of 4 l. payable quarterly,
the first at the Feast of St. Michael, the Nativity of our Lord Christ, the
Annuntiation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and the Nativity of St. John Baptist,
with such Covenants as the Commissioners in their discretions shall think fit.

III. And the said Commissioners, Stage-Coaches to pay 8 l. per Ann. the Leases
to be renewed yearly.
or the major part of them are empowered under their Hands and Seals to license
all Stage-Coaches kept or driven throughout England; and that no License for
any Stage-Coach shall continue longer than for one year; and for every such
License there be reserved to their Majesty's the Rent or Annual Sum of 8 l. to
be paid quarterly at the four most usual Feasts of the year, with such
Covenants as the Commissioners in their discretions shall think fit: And that
every one so licensed to keep or drive a Hackney or Stage-Coach, Power to
assign or devise.
may by Writing under his Hand and Seal assign, or by his last Will in Writing
devise his, her or their Interest therein; and in default of such Assignment or
Devise, their Executors shall be entitled to the residue of their Interest:
That an Entry shall be made of such Assignment in some Book kept by the
Commissioners, to which the Executors or Administrators may have recourse
gratis, and within sixty days after the decease of such Testator or Intestate,
they may produce Letters of Administration to entitle themselves.

IV. This Act to commence from the 24th of June 1694. Penalty 5 l. driving
without License. No Horse under 14 Hand. No Person to keep above two Coaches.
Altering Mark or Figure 5 l.
And that no Person after the 24th of June 1694. shall drive or let to hire any
Hackney-Coach or Coach-Horses within the Cities of London or Westminster, etc.
nor drive or let to hire any Stage-Coach or Coach-Horses within any part of
England, without such License first obtained as aforesaid, upon pain to forfeit
for every such Offense the Sum of 5 l. and that no Horse, Gelding or Mare shall
be used in any Hackney or Stage-Coaches, under the size of fourteen Hands,
according to the Standard. And that every Coach so licensed shall have a Mark
of distinction by Figures, or otherwise; and that no Person shall be licensed
to keep more than two Hackney-Coaches; and that no Person shall put the same
Figure or Mark upon his Coach that is appointed for another; nor shall alter or
obliterate the Figure or Mark of distinction, upon pain of 5 l.

V. And if any Commissioner shall grant Licenses for more than the number of
700 Hackney-Coaches, as before directed, or shall grant any License for any
Hackney or Stage-Coach for any longer time than before directed, Commissioners
Offenses 100 l.
he shall forfeit for every such Offense 100 l.

VI. The Rates for Hackny-Coachmen, on penalty of 40 s.
No Hackney-Coachman or Driver shall take for his Hire in London, or ten Miles
thereof, above 10 s. for a Day, reckoning twelve hours to the day; and by the
Hour not above 1 s. 6 d. for the first hour, and 1 s. for every hour after; and
that no Person shall pay from any the Inns of Court, or thereabouts, to any
part of St. James's or City of Westminster (except beyond Tuttle-Street) above
1 s. and the same Prizes from the same Places to the Inns of Court, or
thereabouts; and from any of the said Inns of Court, or thereabouts, to the
Royal Exchange 1 s. and if to the Tower of London, or to Bishopgate-street, or
Aldgate, or thereabouts, 1 s. 6 d. and so from the said Places to the said Inns
of Court as aforesaid; and the like Rates from and to any place at the like
distance with the places beforementioned. And if any Coachman shall refuse to
go at, or exact more for Hire than the Rates hereby limited, he shall for every
such Offense forfeit 40 s.

VII. Commissioners and Officers Oaths
The said Commissioners, and every Officer to be appointed under them, shall
take an Oath for the faithful execution of their respective Offices; and shall
likewise take the Oaths appointed by an Act made in the first year of their
Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for the abrogating the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, and appointing other Oaths; and that no Person shall be able to
execute the Powers by this Act granted, till the taking the same.

VIII. Offenses how and where determinable.
All Offenses against this Act (other than the Offenses of the Commissioners)
shall be determined by the Commissioners, or any three of them, upon Oath of
one or more credible Witnesses, the Party accused being summoned.

IX. Bylaws for the standing of Coaches in the Streets. etc.
And for the better regulating such as shall be licensed to keep Hackney or
Stage-Coaches, as aforesaid, and to prevent Inconveniences in the Streets where
such Coaches stand, and punishment thereof, it shall be lawful for the said
Commissioners, or the major part of them, to make Bylaws to bind such Persons
as have Licenses, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to annex
reasonable Penalties for the breach thereof, so as such Bylaws be agreeable to
the intent of this Act, and not repugnant to the Laws of this Realm; and so
that such Bylaws be approved by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or Lords
Commissioners of the Great Seal, for the time being, and by the two Chief
Justices of either Bench, and Chief Baron of the Exchequer, or any three of
them; and after such allowance the same shall be published, and the Penalties
put in execution by any Justice of Peace, or other Magistrate of the Place
where the Offense is committed: But no Person shall be punished twice for the
same Offense.

X. The number to ply on Sundays.
It shall be lawful for the said Commissioners to appoint 175 and no more of
the said Hackney-Coaches to ply, stand and drive on the Lord's Day within the
Bills of Mortality only, so as the whole number of 700 may be employed
successively.

XI. And if after the said 24th of June, The penalty for offending.
any Hackny-Coach shall ply, stand or drive upon the Lord's Day, other than such
as shall be so appointed as aforesaid, or any where else within the Bills of
Mortality, the Owner of such Coach shall forfeit 5 l. A List of Hackney-Coaches
to to ply on Sundays.


XII. The Commissioners, for the better discovery of Offenders herein, shall
publish a List or Account of all the particular Numbers of such Hackney-Coaches
as shall be appointed for every Lord's Day successively through the Year.

Fines.
I. STat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 6. Six shillings and eight pence
shall be paid upon signing Judgment to the proper Officer who signeth the same
in full satisfaction of the Capiatur Fine, and all Fees due for or concerning
the same; which said Officer shall make an increase to the Plaintiff of so much
in his Costs, to be taxed against the Defendant.

Justices of Peace.
I. Justices of Peace in Wales limited to eight in each County, repealed
STat. 5 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 4. Whereas by a Statute made the 34th and 35th
of H. 8. Entitled, An Act for certain Ordinances in the Kings Majesty's
Dominion and Principality of Wales, there is a Clause contained in these Words,
viz. That there shall not exceed the number of eight Justices of the Peace in
any of the said Shires, over and above the President, Council and Justices
aforesaid, and the Kings Attorney and Solicitor; which President, Council,
Justices, and the Kings Attorney and Solicitor, shall be put in every Commission
of Peace in every of the said twelve Shires: And whereas this Clause is found
inconvenient; Be it enacted, That the said Clause be repealed, And that it may
be lawful to and for the King and Queen, by Commission under the Great Seal, to
constitute, nominate and appoint any such number of Persons to be Justices of
Peace in any of the said Counties of Wales, as they shall think fitting,
according to such Ways and Methods as are commonly used for the constituting,
nominating and appointing of Justices of Peace for any County of England: And
that the Persons so constituted, nominated and appointed, shall have power and
authority to act and do any thing appertaining to the Office of a Justice of
Peace, in as large and ample manner, as any Justice of Peace within the
Dominion of Wales might or ought to have done before the making of this Act;
any Law, etc. to the contrary notwithstanding.

I. Stat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 5. Certiorari to remove Indictment.
That in Term-time no Certiorari at the Prosecution of any Party indicted,
shall be granted out of the Court of Kings Bench, to remove any Indictment
before Trial had, and from before the Justices of the General or Quarter
Sessions of the Peace, unless such Certiorari shall be granted upon Motion of
Council and Rule of Court in open Court, and that the Parties indicted
prosecuting such Certiorari shall find two Manucaptors before one or two
Justices of the County in 20 l. to plead to the said Indictment in the Kings
Bench, and at their own Charges to procure the Issue that shall be joined upon
the said Indictment to be tried at the next Assizes held for the County where
the said Indictment was found, after such Certiorari shall be returnable, if
not in London, Westminster or Middlesex, and if in the said Cities or County,
then to cause it to be tried the next Term, after such Certiorari shall be
granted, or at the sitting after the said Term, if the Kings Bench shall not
appoint any other time; and if any other time, then notice to be given to the
Prosecutor, and the said Recognizance and Certiorari to be certified into the
Kings Bench, and there filed, and the name of the Prosecutor to be indorsed;
and if the Party prosecuting such Certiorari, being the Defendant, shall not
before allowance thereof, procure such Manucaptors to be bound in a
Recognizance, the Justices of Peace may try the said Indictment at the said
Sessions, notwithstanding such Certiorari so delivered.

II. Costs against Prosecutor of a Certiorari
And if the Defendant prosecuting such Certiorari, be convicted, then the Kings
Bench shall give reasonable Costs to the Prosecutor, to be taxed according to
the course of the said Court; and within ten days after demand upon Oath, and
refusal thereof, he shall have an Attachment against the said Defendant by the
Court for his Contempt; and the Recognizance not to be discharged till the
Costs so taxed shall be paid.

III. Certioraries grantable in vacation.
Nevertheless in the Vacation Writs of Certiorari may be granted by any of the
Justices of the Kings Bench, whose Names shall be endorsed, and the Name of the
Party at whose instance it is granted; and before the allowance of such Writ
the Party indicted prosecuting such Certiorari, shall find such Sureties as
beforementioned in this Act.

IV. Certioraries in Cheshire, Lancaster and Durham.
And also upon every Certiorari granted within Chester, Lancaster and Durham,
to remove Indictments as aforesaid, the Parties indicted prosecuting such
Certiorari shall find Sureties to try the said Indictments at the next Assizes
or General Jail-deliver; and if convicted, shall be liable to like Costs to be
taxed as by this Act provided, where the same are granted out of the Kings
Bench.

V. For repairing Highways, etc.
Provided, if any Indictment be against any Person for not repairing Highways,
Cawsies, Pavements or Bridges, and the Title to repair the same may come in
question; upon such Suggestion and an Affidavit made thereof, a Certiorari may
be granted to remove the same into the Kings Bench; any Law to the contrary
notwithstanding.

VI. Sureties.
Provided that the Parties prosecuting such Certiorari shall find two
Manucaptors to be bound in a Recognizance, with Condition as aforesaid.

Leases.
I. Leases of Lands part of the Duchy of Cornwall.
STat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 16. All Leases and Grants made by the
late King Charles II. or by the late King James, or by their present Majesty's,
or to be made within seven years next ensuing, by Letters Patents, or
Indentures under the Great Seal of England, or Seal of the Court of Exchequer,
or Copy of Court-Roll according to the Custom of the respective Manors of the
said Duchy or thereunto annexed, of any Offices, Messuages, Parks, Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, parcel of the said Duchy of Cornwall, or annexed to
the same (other than of Honors, Lordships or Manors) shall be effectual in
Law, according to the purport of the same Copies, Leases and Grants against the
present King and Queen, their Heirs and Successors, and against every Person
that shall have or enjoy the said Duchy, by force of any Act of Parliament, or
by any other Limitation.

II. Provided, For one, two or three lives, or thirty one years.
that such Lease be not for more than one, two or three Lives, or thirty one
Years, or for some Term determinable upon one, two or three Lives, and not
above; And if such Leases be made in Reversion, that then the same with the
Estate in possession do not exceed three Lives, or thirty one Years, not
dispunishable of Waste, and reserving the ancient Rent, or such as has been
paid for the greater part of twenty years next before the Year 1660. to those
that have the Inheritance; or else a reasonable Rent not being under the
twentieth part of the clear yearly value.

III. All Covenants, Covenants good against them to whom the Interest shall
afterward come.
Conditions and Agreements in every Lease made as aforesaid, shall be good in
Law according to the contents of the same, not only against them to whom the
Reversion of the said Lands shall come, but against them to whom the Interest
of the said Leases shall come, as if their Majesty's at the making such
Covenants and Conditions were actually seized in Fee-simple of the same.

IV. Saving to all Persons, and Bodies Politic, Saving of Rights.
their Heirs and Successors (saving the King and Queen, and their Heirs, the
Dukes of Cornwall for the time being, and their Heirs, or whosoever shall enjoy
the Dukedom by force of any Act of Parliament) all such Rights and Demands
whatsoever, of, in, to or out of the said Offices or Lands, or any of them as
they had before the making this Act; any thing herein notwithstanding.

V. Fees for passing Leases.
The Fees and Charges to be paid for passing and perfecting Leases of Tenements
of small value (where the Fine or Value of such Lease or Grant to be made or
renewed shall not exceed 80 l.) shall not exceed the Sum of 10 l. for every
Lease, and 4 l. for every Copy (besides the said Fine or Value) the said 10 l.
and 4 l. to be divided among the Officers of the Exchequer employed for the
preparing and passing such Lease or Grant; and if any Officer exceed the same,
he shall forfeit to the Party grieved so much as is exceeded by this Act, and
also 20 l. one moiety whereof shall be forfeited to the King, and the other to
the Party grieved.

Militia.
I. STat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 13. An Act for raising the Militia of
this Kingdom, for the year 1694. although the Months Pay formerly advanced, be
not repaid.

Mines.
I. Lawful to dig in Mines, notwithstanding pretended to be Royal.
Stat. 5 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 6. All Persons Subjects of the Crown of
England, Bodies Politic or Corporate, having or that shall have any Mine or
Mines within the Kingdom of England or Wales, wherein any Ore now is or shall
be discovered or wrought, in which there is Copper, Tin, Iron or Lead, shall
and may enjoy the same Mine or Mines, and Ore, and dig and work the said Mine
or Mines, or Ore, notwithstanding they shall be pretended or claimed to be a
Royal Mine or Mines.

II. Rates to be paid for Ore, where Mines are pretended to be Royal
Provided that their Majesty's, their Heirs and Successors, and all claiming
any Royal Mines under them, may have the Ore of such Mines in any part of
England or Wales, (other than in the Counties of Devon and Cornwall) paying to
the Owners of the said Mines wherein such Ore is or shall be found, within
thirty days after the said Ore is or shall be laid upon the Banks of the said
Mines, and before the same be removed thence, the Rates following, viz. For all
Ore washed, made clean and merchantable, wherein is Copper, 16 l. per Tun: For
all Ore washed, made clean and merchantable, wherein is Tin, 40 s. per Tun: And
for all Ore washed, made clean and merchantable, wherein is Iron, 40 s. per Tun:
And for all Ore washed, made clean and merchantable wherein is Lead, 9 l. per
Tun; and in default of payment of such respective Sums as aforesaid, it shall
be lawful for the Owners of the said Mines wherein such Ore shall be found, to
dispose of the said Ore to their own uses.

Orphans.
I. STat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 4. Perpetual Fond to pay the Interest
of 4 l. per Gent. unto Dec. 25th 1693. From the time first due, to Dec. 25th
1683 at 5 l. per Cent. And from thence to Dec. 25th 1693. at 3 l. per Cent. 4
l. per Cent. from the 25th of Dec. 1655 to the 25 of Dec. 1693 and so
proportionably. The City Lands, etc. (excepting the Revenues of the Hospitals,
and Repairs of London Bridge) for ever chargeable after the 24th of June 1694.
for raising the Annual Sum of 8000 l.
It is enacted, That for the raising a perpetual Fond to pay the yearly
Interest of four pounds for every hundred pound principal Money, and of all the
Interest thereof due to any Orphan of the City, or the Executors,
Administrators or Assigns of such Orphan, unto the 25th day of December 1693.
The Interest to be computed from the time first payable unto the 25th day of
December 1683. at five pounds for the Interest of every hundred pounds for one
year; And from that time to the 25th day of December 1693. at three pounds, and
so proportionably for any greater or lesser Sum (the Interest already received
for such principal Money to be deducted) and to pay the like yearly Interest of
four pounds for every hundred pounds of the principal Money and Interest
thereof, to be computed as aforesaid, due upon Bond, Bill or Note liable to pay
Interest between the 25th day of December 1655. and the same day of December
1693. or any other the Creditor of the same City, or the Executors,
Administrators or Assigns of such Creditor on the said 25th day of December
1693. from the Chamber of the said City, or from the Mayor, Commonalty or
Citizens thereof, and so proportionably for any greater or lesser Sum, the
Manners, Messuages, Lands, Markets and Fairs, and other the Hereditaments and
Revenues belonging to the same City, in possession or reversion, and the
Improvements that shall be made thereof (except such the Lands and Revenues
belonging to the Hospitals of the same City, or Borough of Southwark, or such
as are chargeable with the Repairs of London Bridge) shall be yearly charged
for ever after the 24th day of June 1694. for the raising the Annual Sum of
eight thousand pounds, to be appropriated for the raising such a perpetual
Fond, and be applied as aforesaid.

II. The Aqueducts belonging to the City, The City Aqueducts liable.
and their Rents (except the Profits of such Water as shall be for the Supply
of the public Conduits, Hospitals, Halls and Prisons) shall be for ever
appropriated and applied toward payment of the said Interest.

III. 2000 l. annually out of Personal Estates.
And for the raising such a perpertual Fond, the Common Council may every year
raise and assess the Sum of two thousand pounds upon the Personal Estates of
the several Inhabitants within the City and Liberties, and to distrain for
default of payment.

IV. Leases of the Unequal Lights for 21 years, from June 24th 1694 600 l. per
ann.
The City may Lease to the Persons concerned in the Unequal Lights, the sole use
of such Lights within the City and Liberties, for one and twenty years, from
the 24th day of June 1694. at the Rent of six hundred pounds yearly to be
reserved, to be appropriated toward raising such a Fond, and payment of the
said Interest-mony; And after that Term expired, the Profits whatsoever that
shall be made by granting Licenses to lighten the Streets, shall be
appropriated and applied to the uses aforesaid.

V. Every Apprentice after 24th of June 1694 to pay 2 s. 6 d. at his being
bound to be transmitted to the Chamberlain on penalty of 5 l. 5 s. to be paid
by every one admitted a Freeman. 4 s. quod Tun on Wine imported. The Collector
to be appointed by the Mayor and Aldermen
For the increase of the Fond, every Apprentice after the 24th day of June
1694. when he is Bound, shall pay two shillings and six pence to the Master or
Wardens of such Company as his Master is Member of, to be by the said Master
and Wardens transmitted to the Chamberlain of the City, to be employed for the
uses aforesaid; upon the Penalty of five pounds for every Sum not so
transmitted, to be recovered in the Name of the Chamberlain: And Books of
Vellum or Parchment to be kept in the Common Halls of such Payments, for any
Person to inspect gratis.

VI. And every Person after the said 24th day of June 1694. when he is admitted
a Freeman, shall pay the Sum of five shillings, the said several Sums of two
shillings and six pence, and five shillings, to be paid over and above the
usual Fees.

VII. Also every Importer shall pay a Duty of four shillings per Tun upon all
sorts of Wine imported after the said 24th day of June 1694. into the Port of
the City of London, or the Members thereof, by way of Merchandise, over and
above the present Duties, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser
quantity; The Collector to be appointed by the Mayor and Court of Aldermen: And
the said Imposition to be paid in the same manner, and by such Rules, and under
such Penalties as are provided in an Act of Parliament made in the 12th year of
King Charles II. Entitled, A Subsidy granted to the King of Tonnage and
Poundage, etc.

VIII. 4 d. for meetage of every Chaldron of Coals after the 29th of June 1694
After the 29th of Sept. 1700 6 d. quod Chaldron or Tun to continue for 50
years. To be paid by the Owner of the Vessel.
There shall be paid for all such sort of Coals or Culm as are usually sold by
the Chaldron, imported into the Port of London, or Members thereof after the
24th day of June 1694. for every Chaldron thereof the Sum of four pence Meetage
for ever, over and above what is now paid, to be paid as the present Duty of
Meetage is; And after the 29th day of September 1700. the farther Sum of six
pence: And for such Coals as are sold by the Tun, for every Tun thereof
containing two thousand Weight, the like Sum of six pence, which shall continue
from the said 29th day of September for fifty year, and no longer, to be paid
by the Master or Owner of the Ship or Vessel whereupon they are laden, before
they shall break Bulk, or have a Meeter assigned, at such place as the Mayor
and Court of Aldermen shall appoint, within the City or Liberties, for Receipt
thereof; upon receipt whereof the Party appointed to receive the same, shall
without delay gratis deliver a Receipt, which shall be a sufficient Discharge.
How to be collected.
And the same Imposition of six pence per Chaldron shall be collected and
levied in such manner and in every respect as in and by one Act made in the
19th year of King Charles II. Entitled, An Act for the rebuilding the City of
London, the Imposition of Coals thereby granted was to be collected and levied;
And the Powers and Directions for that Act shall be exercised for the
collecting of the said Duty of six pence, as if particularly expressed in this,
during all the time it is payable: The Moneys to be paid into the receipt of
the Chamber. Collectors to give reasonable security.
All Sums of Money as part of the said Fond are to be paid into the Receipt of
the Chamber, and are hereby appropriated for the raising the said Fond, and
applied toward the discharge of the said Debts: And every Person that shall be
concerned in the Receipt of any of the Sums so appropriate, before he take upon
him the execution of such Office, shall find Sureties in such reasonable Sum as
by the Mayor and Court of Aldermen shall be thought fitting for the faithful
execution of such Office.

IX. After the expiration of 6 d. per Chaldron the City revenues liable for
6000 l. quod ann. besides the 8000 l. per ann. The Money raised by this Act to
be applied for the payment of 4 l. per Cent. due the 25th of Dec. 1693 And also
for the payment of 4 l. per Cent. from between the 25th of Dec. 1655 and the
25th of Dec. 1693 The payments to be made twice a year, at St. Thomas and St.
John Baptist, or within 14 days after. The perpetual Interest to be in full
satisfaction of the principal Debt.
After the said Imposition of six pence shall determine, all the Revenues of
the City of London in possession or reverson shall stand and be charged with
the full yearly Sum of six thousand pounds (over and above the said yearly Sum
of eight thousand pounds) in like manner appropriated as the yearly Sum of
eight thousand pound was.

X. And all the Rents, Impositions and Sums of Money by this Act applied to be
charged, raised or paid, (after reasonable Salaries and Allowances deducted)
for ever shall be applied for the payment of the Annual Sum of four pounds for
the Interest of every hundred pound, and proportionably for a greater or lesser
Sum of the abovementioned respective Debts, and all the Interest thereof due
on the 25th day of December 1693. to any Orphan of the City, or the Executors,
etc. of such Orphan: And also for the payment of the like yearly Interest of
four pounds for every hundred pound principal Money, and the Interest thereof to
be computed as aforesaid, due at any time between the said 25th day of December
1655. and the said 25th day of December 1693. upon Bond, Bill or Note liable to
pay Interest from the said City, unto any Person or Persons, or to so much
thereof only as the Moneys appointed by this Act to be raised and paid shall
yearly amount unto, to satisfy and pay toward the Interest to the said
Orphans and Creditors equally in proportion to their respective Interests; The
Payments to be made twice in every year, upon St. Thomas Day and St. John
Baptists, or within fourteen days after; The first payment to be made on St.
Thomas Day 1694. or within fourteen days after: The said Moneys to be employed
to no other use, and all the Orders or Warrants for the disposal thereof,
contrary to the intent of this Act to be void.

XI. The provision hereby made for the payment of the said Interest-Mony for
ever, shall be in full satisfaction of the Debts and Interest thereof due to
the said Orphans and Creditors, and they are to acknowledge satisfaction of
their respective Debts, according to the usual Custom, paying such Fees to the
Officers concerned, as the Mayor and Court of Aldermen shall appoint, not
exceeding thirteen shillings and four pence for every thousand pounds, The City
hereby discharged. Books to be kept of the Receipts and Disbursements. Access.
thereto gratis from 9 to 12 in the Forenoon. The Receipts and Payments to be
yearly audited. The Auditors Fees.
and the City and their Successors are hereby acquitted of the same.

XII. The Chamberlain shall provide or keep one or more Book or Books of Vellum
or Parchment, of the Receipts, and likewise of the Disbursements by virtue of
this Act, whereto all Persons may have free access to view the same, between
the hours of nine and twelve in the Forenoon, without any Fee or Reward; And
the Receipts and Payments of all the Moneys aforesaid shall be audited yearly
upon Oath, before one of the Auditors of the Impressed, (which Oath the said
Auditors are hereby required to administer) between Michaelmas Day and Saint
Thomas the Apostle, and for every thousand pounds the Accounts shall amount to,
the Auditor shall receive of the Chamberlain twenty shillings, and no more; The
Accounts so audited shall be signed by the said Auditor, and also allowed by
the Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and fairly entered and remain in the Chamber of
the City, to be perused and viewed.

XIII. If any Chamberlain of the City, Penalty of misimploying.
or other Person, shall after Receipt of any the said Moneys, divert or
misapply the same, he shall forfeit treble the Sum so misapplied, to be
recovered by any the Orphans or Creditors that will sue for the same in any of
their Majesty's Courts of Record.

XIV. The Chamberlain and Common Sergeant of the City, upon request, shall give
unto every of the said Orphans and Creditors, and their respective Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, Liberty of assigning.
a Bill or Note in Writing, of the Principal, Debt or Interest owing to them:
And any Person to whom any Money is payable by this Act, may by Writing under
his Hand and Seal, transfer his Right and Interest therein, to be registered in
a Book to be kept by the Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and the Note or Bill of
the said Debt being delivered up to the Officer appointed by the Court of
Aldermen for that purpose, he shall give his Note or Bill in Writing, of the
Debt so assigned, to the Party to whom such Assignment is made, and such
Assignee shall be entitled to the benefit thereof, and may assign toties
qu^^ies; Assignments irrevocable.
And it shall not be in the Power of such Persons who have made such
Assignments, to release or discharge the same, or the Moneys thereby assigned.

XV. Orphans not compellable to bring in their Money to the Chamber.
No Person shall be obliged or compelled by virtue of any Custom within the
said City, or by Order or Process of the Court of Orphans, to pay into the
Chamber any Sum of Money or Personal Estate, due or to be due, or belonging to
an Orphan of any Freeman, any Law or Usage enforcing the same notwithstanding:
But this not to be construed to extend to impeach or prevent Process upon any
Recognizance already given according to the Custom.

XVI. The City answerable for their Officers defaults.
If the Corporation of the City, or any of their Officers, or other Person, by
color of any Warrant or Authority from them, misapply or convert to their own
use any of the Sums hereby appropriated, the Corporation shall be answerable
for the same out of their Revenues, in any Action to be brought by any of the
said Orphans or Creditors, the Sum recovered to be to the uses aforesaid, and
the Costs to the Party suing. The Amerciaments, Fines on such Suits to the use
of the City.
Fines and Distresses upon the Corporation, upon the Account of such Suit, to
be to the uses aforesaid, and not to be pardoned or acquitted by their
Majesty's.

XVII. Provided on Application made to the Mayor and Court of Aldermen, by the
Executors or Administrators of the Father of such Orphan, to pay in, or lodge
any Sum of Money of such Orphan in the said Chamber, and to have the benefit of
the said provision hereby made, It shall be lawful for the said Mayor and
Aldermen to pay off the like Sum to such Person entitled to the said yearly
Payments as aforesaid, as they think fit, not being Orphans under the Age of
twenty one years of Age, and giving three months notice to, or for the Person
so to be paid off; at the end of which three months, upon payment or tender of
the said Moneys due for Principal and Interest to, or for the Person to whom
such notice shall be given according to the provision hereby made at the Office
of the said Chamberlain in Guildhall, that from thenceforth the Annual Sum of
Money payable to such Person, to whom such notice, payment or tender shall be
made, shall cease and determine, and the same shall become due and payable to,
or for the use of such Orphan, who shall have paid in the Moneys for the same,
and shall be registered accordingly, and be assignable as aforesaid; yet the
Moneys so tendered shall be paid to such Persons, upon their demand of the same,
and assigning or giving a Discharge for the same: And the provision hereby made
shall remain a perpetual Fond for the benefit of the Orphans of the said City
successively.

XVIII. Debts mortgaged redeemable upon payment of Principal and Interest.
Provided it be within 3 years after this Session of Parliament
If any such Debts due to any of the said Orphans, have at any time before the
said 25th day of December, been mortgaged or covenanted to be so, they are
redeemable, and shall be redeemed upon payment of the Principal Money paid in
consideration of making the Mortgage, with the Charges and Interest for the
same, from the time of payment thereof, after the rate of eight pounds per
Cent. per Annum for one year, discounting for what has been received for the
said Debt; And upon payment or tender of Principal, Interest and Charges, the
Security concerning the same to be void. But such Redemption is to be made
within three years after the end of this present Session of Parliament.

XIX. Contracts with Solicitors void. Solicitors to be paid at the discretion
of the Mayor and Aldermen. Their Forfeiture if they take more.
All Securities given by the Orphans to any Agents or Solicitors to obtain
Payments of their Debts, by Act of Parliament or otherwise, shall be null and
void; And the Mayor and Court of Aldermen out of the Revenue settled by this
Act, shall allow and pay to such Agents and Solicitors what they judge may be
reasonable, and that to be allowed in the Account of the said Revenue. And if
they demand or receive more than shall be so adjudged due to them, they shall
forfeit treble the Sum received, to be recovered with Costs of Suit, by such
Persons as will sue for the same in any of their Majesty's Courts of Record at
Westminster.

XX. New-River Water, Thames Water and Shadwel Waterworks excepted.
This Act shall not extend to the New-River Water, or Profits thereof; Nor
shall be construed to hinder or obstruct the Governors and Company of
Undertakers for raising of the Thames-Water in York Buildings, nor the Governor
and Company of the Water-work in Shadwel; But they may raise and take the Water
and lay Pipes and Branches in the Streets, as before, and enjoy all their
Rights: Nor shall this Act extend to the Waterworks of Thomas Morris, Th.
Morris Waterworks excepted.
at or near London Bridge, nor to the Profits or Benefits thereof, other than
the Rent reserved upon a Lease formerly made thereof by the City And Samuel
Hutchinson, Samuel Hutchinson.
or his Assigns, paying their proportion of Stock to the Partners in the Unequal
Lights, and covenanting to perform such Contracts and Agreements as are or
shall be made by them before the 24th day of June 1695. may enjoy the same
Interest and Benefit in the Premises, as any of the Partners, according to
their respective Proportions.

XXI. Privilege of Persons sued upon this Act.
Any Person sued for what he shall do in pursuance, or in the execution of this
Act, may plead the General Issue, and give upon Trial this Act, and the Special
Matter in Evidence; and in case of Nonsuit, forbearance of farther
Prosecution, Discontinuance or Verdict against the Plaintiff or Prosecutor, the
Defendant shall recover Costs, and have like Remedy for them, as when Costs by
Law are given to the Defendants.

XXII. This Act to be reputed a general Act.
This Act shall be reputed a General Act, and the Judges upon all occasions
shall take notice as if it were a Public Act of Parliament relating to the
whole Kingdom.

XXIII. For the space of seven years from the 29th day of September last past,
The City may use 2000 l. yearly for 7 years toward their necessary Expenses,
provided the Orphans have their due, otherwise to repay what is wanting to the
Orphans by 2000 l. per ann.
it shall be lawful for the Mayor and Court of Aldermen to retain and apply,
and the Chamberlain to issue and pay toward the necessary Expenses and Charges
of the City, any Sum not exceeding in the whole the Sum of two thousand pounds
yearly, out of the Moneys hereby appointed to the use of the Orphans and
Creditors: But in case after the deduction and allowance of the said two
thousand pounds, during the seven years, there shall not be raised and paid to
the Orphans and Creditors, out of the residue of the Profits of the aforesaid
several Provisions and Fonds, so much Money as will fully satisfy all the said
Orphans and Creditors Interest for all their several and respective Debts,
after the rate of four pounds per Cent. per Annum, during the whole seven
years, that then the City shall repay into the Hands of the Chamberlain, within
seven years after the expiration of the said Term, fourteen thousand pounds, or
so much thereof as they shall have made use of, by two thousand pound per
annum, or such less yearly Sum as shall be proportionable to what they shall
have so made use of, until the same, or so much thereof as shall make good the
deficiency that shall appear in the satisfaction of the Interest of all the
Moneys due to the said Orphans and Creditors, at the Rate aforesaid, by reason
of applying the said two thousand pounds per Annum, or any part thereof to the
use of the City for the Term aforesaid, shall be satisfied: And for securing
the repayment thereof, all the Estate, Rents and Profits of any sort, which at
the expiration of the term of seven years shall belong to the Mayor, The City
Revenues liable for the same.
Commonalty and Citizens in their Politic Capacity only (except the Revenues
belonging to the Hospitals, in or belonging to the same City or Borough of
Southwark, or for the Repairs of London Bridge) shall be and are charged, and
made subject and liable thereunto.

Prisoners.
I. STat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 2. Act 2 W. and M. revived.
That the Act made in the second year of their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An
Act for Relief of Poor Prisoners for Debt and Damages, be revived; and that the
Oath in the said Act, shall be abolished, and instead thereof the Oath herein
mentioned shall be the Oath to be tendered to the Sheriffs, Gaolers and Keepers
of Prison. I A. B. The Oath to be taken by Sheriffs and Gaolers
do swear, That I have examined the Commitments or Books belonging to the said
Prison, and that by them it does appear that J. S. was really and truly a
Prisoner in the Custody of the then Jailer or Keeper of the Prison of D. Prison
in the County of C. without any Fraud or Deceit, by me or any other, to my
knowledge or belief, at or upon the 28th day of November, Anno Dom. 1690.

II. And in case any Sheriff, Penalty for refusing the Oath.
Jailer or Keeper of Prison, shall refuse to take the Oath herein appointed, he
being required, unless it appear by the Commitment and Books of the said
Prison, that the Person for whom such Oath is required, was not truly a
Prisoner in the Custody of the said Jailer and Keeper according to the said
Act; that otherwise the said Jailer and Keeper so refusing to take the said
Oath, shall forfeit to such Prisoner the value of the Debt for which he shall
be imprisoned: And that in that case upon complaint of the Prisoner, the
Justices of Peace of the County or City where the Prison lies, Prisoner may be
discharged if he were in Custody 28 Nov. 1690
shall have power to examine the said Matter upon Oath of any other Persons,
which Oath they are hereby empowered to administer; And if it shall appear to
them, that the said Prisoner was truly a Prisoner on the said 28th day of
December 1690. then the said Justices may discharge the said Prisoner, so as he
may have full benefit of the said Act, notwithstanding the Sheriffs, Gaolers or
Keepers refusing the said Oath; any thing in the said Act notwithstanding.

III. The Sheriff or Gaolers Fee for discharge of a Prisoner.
And farther, That no Sheriff, Jailer or Keeper of Prison, nor any Clerk of the
Peace or other Officer directly or indirectly, shall take of any Prisoner to be
discharged by this Act, any Chamber-rent, Fee or Reward, for any thing relating
to his Discharge, above the Sum of 6 s. 6 d. in the whole, upon pain of
forfeiting the value of the Debt, and upon pain of being proceeded against as
an Extortioner; any Law, Act of Parliament or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

IV. The Justice of Peace his Clerks Fee.
And that no Justice of Peace, his Clerk or Servant shall take of any Prisoner
for signing his Warrant and Summons, any Fee or Reward whatsoever; nor any
Clerk of the Papers or other Officer that shall make out any Copies of Causes
for the said Prisoner, shall take for the same above 4 d. upon pain to be
proceeded against as Extortioners aforesaid.

V. No Debt contracted since Nov. 28. 1690. shall hereby be discharged.
Provided, that no Debtor shall by virtue of this or the aforesaid Act be
discharged of any Debt contracted by such Debtor since the 28th day of
November, which was in the Year 1690.

Ships.
I. Builders of 3 Deck Ships within 10 years from first M. 1694. their
allowance for Customs.
STat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 18. Every Person that shall within ten
years, from and after the first of May 1694. build or cause to be built within
any of their Majesty's Dominions any Ships or Vessels of three Decks, reckoning
the Orlop for one, with a Fore-castle, Quarter Deck Round-house, and six Foot
between each Deck from Plank to Plank, their Hawrses to be between Decks, the
said Ships to be of no less than 450 Tun, and to have no less than ten Ports of
a side between Decks, mounted with 32 Pieces of Ordnance close, of which 18 to
be between Decks, the said Guns upon the lower Deck to be Demy-Culverine of
3000 weight at least, upon the Upperdeck, Fore-castle and Steerage to be also
Demy-Culverine of 2200 weight at least, and those in the Cuddy to be 600 weight
at least, and other Ammunition proportionably, shall for the first three
Voyages which the said Ship or Ships shall make from their Majesty's Dominions
to any Foreign Parts, receive to their own use and benefit, one tenth part of
the Customs, commonly called or known by the name of the Subsidy of Tunnage and
Poundage, that shall be paid to their Majesty's for all such Goods and
Merchandises as shall be exported and imported on the said Ship or Ships to and
from this Kingdom; and the Commissioners and Officers of their Majesty's
Customs are hereby empowered to pay the same to the respective Owners
accordingly.

II. The penalty if altered.
And if at any time after the end of the said three first Voyages, any of the
said Ships or Vessels so to be built, as aforesaid, shall be altered, or put
into another form of Building, whereby they shall become, or be made less
defensible than they were at first building, that then every such Ship or
Vessel, with all the Guns, Tackle, Ammunition and Apparel thereof shall be
forfeited and lost.

I. Stat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 19. Offenses done since 24 June 1694.
may be tried in the Kings Bench, or by Justices of Oyer and Terminer.
All Offenses (contrary to one Act made in the 13th year of King Charles II.
Entitled, An Act for the establishing Articles and Orders for the regulating
and better Government of his Majesty's Navies, Ships of War and Forces by Sea)
which shall be committed after the 24th of June 1694. may be tried and
determined in the Kings Bench at Westminster, or before Justices of Oyer and
Terminer appointed by their Majesty's, which said Courts are hereby empowered
to hear and determine the same according to the Common Law, and to inflict such
Penalties as are appointed by the said Act.

II. Offenses done out of the Realm, etc. Person tried by a Court Martial not
to be tried again. How long to continue.
Where any of the said Offenses shall be committed out of this Realm, the same
may be alleged and laid in any County within this Realm.

III. Provided, that no Person who shall be tried in a Court Martial, shall for
the same Offense be again tried by virtue of this Act; nor shall any Person
tried by virtue of this Act be tried again by a Court Martial.

IV. Provided also, that this Act shall continue in force for three years, and
from thence to the end of the next Session of Parliament.

Soldiers.
I. Stat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 9. The Act made in the last Session
of this Parliament, Entitled, An Act for punishing Officers and Soldiers, who
shall mutiny and desert their Majesty's Service, and for punishing false
Musters, and for payment of Quarters, shall continue and be in force until the
first of March 1694. and no longer.

II. Who shall be accounted a listed Soldier.
No Person that shall be listed for the Land-Service after the first of March
1693. shall be esteemed a listed Soldier, or be subject to any of the Pains
and Penalties of this Act, or any other Penalty for his Behavior as a
Soldier, that shall not have been brought before a Justice of Peace, not being
an Officer in the Army, or Chief Magistrate of some City or Town-Corporate, or
High Constable or Pety Constable in the Hundred or Division where the Person
shall be listed, and before such Justice, Magistrate or High Constable or Pety
Constable declare his free consent to be listed or mustred as a Soldier before
he be listed or mustred, or inserted in any Muster-Roll of a Regiment, Troop or
Company as aforesaid: And every Military Officer that shall offend herein shall
incur the like Penalty and Forfeiture, as is by the said continued Act to be
inflicted upon any Officer for making a false and untrue Muster.

Sureties.
I. St. 10 E. 3. for finding Sureties for Good Behavior repealed.
Stat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 7. The Statute the 10th year of King
Edw. III. for finding Sureties for the Good abearing, by him or her that has a
Pardon of Felony is hereby made void and repealed.

II. Provided, At the Justices discretion.
that if any Charter of Pardon be pleaded by any Person for any Felony, the
Justices before whom such Pardon shall be pleaded, may at their discretion,
remand or commit such Person to Prison, there to remain until he or she shall
enter into a Recognizance, with two sufficient Sureties for his or her being of
the Good Behavior, for any time not exceeding seven years.

III. Provided, Feme-Covert or Infant to find Sureties.
if any such Charter of Pardon be pleaded by a Feme-Covert or Infant, such
Feme-Covert or Infant may find two sufficient Sureties who shall enter into a
Recognizance for his or her being of the Good Behavior, as aforesaid.

Taxes.
Aid of 4 s. in the Pound.
I. STat. 5 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 1. 4 s. in the Pound to be paid for all
personal Estates, excepting desperate Debts and Housholdstuff
All and every Person and Persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, Guilds and
Fraternities, having any Estate in ready Moneys, or in any Debts owing to them
within this Realm or without; or having any Estate in Goods, Wares,
Merchandises, or other Chattels or Personal Estate within this Realm or
without, belonging to, or in trust for them (except out of the Premises such
Moneys as he or they do bona fide owe, and such Debts owing to them as shall be
adjudged desperate, by the Commissioners appointed by this Act; and also the
Stock upon Lands, and such Goods as are used for Household Stuff) shall pay unto
their Majesty's 4 s in the Pound, according to the true yearly value thereof
for one year, viz. for every 100 l. of such ready Money and Debts, and for every
100. l. worth of such Goods, Wares, Merchandises or other Chattels or other
Personal Estate, the Sum of 24 s. and so after that rate for every greater or
lesser Sum or quantity.

II. All and every Person and Persons, All public Officers and their Agents
(except Officers in the Army) to pay 4 s. in the Pound.
Commissioner or Commissioners, having or exercising any Public Office or
Employment of Profit (such Military Officers who are or shall be in Muster by
the Muster-Master General of the Army, or in Pay in their Majesty's Army or
Navy, in respect of such Offices only excepted (other than Governors, Deputy or
Lieutenant-Governors of any of their Majesty's Garrisons, Forts or Castles for
their Salaries, or Pay for the same Governments:) And also except such Persons
in their Majesty's Ordnance, whose Salaries do not exceed 100 l. per Ann.) and
all and every their Agents, Clerks, Secondaries, Substitutes and other
inferior Ministers whatsoever, shall pay unto their Majesty's the Sum of 4 s.
for every 20 s. which he or they receive in one year, by virtue of any
Salaries, Gratuity, Bounty-mony, Reward, Fees or Profits to him or them
accruing by reason or occasion of their several Offices or Employments.

III. All real Estates chargeable as aforesaid.
All Manors, Messuages, Lands and Tenements, as also Quarries, Mines of Coal,
Tin or Lead, Copper, Mundick-Iron, or other Mines, Iron-works, Salt-springs and
Salt-works; all Allom Mines or Works, all Parks, Chases, Warrens, Woods,
Under-woods, Coppices; and all Fishings, Tithes, Tolls, Annuities and all other
yearly Profits and Hereditaments of what nature or kind soever they be, as well
within ancient Demesne and other Liberties and privileged Places as without,
shall be charged at 4 s. for every 20 s. by the year, which the said Manors,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and other the Premises are now worth
to be leased, if the same were truly and bona fide leased or demised at a Rack
Rent, and according to the full true yearly value thereof, without any respect
had to the present Rents reserved for the same, if such Rents have been
reserved upon such Leases or Estates made, for which any Fine or Income has
been paid or secured, or have been lessened or abated upon consideration of
Money laid out, or to be laid out in Improvements, and without any respect had
to any former Rates or Taxes thereupon imposed, or making any abatement in
respect of Reparations, Taxes, Parish-Duties, or any other Charges whatsoever,
To be paid quarterly.
to be paid by four quarterly Payments, the first thereof to be made upon the
26th of March which shall be in the year 1694.

IV. Deductions to be allowed.
And whereas many of the Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Tithes,
Hereditaments and Premises, intended by this Act to be charged with the Pound
Rates as aforesaid, stand encumbered with, or are subject and liable to the
payment of several Rent-charges or Annuities issuing out of the same, or to the
payment of diverse Fee-farm Rents, Rent-service, or other Rents thereupon
reserved or charged, by reason whereof the true Owners of such Manors, etc. do
not receive to their own use the true yearly value of the same, for which
nevertheless they are by this Act charged; It is therefore hereby enacted, That
it shall be lawful for the Landlords and Proprietors of such Manors, etc. as
are charged with the Pound Rate as aforesaid, to deduct and keep in their Hands
4 s. in the Pound for every Fee-farm Rent, etc. charged upon, or issuing out of
the Premises, or any part thereof: And all Persons who are entitled to such
Rents, etc. are hereby required to allow such Deductions, upon receipt of the
residue of such Moneys, as shall be due to them for such Rents, or Annual
Payments reserved as aforesaid.

V. Commissioners to make Assessors, who are to return the Names of Persons,
and value of their Estates. As also Collectors. Penalty of neglect or refusal.
The Commissioners after their general Meeting and Charge given, shall issue
their Warrants to two at the least of the most sufficient Inhabitants of each
Parish or Township within the respective Divisions, requiring them to be
Assessors of every the Rates and Duties by this Act imposed, and shall prefix a
certain day and place for the Assessors to appear before them, and to bring in
their Certificates in Writing, of the Names and Sirnames of every Person
dwelling within the Limits of those Places with which they shall be charged,
and of the value of every of them in ready Money, Debts, Goods, Chattels or
other Personal Estate, (except before excepted) or in public Offices or
Employments. And the same Assessors are also hereby required to inform
themselves by all lawful ways of the full yearly value of all Manors,
Messuages, Lands and Tenements, as also of all Quarries, Mines of Coal, Tin or
Lead, Copper, Mundick or other Mines, Iron-works, Salt-springs, and Salt-works,
Allom-mines and Works, Parks, Chases, Warrens, Woods, Under-woods and Coppices,
and all Fishings, Tithes, Tolls, Annuities and other yearly Profits; And of all
Hereditaments of what nature soever lying or being in the Limits with which
they shall be charged: And being so thereof ascertained, they are to assess the
said Manors, Lands and Premises before appointed, to be charged after the rate
of 4 s. for every 20 s. of the full yearly value, as aforesaid, and to bring
with them a Certificate in Writing of their said Assessment: And shall then
also return the Names of two or more able Persons living within the Limits of
those Parishes or Places where they shall be chargeable, to be Collectors of
the Moneys to be paid to their Majesty's by this Act; for whose paying to the
Head-Collector such Moneys as they shall be chargeable withal, the Parish
wherein they are so employed shall be answerable. Penalty of Assessors for
neglecting their Duty.
And if any of the Assessors, as aforesaid appointed, refuse to serve, or make
default at the time appointed for his Appearance (not having a lawful excuse
to be witnessed by the Oaths of two credible Witnesses, which two or more of
the said Commissioners have power to administer) or shall not perform his Duty,
every such Assessor shall for so neglecting or refusing, forfeit to their
Majesty's such Sum as the said Commissioners or the major part of them shall
think fit, not exceeding 20 l. nor under 10 l. to be levied by distress and
sale of the Offenders Goods and Chattels, in like manner as is appointed for
levying the several Rates herein mentioned in case of refusal of payment. And
every Assessor, as before appointed, before he take upon him the execution of
the said Employment, shall take the Oaths required to be taken in an Act made
in the first Year of their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for the
abrogating the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and appointing other Oaths;
Oath to be taken.
and also take the Oath following; You shall swear well and truly to execute
the Duty of an Assessor, and to cause the Rates and Duties imposed by an Act,
Entitled, An Act for granting to their Majesty's an Aid of 4 s. in the Pound
for one year for carrying on a vigorous War against France, to be duly and
impartially assessed, according to the best of your skill and knowledge; and
therein you shall spare no Person for Favor or Affection, nor any Person
grieve for Hatred or Ill Will.

So help you God.

VI. Certificates to be returned to the Commissioners by the 5th of March 1693.
The Rates and Assessments upon all ready Moneys, Debts, Goods, Chattels,
Personal Estates and Public Offices and Employments of Profit charged by this
Act, shall be ascertained, and the Certificates thereof returned to the
Commissioners upon or before the 5th of March 1693. unless the Commissioners
shall think fit to give farther time: And also the Assessments of 4 s. in the
Pound of the yearly value of all Manors, Messuages, Tenements, Hereditaments
and Premises, charged by this Act, shall be ascertained, and the Certificates
returned in to the Commissioners, on or upon the 5th day of March aforesaid,
unless the Commissioners shall think fit to give farther time; and upon return
of such Certificate, any three or more of the Commissioners may examine the
Presenters thereof, if they see cause: Commissioners to examine suspected
Returns.
And if at the return of the Certificates, or within twenty days after, they
shall have cause to suspect that any Person, or any Manors, Lands, or other the
Premises, which ought to be charged, is omitted; or that any Person is of a
greater Estate, or any the Lands or other Premises are of greater yearly value,
the said Commissioners or any three of them may summon such Person or the
Owners of such Manors or other Premises to appear before them; and if they
neglect to appear (not having a reasonable excuse) every Person so making
default, Penalty of the Persons not appearing.
shall pay to their Majesty's double the Sum he should have been rated at: And
the said Commissioners or the major part of them shall have power to examine
into the Estate of such person, and the value of such Premises chargeable by
this Act, and to set such Rates thereon as shall be chargeable by this Act.

VII. And the said Commissioners, Collecting the Duty at 4 quarterly Payments,
and when to begin.
or any two of them shall issue out their Warrants for the collecting the Rates
and Assessments in respect of the Personal Estates, Offices and Employments;
and also of the Pound Rate to be charged upon Lands, Tenements and other the
Premises as aforesaid, at four quarterly Payments, the first to be on the 26th
of March 1694. or within twenty days after paid into their Majesty's Exchequer;
The second Payment by the 20th day of June next ensuing, or within twenty days
after; The third on the 20th day of September next ensuing, or within twenty
days after: And the last Payment to be on the 20th of December, or within
twenty days after.

VIII. The Sub-collector may retain 3 d. Sub-collectors and Receiver Generals
Fee.
for each 20 s. he collects as a Reward for his Pains, and shall not travel
above ten miles for payment of any Moneys by him received: And the
Head-collector shall be nominated by the Receiver General of the County, which
Receiver General shall be answerable for all Moneys received by the Collectors
of the said County; And the Receiver General shall have 2 d. in the Pound for
all Moneys paid by him into the Exchequer, on or before the times prefixed in
this Act.

IX. Commissioners Clerks Fees
The Commissioners Clerks shall for writing Warrants, Certificates and
Duplicates, by Warrant under two or more of the Commissioners Hands, receive
from the respective Receivers General, 1 d. in the Pound for such Moneys as
they shall have received.

X. Penalty of refusing payment.
Upon refusal to pay, as by Act assessed, it shall be lawful to distrain, and
the Distress to sell within four days: And moreover it shall be lawful to break
open (in the daytime) any House, and (upon Warrant under the Hands and Seals
of two or more of the said Commissioners) any Chest, Trunk, Box or other things
where any such Goods are, calling the Constables or Headboroughs to their
assistance where any refusal or resistance shall be made, Tenants to deduct out
of their Rents.
The several Tenants which shall be rated by virtue of this Act, are hereby
required to pay such Moneys as shall be rated upon such Houses and Premises,
and deduct out of the Rents so much of the said Rates as in respect of the said
Rents of every such House or Lands the Landlord ought to bear; and all
Landlords are hereby required to allow such Deductions upon receipt of the
residue of their Rents.

XI. Within what time to appeal.
If any Person by this Act sessed, do find himself grieved by such assessing,
and do within ten days after demand of the same, complain to the Commissioners,
the said Commissioners, or any three or more of them, so as the major part of
the Commissioners who signed the Rates be present, shall have power within ten
days after such complaint to examine any Persons upon Oath of their real or
personal Estate, and upon examination and knowledge thereof to abate or enlarge
the same Assessment, and the same so abated or enlarged shall be estreated into
the Exchequer as aforesaid: Appeals to be final. Collector neglecting or
refusing, his Penalty
And Appeals once determined to be final.

XII. If any Collector shall neglect or refuse to pay any Money by him received,
as by this Act is directed, or shall detain any Money and not pay the same at
such time as is hereby directed, the Commissioners of each County, or any two
or more of them are hereby empowered to imprison the Person and seize the Estate
both real and personal of such Collector to him belonging, or which shall
descend or come to his Heirs or Executors, and to give notice and appoint a
time for the sale thereof, and to satisfy and pay into the Hands of the
Receiver General, so much as shall be detained by the said Collector his Heirs
or Executors.

XIII. Controversies among Commissioners how to be determined.
If any Controversy arising concerning the assessment or payment thereof which
concerns any of the Commissioners by this Act appointed, the Commissioners so
concerned in the said Controversy shall have no Voice, but shall withdraw at
the time of the Debate, until it be determined by the rest; and in default
thereof, that the Commissioners present may impose upon such Commissioners so
refusing to withdraw what to them seems fit, not exceeding 20 l. the same to
be paid as other Fines in this Act.

XIV. Colleges, Halls and Persons, etc. excepted.
No College or Hall in either of the two Universities, or the Colleges of
Windsor, Eaton, Winchester or Westminster; or the Corporation of the Governors
of the Charity for Relief of poor Widows and Children of Clergymen, or the
College of Bromley, or any Hospital for or in respect of the Scites of the
said Colleges, Halls or Hospitals, or any Master, Fellow or Scholar of any
such College or Hall, or any Reader, Officer or Minister of the said
Universities, Colleges or Halls, or any Master or Usher of any School, for or
in respect of any Stipend, Wages or Profits whatsoever arising or growing due
to them in respect of the said several Places or Employments in the said
Universities, Colleges, Halls or Schools, shall be assessed by this. Nor shall
any the Houses or Lands belonging to Christ's Hospital, St. Bartholomews,
Bridewel, St. Thomas or Bethlehem in the City of London and Borough of
Southwark; or the Corporation of the Governors of the Charity, for Relief of
poor Widows and Children of Clergymen, or the College of Bromley, be assessed
by virtue of this Act. No Alms-men or Alms-women, or other poor Person
inhabiting within any other Hospital or Almshouse for or in respect of any
Rents or Revenues payable to them for their immediate use and relief, and whose
annual Maintenance and Profits does not exceed in the whole the Sum of 20 l.
But nevertheless all the Houses and Lands which are held by Lease or Grant from
the said Corporation, or any of the said Hospitals or Almshouses for so much
as they are yearly worth over and above the Rents reserved and payable to the
said Corporation, or to the said Hospitals or Almshouses, to be received and
disbursed for the immediate support and relief of the Poor in the said
Hospitals or Almshouses, are liable to be assessed by this Act.

XV. No Covenants hereby avoided
Provided, that nothing in this Act contained, shall change or make void any
Covenants or Agreements whatsoever between Landlord and Tenant, or any others,
touching the payment of Taxes, any thing herein mentioned to the contrary
notwithstanding.

XVI. Guardians and Parents liable for Infants
Where any Persons chargeable with any Rates by this Act, shall be under the
Age of twenty one years, in such case the Parents, Guardians and Tutors of such
Infants, upon default of payment by such Infants, shall be hereby liable to,
and charged with the Payments which such Infants ought to have made; and upon
default or neglect of such Parents, Guardians or Tutors, as aforesaid, they
shall be proceeded against as any other Persons making default in this Act.

XVII. Where a Person shall be taxed, in respect of Employment.
Every Person rated or assessed for his Office or Employment, shall pay for the
same in the place where such Office is executed. And every Person rated in
respect of his personal Estate, shall be rated at such place where he shall be
resident at the time of the execution of this Act. And if any Person, who ought
to be taxed by this Act, for his personal Estate, shall at the time of his
Assessment be out of the Realm, such Person shall be rated therefore in such
place where he was last abiding within the Realm.

XVIII. Where in respect of his Estate. Shifting his Residence the Penalty.
If any Person having several Mansionhouses shall be doubly charged by this Act
in respect of his personal Estate, then upon Certificate under the Hands and
Seals of two or more Commissioners for that place, of the Sum charged upon him,
and upon Oath made before a Justice of Peace of such Certificate, the Person so
doubly charged, shall for so much as shall be so certified, be discharged in
every other place. And if any that ought to be taxed by this Act for his
personal Estate, shall by changing his place of Residence, or any other fraud,
escape from being taxed, and the same be proved before any two of the
Commissioners, or a Justice of Peace of the place where such Person resideth at
any time within one year after such Tax, every Person so escaping shall be
charged at the double value of so much as he should be taxed by this Act, the
same to be certified into the Exchequer, and levied upon his Lands and Goods.

XIX. Householder to give Account of his Lodgers. Commissioners to assess each
other. New River Water, Thames Waterworks, etc. excepted.
Every Householder shall upon demand of the Assessors, give an Account of the
Names and Qualities of all Lodgers in their Houses, under penalty of forfeiting
20 l. to their Majesty's.

XX. The Commissioners in their several Limits shall assess each other for
their personal Estates and Employments respectively; and also shall assess each
Assessor within their several Divisions. No Persons shall be assessed for
having any share or interest in the New-River Water, brought to the North-parts
of London, commonly called the New-River; or in the Thames Waterworks, or in
the Hide-Park or Marybone Waters, or any Rents or Profits arising thereby: Nor
any Person having any share or interest in the Stock for printing of Books in
the Kings Printing House, nor any Companies of Merchants in London, for their
respective Shares aforesaid, and the aforesaid Stock.

XXI. Scotland, Ireland, etc. excepted.
Provided this Act shall not extend to the Inhabitants of Scotland, Ireland,
Jersey or Guernsey, for and concerning any such personal Estate, which they or
any to their use have within the places aforesaid.

XXII. Exemptions from Taxes void.
No Letters Patents granted to any Persons or Corporations of any manner of
Liberties or Exemptions from Taxes or Aids shall be construed to exempt them
from the Sums of Money granted by this Act.

XXIII. No Commissioner shall act by virtue of this Act before he has taken
the Oaths appointed by an Act made in the first year of their Majesty's Reign,
Entitled, Commissioners Oath
An Act for the abrogating the Oaths of Supremacy, and appointing other Oaths,
upon the pain of 500 l.

XXIV. Every Papist or reputed Papist, Papist not swearing to be doubly charged.
being of the Age of sixteen years or upwards, who has not taken the Oaths in
the last Act mentioned, to be taken, as there expressed, shall be doubly
charged the Rates above mentioned.

XXV. Penalty of any Person refusing the Oath.
Every Person of the Age of sixteen years or upwards, and being now withing
this Realm, who has not taken the Oaths mentioned, and upon Summons under the
Hand and Seal of any two or more of the said Commissioners appointed by the
first abovementioned Act, shall refuse to take the said Oaths at the time
appointed in such Warrant, or shall neglect to appear at such times before the
Commissioners, in order to take the said Oaths, shall doubly be assessed the
Rates abovementioned.

XXVI. Gentlemen to be taxed by a former Act, and not paying, the Penalty
Every Gentleman or so reputed, or owning or writing himself such, or being
above that Quality, who by virtue of an Act made in the third year of their
Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for raising Money by a Poll, payable
quarterly for one year, for carrying on a vigorous War against France, did pay
or ought to have paid double the Sums charged by the said Act, or were or ought
to have been returned into the Exchequer for non-payment thereof, who shall not
voluntarily appear before the said Commissioners, or any two or more of them,
within ten days after the first Meeting of the said Commissioners, and take the
said Oaths appointed by the said Act made the first year of their Majesty's
Reign, shall be doubly assessed, as above.

XXVII. Quakers to subscribe the Declaration.
Provided nevertheless, that whereas certain Persons called Quakers, and now
known to be such, do scruple the taking of any Oath, It shall be sufficient for
every such Person to subscribe the Declaration of Fidelity contained in an Act
of Parliament held in the first year of their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An
Act for exempting their Majesty's Protestant Subjects dissenting from the
Church of England, from the Penalties of certain Laws; and every Person so
doing, shall not be chargeable with any of the double Rates aforesaid.

XXVIII. Lands to be above 20 s per ann.
No Person shall be liable to the Pound-rate imposed by this Act upon Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, whose Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments are not of
the yearly value of 20 s. in the whole.

XXIX. Master of the Rolls, etc. where to be charged.
The Master of the Rolls, Masters in Chancery, Six Clerks, Clerks of the Petty
Bag, Examiners, Registers, Clerks of the Inrolment, Clerks of the Affidavits
and Subpoena Office, or any other the Officers of the High-Court of Chancery,
that execute their Offices in the Liberty of the Rolls, are to be assessed
there and not elsewhere.

XXX. Penalty of Collectors detaining Money.
If any Collector shall keep in his Hands any part of the Money by him
collected, for any longer time than by this Act directed, or pay any part
thereof to any other Person than the Head-Collector or Receiver-General of such
place, every such Collector shall forfeit 10 l. And if any Head-Collector shall
detain in his Hands, or pay any Money to any other than the Receiver-General of
such Place, every such Head-Collector shall forfeit 40 l. And if any
Receiver-General or his Deputy shall pay such Moneys, or any part thereof paid
to him by this Act to any Person whatsoever, other than the Receipt of their
Majesty's Exchequer, within the times limited by this Act, such Receiver
General or his Deputy shall forfeit the Sum of 1000 l.

XXXI. Changing Abode after Assessment.
If after Assessments on personal Estates according to this Act, any Person
shall remove to any place where such Person was not taxed, the Commissioners
acting within such place are hereby empowered to summon such Person before them,
and unless he or she shall produce a Certificate made according to the
Directions of this Act, whereby it may appear that he or she have paid all
their precedent quarterly Payments, the said Commissioners are hereby required
to cause such Persons to be assessed for such quarterly Payments as remain
unassessed, to be assessed and paid according to the true intent of this Act.

XXXII. The King may borrow upon this Act at 7 l. per Cent.
It shall and may be lawful for any Person Native or Foreigner, Bodies Politic
or Corporate to lend to their Majesty's upon the security of this Act any Sums
of Money, and to receive for the forbearance thereof any Sum not exceeding 7 l.
per Cent. for one whole year, and that no Money so lent shall be rated by virtue
of this Act.

XXXIII. No Rector or Vicar chargeable except above 30 l. per Ann.
No Rector or Vicar who has the Cure of Souls, and actually resides upon his
Rectory or Vicaridge, (upon the account of such his Rectory and Vicaridge only)
shall be charged by this Act, unless his Rectory or Vicaridge does really and
truly exceed the value of 30 l. per annum, or unless he has more than one
Rectory or Vicaridge.

Additional Supply for 118506 l. 5 s. 10 d.
I. Stat. 5 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 5. That it shall and may be lawful for any
Persons Natives or Foreigners to contribute toward the advancing the Sum of
118506 l. 5 s. 10 d. to make up the whole Sum of 1000000 l. granted to their
Majesty's by an Act made this present Parliament, intended to be advanced by
paying into their Majesty's Exchequer at any time before the first day of May
1694. any Sum or Sums of Money, not exceeding in the whole the Sum of 118506 l.
5 s. 10 d. as follows, viz. That every Person out of the Rates and Duties of
Excise granted by the said Act of 1000000 l. 14 l. per Cent. for own Life or
Nominees.
shall have and receive for every Sum of 100 l. by them respectively advanced
and paid a quarterly Annuity, Rent or Payment of 14 l. and proportionably for a
greater Sum, for and during the life of such Person so advancing or paying the
same, or during any other life to be nominated by the Person advancing, or
paying any such Sum as aforesaid, Within what time to be nominated.
the same to be nominated within six days after payment of such Sum, which
yearly Annuities, Rents or Payments shall commence from the 24th of June next
ensuing, and shall be paid and payable at the four most usual Feasts of the
year, viz. The Annuntiation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Nativity of St.
John Baptist, the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, and the Feast of the
Birth of our Lord Christ; and every Person on payment of such Sum or Sums as
aforesaid, Tallies to be given on receipt of the Moneys. and Orders thereon,
which may be transferred or assigned, and not to be revoked.
shall immediately have one or more Tally or Tallies importing the receipt of
the Consideration Money, and Orders for the Payment of the said Annuities,
bearing the same date with the Tally, the said Tallies to be levied, and the
said Orders to be signed in the same manner as in the said Act is mentioned
touching Tallies and Orders to be given to the Contributors for Annuities upon
the said Act, and the said Orders not to be determinable, revocable or
countermandable, as touching the aforementioned Orders in the said Act is
enacted; which said Orders shall be assignable and transferrable in such and
the same manmer as is mentioned in the said Act touching Orders given to the
Contributors in the said Act mentioned, and all the Rates and Duties by the
said Act granted, over and beside so much as shall bear proportion at the Rates
in the said Act mentioned, to the whole Sum of 881493 l. 14 s. 2 d. already
advanced by the Contributors upon the said Act, are and shall be appropriated
and applied, and are hereby appropriated to and for the payment of the said
Annuities, yearly Rents or Sums after the rate of 14 l. per Cent. per Annum for
every 100 l. to be advanced as aforesaid, according to the true intent and
meaning of this Act, and shall not be diverted or divertible to any other use,
intent or purpose whatsoever, under the like Penalties, Forfeitures and
Disabilities, Penalty for misapplying the Moneys given by this Act. Books and
Registers to be kept.
in respect to all and every the Officers in the said Act mentioned, as are in
the said Act appointed, in case of diverting or misapplying any part of the
Moneys which ought to be paid to the Contributors upon the said Act. And the
said Officers are hereby required to keep Books and Registers, and make Entries
of the Names of all Persons who shall advance any Moneys before the said first
of May, and of the several Sums so advanced, and the times of paying in the
same respectively, and the Names of such Persons for whose Lives the several
Annuities or yearly Payments are to be payable, without Fee or Reward, as in
the said Act mentioned: And every Person who shall advance or pay any such Sum,
as asoresaid, Interest of 10 l. per Cent. from 1st of May to the 24th of June.
before the first of May, as aforesaid, shall receive out of the Money granted
by the said Act, for all Money so advanced by him, and paid from the respective
days of payment unto the 24th of June, as aforesaid, Interest at the rate of 10
l. per Cent. per Annum.

II. Money payable to any Person by this Act to be free from Duties. Surplus to
be to the use of their Majesty's.
Any Moneys payable to any Person or Persons by virtue of this Act, shall not
be chargeable with any Rates, Duties or Impositions whatsoever; and in case
there shall be any Surplus or Remainder of the Moneys arising by the said Rates
and Duties of Excise, at the end of any year during the term of ninety and nine
years granted therein by the said former Act, after making all the Payments
which by this or the said former Act are appointed to be paid within the same
year, or reserving Money for the same, such Surplus or Remainder shall be to the
use of their Majesty's, their Heirs and Successors.

III. Upon demand of their shares a Certificate of the Life of the Nominee
shall be produced.
Every Contributor upon this or the former Act, his or her Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, upon their demanding any half-yearly or quarterly
Payment of their respective shares of either of the said Funds (unless the
Nominee appear in Person at the said Receipt) shall produce a Certificate of
the Life of his, her or their respective Nominee, signed by the Minister and
Churchwardens of the Parish where such Nominee shall be then living, as by the
said Act is appointed, or otherwise it shall and may be lawful to and for every
Contributor, his or her Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at his, her or
their Election to make Oath of the truth of his, her or their respective
Nominees Life, on the day when the said Payments shall become due, before any
one or more Justices of the Peace of the respective County, Riding, City, Town
or Place wherein such Person at the time of the making the said Oath shall
reside, and the said Justice or Justices shall make a Certificate thereof
without Fee, the which shall be filed in the said Office or Receipt of
Exchequer: And if any Person shall be guilty of a false Oath, Penalty of
forging a Certificate.
or forging any Certificate touching the Premises, and be thereof lawfully
convicted, he shall incur the Pains and Penalties to be inflicted upon Persons
who commit wilful Perjury or Forgery: And in case any Nominee shall at the time
of such demand be resident in Scotland, or beyond the Seas, and any one or more
of the Barons of the Exchequer for the time being shall certify, that upon
proof to him or them made (which proof is to be taken in a Summary way) it does
seem probable to him or them that the said Nominee is living, the said
Certificate being filed, as aforesaid, shall be a sufficient Warrant for making
the said quarterly Payment to the respective Contributors, their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns: And if any Person shall receive one or more
quarterly Payments, upon his, her or their Annuity or Annuities for any time
beyond the death of his, her or their Nominee, when the same ought to cease,
such Person shall forfeit treble the value of the Moneys so received.

IV. And whereas several Persons who did contribute or pay several of the Sums
of Money which have been contributed upon the said recited Act, for Shares,
Dividends, Annuities, or other Benefits in the said Act mentioned, as well upon
the benefit of Survivorship as upon the yearly Annuities of 14 l. per Cent. did
not name to the Auditor of the Receipt, or Clerk of the Pells in the Receipt of
the Exchequer, within the respective times by the said Act appointed, the
respective Lives during which such Dividends, Shares, Annuities or other
Benefits respectively were to continue: It is hereby enacted, Benefit of
Survivorship within what time the Lives to be named
That if such Persons shall at any time before the first of March next,
nominate to the Auditor of the Receipt of Clerk of the Pells in the Exchequer
the respective Lives (their own or others) during which such Dividends, Shares,
Annuities, or other Benefits should continue respectively, that then his, her
or their Nominees shall be entered in the Books kept in the Receipt for the
Nominees: And every such Contributor, his or her Executors, Administrators and
Assigns shall have, receive and enjoy such and the like Dividends, Shares and
Annuities, and other Benefits, in respect of the Moneys so contributed as he or
she might have had received and enjoyed, if the respective Lives for the same
had been named within the respective times by the said Act prescribed.

V. The Surplus to their Majesty's not to be charged with any Gift, etc.
Provided that the Surplus or Remainder of the Moneys arising by the said Rates
and Duties appointed by the said Act be to the use of their Majesty's, their
Heirs and Successors, and shall not be charged or chargeable with any Gift,
Grant or Pension whatsoever.

The Lottery Act.
I. Stat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 1. From and after the 25th day of
March 1694. there shall be raised, levied, collected and paid unto their
Majesty's until the 17th day of May, which shall be in the year 1697. and no
longer, for Salt, the Rates and Duties following, viz.

II. Foreign Salt 3 d. per Gallon.
Three pence shall be paid by the Importer for every Gallon of Salt not being
of the Product or Manufacture of this Kingdom, that shall be imported after the
said 25th of March, over and above the present Duties now payable for Salt
imported.

III. Forfeiture and how to be racovered.
The Duty hereby set on all foreign and imported Salt, shall be paid in ready
Money upon Entry made, before the landing, and if any be landed before due entry
with the Collector, or before the Duty satisfied, or without a Warrant for the
landing the same first signed by the Collector in the Port, the same or the
value to be forfeited, and to be recovered in such manner as any Forfeiture is
to be recovered, mentioned in an Act of 12 Car. 2. Entitled, An Act for the
taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries and Tenures in Capite, Allowance
for payment in ready Money
etc. or by any other Statute now in force, relating to the Revenue of Excise;
Nevertheless such Importer of Foreign Salt shall have six months time for the
payment, giving security to the Collector; but if he pay ready Money, he shall
have 10 l. per Cent. abated.

IV. Inland Salt 1 d ob. per Gallon.
Every Gallon of Salt, and Rock-Salt made within this Kingdom shall pay one
penny halfpenny, and after that rate for a greater or lesser quantity.

V. Duties by whom to be managed.
The Duties upon Salt shall be managed by the Commissioners of the Excise, and
the Collectors shall be appointed under their Hands and Seals.

VI. All Makers and Proprietors of Salt and Rock-Salt shall make true Entries
with the Officers hereby appointed of the Quantities of Salt by them made or
taken out of the Pits, and shall have a Warrant gratis under the Hand and Seal
of the Officer, impowering such Maker or Proprietor to carry away the same,
before it shall be removed, Allowance for present payment of Inlandy Salt.
the said Warrant to be given upon payment or security of payment within six
months after such entry. Provided if any Person at the time of entry and
delivery shall pay down the Duty hereby imposed, he shall be allowed at the
rate of 10 l. per Cent.

VII. It shall be lawful for the Officers by this Act appointed to seize all
such Salt which shall be conveyed away before entry made, without Warrant of
the Commissioners or other Collectors: And the Salt that shall be so seized,
Seizure for default of Entry.
shall be brought to the Office next the place where such Salt shall be so
seized, and there detained: And if the same be not claimed by the true Owner
within ten days after seizure, it shall be forfeited and sold by the next
general day of Sale to be appointed by the Commissioners or their Officers, one
moiety to the use of their Majesty's, the other to him that seized the same.
And if the Owner shall claim the same within ten days, and shall not make it
appear before the next Justice of Peace in the County where such seizure was,
by the Oath of one or more Witnesses, that the Salt was duly entered, and that
there was a Warrant for carrying away the same, then it shall be forfeited and
disposed as aforesaid, and he that carried or caused it to be conveyed away
shall forfeit double the value.

VIII. Retailer shipping off Salt.
No Retailer shall be permitted to ship off any Salt to be sent to any Port in
England or Wales, or to Berwick, before he has made it appear by Oath, or
otherwise, before the Commissioners or their Officers, or some or one of them,
that the Duty of such Salt is paid or secured, or that it was bought of some
other Retailer or Shopkeeper that has paid the Duty.

IX. Masters of Ships Duty for transporting Salt from one Port to another in
this Kingdom.
The Master and Commander of any Ship or Vessel that shall after the 25th day
of March aforesaid, transport any Salt from one Port to another in England,
Wales or Berwick, shall before landing it, deliver to the Collector of this
Duty in the said Port a true particular of the quantity thereof, signed by the
Collectors of this Duty, and the Officers of the Customs in that Port from
whence the Vessel came, and that then the Master or his Mate, or the Boat-swain
of such Ship or Vessel shall make Oath before the Commissioners or their
Officers, or one of them, that to his knowledge there has not been taken into
the said Ship any Salt since he or they came from such Port; and if such Ship
be to deliver her Salt part at one Port and part at another, then the
Collectors of this Duty, and the Officers of the Customs where such part shall
be delivered, shall gratis certify on the Cocket Transire, or other Warrant,
or by Certificate under Hand and Seal of the Officer, what quantity of the Salt
mentioned in the Cocket whence such Ship came, has been there landed, upon
forfeiture of double the value of the Salt that shall be otherwise delivered.

X. For all such Fish hereafter mentioned, as shall be exported during the
continuance of the Duty upon Salt by this Act, from any Port or Place in
England, Wales and Berwick, into Parts beyond the Seas shall be paid these
Rates, viz.

l. s. s. Every Vessel of Pilchards or Scads, containing 50 Gallons 00 12 00
Duties upon Fish exported beyond Sea.
Every Barrel of White Herrings 00 02 06 Every Barrel of Red Herrings 00 02 00
Every Barrel of Salmon 00 05 00 Every Hundred of Cod-fish, Ling, Conger or Hake
00 15 00

And so proportionably for a greater or smaller number or quantity, How and by
whom to be paid.
shall be paid by the Officer appointed to collect the Duties upon Salt payable
by this Act, in the same Port, from whence any such Fish shall be exported,
within thirty days after demand thereof, on a Debenture to be prepared by the
Collector of the Customs where such Fish shall be exported, and verified by the
Searcher there, as to the quantity of Fish actually shipped; and the Oath of
the Exporter shall be first taken before the principal Officer of the said
Port, The Exporters Oath to be taken.
before the Debenture be allowed, that the Fish in really exported to Parts
beyond Seas, and not intended to be relanded in England, Wales or Berwick: And
if the Officer have not Money in his Hands to pay the same, then upon his
Certificate the principal Commissioners of Excise shall pay it; and if the
Officer refuse to pay or give such Certificate, he shall forfeit double the Sum.

XI. If any Person shall export beyond the Seas any Salt, Money repaid for Salt
exported upon Certificate of the Officer.
as well Foreign as English, or any RockSalt, the Officer where the Salt was
made, taken out of the Pit, or imported, and the Duty thereof paid or secured,
shall upon demand, gratis, deliver a Certificate under his Hand and Seal, that
the Duty imposed by this Act on such Salt, has been duly paid or secured; and
then the Officer where the Salt is exported, upon producing the Certificate,
and Oath made of the shipping of the said Salt, and of its not being relanded
in England or Wales shall give a Debenture under his Hand for repayment of the
said Duty, which being produced to the Officer of the Place where the Duty on
the said Salt shall have been paid or secured, such Security shall be
discharged, and the Money for the Duty of the said Salt shall be repaid upon
demand, by the said Officer, without Fee.

XII. All Salt imported by Sea or Land into England, What shall be charged as
Foreign Salt. Scotch Salt where to be entered
Wales or Berwick, and not of the Product of any of the said Places, shall be
adjudged Foreign Salt, and so chargeable: And all Scotch Salt brought by Land
into England, shall be entered at Carlisle or Berwick, under forfeiture of
double the value.

XIII. The Justices of Peace (not concerned in making or selling Salt) at every
Easter and Michaelmas Sessions, Justices of Peace to settle the Prices of Salt.
shall set the Prizes of Salt to be sold by the first Seller, for the next half
year, and none to sell above those Prices, under the Penalty of 5 l. and
forfeiture of double the value, to be levied by distress and sale of the
Offenders Goods, one half to the King, and the other to the Informer.

XIV. No Person shall be capable of acting as chief Commissioner for collecting
the said Duties, till he has taken before one of the Barons of the Exchequer,
the Oaths appointed in the first year of K. William and Q. Mary, Entitled,
Oaths of the Commissioners and other Officers.
An Act for abrogating the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and the Oath
following, You shall swear to execute your Office truly and faithfully without
Favor or Affection, and shall from time to time true Account make and deliver
to such Person and Persons, as their Majesty's shall appoint to receive the
same, and shall take no Fee or Reward for the Execution of the said Office from
any other Person than from their Majesty's, or those whom their Majesty's shall
appoint on that behalf. The like to be taken by other Officers before two of
the chief Commissioners, or two Justices of Peace of the Place where he shall
be appointed Officer, mutatis mutandis.

XV. The General Issue may be pleaded by the Defendant on Suit, General Issue
to be pleaded.
and the Special Matter given in Evidence; and if the Verdict pass for the
Defendant, or the Plaintiff be nonsuit, he shall have double Costs.

XVI. No Certiorari to supersede.
No Certiorari shall supersede Execution or other Proceedings upon any Orders
made by the said chief Commissioners or Justices of Peace in pursuance of this
Act.

XVII. All Salt shall be measured by a Bushel of eight Gallons, Winchester
Measure, Measures of Salt.
by fit Measurers, sworn and admitted by some neighboring Justice, without
Fee, upon Forfeiture of double the value of Salt not so measured.

XVIII. No Salt shall be delivered from any Salt-Works or Pits, without notice
to the Officer, Salt not to be delivered without notice to the Officer.
upon forfeiture of the Salt so delivered, and upon forfeiture of 20 l. by the
Owner of the SaltWorks, one half to the King, and the other to the Informer.

XIX. If any of the Salt for which the Duty shall have been repaid and
discharged upon the Exportation thereof, The penalty of relanding in England by
Fraud.
shall by Fraud or otherwise be landed in England, Wales or Berwick, before the
Duty be again paid, and such Entry and all other things performed as are herein
before required in case where any Foreign Salt is imported, the Offender shall
forfeit double the value of such Salt so landed, and such other Penalties as
are herein inflicted upon any Person landing Foreign Salt contrary to the
intent of this Act.

XX. If any Merchant, being a Subject of this Realm, Vessel lost or taken, he
may buy the like quantity, without paying Duty.
shall ship any Salt that has paid the Duty, to convey it by Sea to any part
of England, and the Vessel shall happen to be lost or taken, he shall upon
proof before the Justices at QuarterSessions of such loss, have a Certificate
of it, and upon producing the same to any Collector of this Duty, the Officer
shall let him buy the like quantity, without paying any Duty for the same.

XXI. The Owners of any Rock-Salt may remove the same into Warehouses, When
the Owner of Rock-Salt shall pay or secure.
after due entry thereof made, and a Warrant or Ticket taken for the same from
the Officer next to the Salt Pits; and the Owner shall not be obliged to pay or
secure the payment of the said Duty, till the said Rock-Salt shall be sold and
delivered.

XXII. No Person shall be obliged by Contract before the first of December
1693. Buyer not to deliver till payment secured.
to deliver any Salt or Rock-Salt, unless the Buyer at the time of the delivery
pay to the Seller such Money as he has paid, or secured for the Duty.

XXIII. All Salt made in Cheshire shall be entered by Weight only, Salt made in
Cheshire how to be entered. Pit-Salt how to be entered. Refiner of Rock-Salt his
allowance.
56 l. weight shall be taken to be a Winchester Bushel of eight Gallons
Winchester Measure, and shall be entered and taxed accordingly. And all Salt
taken out of the Pits, shall be entered by weight only, and that six-score
pounds weight thereof shall be deemed a Winchester Bushel of eight Gallons
Winchester Measure, and entered accordingly. And where any Rock-Salt shall be
melted and resined, which had before paid the Duty, the Refiner shall have
allowance after the rate of 12 d. per Bushel; Oath being first made before some
Justice of the Peace of the particular quantity by him so employed.

XXIV. This Branch of the Act concerning Excise upon Beer, Ale, Cider and other
Liquors herein after expressed, over and above all Duties and Impositions by
any former Act unexpired, commenceth from the 17th of May 1697. and continues
for sixteen years and no longer, in manner following, viz.

l. s. d. Every Barrel of Beer or Ale above 6 s. the Barrel, by the Common
Brewer or Seller over and above the Duties payable for the same 00 00 09 Excise
upon Liquors.
Every Barrel of Beer or Ale at or under 6 s. the Barrel, by the Common Brewer
or Seller over the Duties payable for the same 00 00 03 Every Barrel of
Vinegar, or Vinegar Beer brewed or made of English Materials for sale, over and
above the Duties payable for the same 00 01 06 Every Barrel of Vinegar or
Liquor prepared for Vinegar, made or mixed with Foreign Materials made for sale
00 04 00 Every Barrel of Beer, Ale or Mum imported from beyond Sea, or from
Guernsey or Jersey, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity 00
03 00 Every Tun of Cider or Perry, and so proportionably imported from beyond
Sea, to be paid before landing, over and above the Duties payable for the same
04 00 00 Every Gallon of single Brandy, Spirits or Aqua-vitae imported from
beyond Sea, to be paid before landing 00 02 00 Every Gallon of double Brandy,
Spirits or Aqua-vitae above proof imported from beyond Sea 00 04 00 Every
Hogshead of Cider or Perry made and sold by Retail by the Retailer 00 01 00
Every Gallon of Metheglin or Mead made for sale by retail or otherwise 00 00 03

XXV. The said several Rates and Duties to be levied, Duties how to be
collected.
collected and paid, over and above the Duties payable for the same, and so
proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity, for sixteen years, in the same
manner and form, and under such Penalties as are mentioned in an Act of 12 Car.
2. Entitled, An Act for taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries, and
Tenures in Capite, etc. and by another Act in the same year, Entitled, A Grant
of certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors, etc. and by another
Act made 15 Car. 2. Entitled, An additional Act for the better ordering and
collecting the Duty of Excise, etc. And that the said Acts as to the
Impositions upon Beer, Ale, etc. by this Act granted, shall be of full force to
all intents during the said Term of sixteen years, as if the same were
particularly set down in the Body of this Act.

XXVI. The Commissioners for Receipt of Excise and the Duties upon Salt,
Commissioners of Excise to manage theDuty upon Salt paid weekly.
shall at the HeadOffice in London, keep the Money hereby raised apart by it
self, and shall pay the same weekly, viz. on Wednesday in every Week, if it be
not a Holiday, and if it be, then the next day after that is not a Holiday,
into the Exchequer, distinct and apart from other Money. A Book for entering the
same.
And there shall be a Book kept in the Office of the Auditor of the Receipt,
wherein the Weekly Money paid into the Exchequer, shall be entered apart and
distinct.

XXVII. The Commissioners refusing or neglecting to pay the said Weekly Sums,
Penalty upon the Commissioners for neglecting, etc. Salaries and Charges how to
be paid.
or misapplying them, shall forfeit their Offices, and be made incapable of any
Office of Trust whatsoever; and shall be liable to pay such Sums misapplied, to
any Person who will sue for the same; The Salaries and incident Charges to be
paid by the King out of the Duties upon Salt.

XXVIII. The Head Office of Excise established by this Act shall be continued
in London, Head Office of Excise where to be kept.
or within ten Miles of it, to be executed by a sufficient number of
Commissioners by their Majesty's to be appointed; And also a Comptroller, who
shall keep a distinct Account in Books fairly written, of all the Moneys
arising by this Act, as shall be brought into the said Office; Resort to the
Books gratis.
to which Books all Persons shall have free access gratis. Nor shall the
Commissioners receive any other Salary or Fee than by this Act appointed.

XXIX. The yearly Sum of 140000 l. out of Duties hereby granted, shall be the
yearly Fond, The yearly Fond, what and how much it shall be.
reckoning the first year to commence from the 25th of March 1694. to be
brought in Weekly into the Exchequer. And if the Weekly Payments will not
amount to 140000 l. per Annum, yet so far as it will extend, shall be part of
it, toward the answering the purposes herein mentioned. If deficient, how to
be supplied.
And if the Weekly Payments fall short of satisfying the said 140000 l. or to
discharge the Annuities or other Benefits hereby charged, that then the
Commissioners of the Treasury, or Under-Treasurer of the Exchequer, shall apply
so much of their Majesty's Revenue (not being appropriated to any particular
use by Act of Parliament) to supply the defect of the said Recompenses of
Annuities.

XXX. Foreigners as well as Natives may contribute toward advancing the Sum of
1000000 l. Adventurers, when to pay in their Money.
by paying at or before the 10th of September 1694. to any Receiver hereby
appointed, the Sum of 10 l. each, or diverse entire Sums of 10 l. each; and for
every 10 l. to receive a Share or Dividend of the said yearly Fond for sixteen
years.

XXXI. Their Majesty's under their Broad Seal shall appoint Managers of the
Tickets or Lots, who shall meet from time to time at some public Office in
London or Westminster, for the execution of their Powers and Trusts; The Books
and Columns how to be ordered.
and shall prepare Books wherein every Leaf shall be divided into three
Columns, and upon the innermost of the said Columns, shall be printed 100000
Tickets, numbered 1, 2, 3, etc. Upon the middle Column shall be printed 100000
Tickets, of the same length, breadth and form, and numbered in like manner. And
in the extreme Column of the said Book shall be printed a third Rank of Tickets
of the same number; and the several Tickets shall be of an oblong Figure,
joined within oblique Lines; and every Ticket in the third or extreme Column
shall have these Words written or imprinted thereon, or this effect, viz.
Inscriptions on the Tickets.
[This Ticket Entitles the Bearer to an Annuity of one Pound, or (by chance) to
a greater yearly Sum for sixteen years.]

XXXII. The Commissioners of the Treasury, Commissioners to appoint Receivers.
or any three of them, to appoint Receivers, taking reasonable Securities of
them to pay the Moneys received into the Exchequer. And that the Managers shall
carefully examine the Books with the Tickets therein, Managers to examine the
Books and Tickets
and deliver the same to the Receivers, taking from each a Writing
acknowledging the Receipt of such Books and Tickets, that so the Receiver may
be answerable for every 10 l. for every Ticket in the extreme Column, or for so
many of them as he shall not return back: Tickets how to be ordered upon
receipt of the Money
and the Receiver upon receiving of every 10 l. of every Adventurer, shall cut
out of the Book through the oblique Line, a Ticket of the outside, and give it
the Adventurer to write his Name or Mark on the two corresponding Tickets; and
at the same time the Receiver shall deliver to the said Adventurer, the Tickets
so cut off, which is to be kept for the better securing the share to be had in
the said Fond, for the Money adventured.

XXXIII. The Receivers shall on the 20th of September 1694. The Receivers to
deliver the Books with the Tickets to the Managers, and when.
redeliver to the Managers at their Office all the said Books, and therein all
the said Tickets of the first and second Columns, and so many of the extreme
Columns as shall remain uncut, and shall then deliver an Account in Writing of
all Moneys by them received for the Tickets delivered, and how much thereof
have been actually paid by the Receiver into the Exchequer. Tickets to be
rolled up by the Managers, and how to be ordered.
And the Managers that shall roll up so many Tickets of the middle Columns as
shall correspond with those of the extreme Columns which shall have been cut
out and disposed, and make them fast with Thread or Silk, and then cut them off
Indent-wise through the oblique Lines, into a Box marked with the Letter A.
which Box shall be put into another strong Box, and locked up with seven
different Locks and Keys, to be kept by the said Managers, and sealed with
their Seals, or some of them, and kept till the time of drawing, and the
Tickets in the innermost Columns to remain still in the Books for the discovery
of any Mistake or Fraud.

XXXIV. The Managers shall also prepare other Books in which every Line shall
be divided into two Columns, Other Books to be prepared, which shall be
distinguished into two Columns.
and upon the innermost of those Columns shall be printed 100000 Tickets; and
upon the outermost of the said two Columns shall be printed 100000 Tickets of
equal length and breadth as near as may be, which two Columns shall be joined
with some Flourish or Device, through which the outmost Tickets may be cut off
Indent-wise; and that 2500 Tickets part of those contained in the outmost
Columns in the Books last mentioned, shall be called Fortunate Tickets, to
which extraordinary Benefits shall belong. And if the whole Sum of 1000000 l.
shall be contributed by the Adventurers, as aforesaid, then the Managers shall
cause the said Fortunate Tickets to be written upon, as well in Figures as in
words at length in manner following, Upon one of them 1000 l. yearly. Fortunate
Tickets and Annuities.
Upon every one of nine of them severally 500 l. yearly. Upon every one of
twenty of them severally 100 l. yearly. Upon every one of eighty of them
severally 50 l. yearly. Upon every one of ninety of them severally 25 l.
yearly. Upon every one of three hundred of them severally 20 l. yearly. Upon
every one of two thousand of them severally 10 l. yearly. To the Owner of the
first-drawn Ticket 150 l. yearly. To the Owner of the last-drawn Ticket 100 l.
yearly, besides the Benefits which may happen to the said two last mentioned
Tickets.
Amounting in the whole to 40000 l. per Ann.

XXXV. Provided if the whole Sum of 100000 l. shall not be advanced on or
before the 10th of September, If the Million shall not be advanced, how to be
proportioned, and by whom. Twenty shilling Tickets.
then so much of the yearly Sum of 140000 l. as shall bear proportion to the
real Sum which shall be actually advanced, shall be the yearly Fond: And the
Managers shall make a Calculation proportionably. Yet so as that every numbered
Ticket that shall be drawn not having a Fortunate Lot, shall be entitled to 20
s. per Ann. for sixteen years.

XXXVI. All the said 100000 Tickets, as well Fortunate as Blanks which shall be
contained in the said outermost Columns of the Books last mentioned, The Column
of Fortunate and Blank Tickets how to be ordered.
shall be rolled up and fastened with Thread or Silk, and be severally cut out
Indent-wise through the Figure or Device, to be put into another Box, marked
with the Letter B. which shall be put into another Box and locked up with seven
different Locks and Keys, to be kept by as many Managers, and sealed with their
Seals, until these Tickets shall be also drawn in manner herein after
mentioned. No Money received after 10th of Sept.
And that no Money shall be received from any Adventurer after the said 10th day
of September. The rolling up, cutting off, and putting into the said Boxes the
said Tickets, and locking up and sealing the said Boxes shall be performed by
the said Managers on or before the first of October 1694. Rolling up Tickets,
and sealing the Boxes, etc.
and to certify each Party concerned that the Counterpart of the same number
with his Ticket is put into the Box marked A. from whence the same may be
drawn, Notice of cutting the Tickets.
notification in Print shall be given of the time of cutting the said Tickets
into the said Boxes, that the Adventurers may be present at the doing thereof.

XXXVII. On the 8th of October 1694. Adventurers Tickets within what time to be
brought. The Fortunate Tickets how to be managed when drawn.
the Boxes with the Tickets therein, shall be brought into the Guild Hall in
London by eight of the Clock in the Forenoon, and the two Boxes containing the
said Tickets to be taken out of the other two Boxes, and the Tickets to be well
shaken and mingled in each Box distinctly, and one indifferent Person appointed
by the Managers shall draw one Ticket from that Box where the said numbered
Tickets shall be put, and one other indifferent Person to take out a Ticket
from that Box where the 2500 Fortunate, and 97500 Blank Tickets are
promiscuously put, and immediately both the Tickets so drawn shall be opened,
and the numbered Ticket as well as the Fortunate or Blank shall be named aloud;
and if the Ticket drawn from the Fortunate Box be a Blank, then the numbered
Ticket so drawn, with the said Blank at the same time drawn, shall both be put
on the File: But if the Ticket so drawn from the Box of Fortunate and Blank
Lots shall appear to be a Fortunate Ticket, then the yearly Sum writ upon that
Ticket shall be entered by a Clerk, appointed by the said Managers, into a Book
kept for entering the Numbers coming up with the said Fortunate Tickets, and the
yearly Sums thereon: The Managers to set their Names.
And two of the said Managers shall set their Names as Witnesses to every such
entry, and the said Fortunate Ticket shall be put upon another File, and both
filed; and this to continue until the whole number of 2500 l. Fortunate
Tickets, and one more for the last shall be drawn.

XXXVIII. After six days, and within sixty days after the drawing is finished,
the Adventurers or their Agents which are possessed of Fortunate Lots shall
appear with the said numbered Tickets before the Managers, that so the Managers
may write down the Names of the Fortunate Lots, and the several yearly Sums
thereon written, and to whom they belong, Fortunate Tickets to be printed.
Differences to be determined, etc. Forging of Tickets Felony.
and the number of the Ticket against each Fortunate Ticket: And for the better
satisfaction of the Fortunate Adventurers, the yearly Annuities shall be
printed: And if any Contentions shall arise, the major part of the
Commissioners shall determine the same. All Forgers of Counterfeit Tickets,
knowing the same to be so, and being thereof legally convict, shall be punished
as Felons.

XXIX. The Managers to prepare a Parchment Book, Names of Persons and Plates of
Abode.
wherein shall be entered the Names and Sirnames of Persons entitled to
Fortunate Tickets, and their respective Places of Abode, and the yearly
Annuities they are to have: This Book to be signed by the Managers, and to be
transmitted by the first day of March 1694. into the Office of the Auditor of
the Receipts of the Exchequer; and a Duplicate thereof shall be transmitted to
the Officer of the Transfer Office herein after mentioned. Annuities when to be
paid.
The Annuities to be paid by half-yearly Payments, viz. at Lady Day and
Michaelmas, or within twenty days after; the first payment to be at Lady Day
1695. The Lots which are not Fortunate shall have 20 s. per Annum paid every
Michaelmas or twenty days after, the first payment to be at Michaelmas.

XXX. All Persons commissionated by their Majesty's to be Managers and
Directors in this Act, shall before they act take the following Oath, viz. The
Managers Oath.
I A. B. do swear that I will faithfully execute the Trust reposed in me; And
that I will not use any indirect Art or Means, or permit or direct any Person
to use any indirect Art or Means, to obtain a Prize or Fortunate Lot for my
Self or for any other Person whatsoever: And that I will do my utmost endeavor
to prevent any smister or undue Practice, to be done by any Person whatsoever.
And that I will to the best of my Judgment declare to whom any Prize, Lot or
Ticket of Right does belong, according to the true intent of this Act. By whom
to be administered. The residue of the 140000 l. per Ann. employed.
The said Oath may be administered by any two or more of the other Managers or
Directors.

XXXI. Out of the residue (which in any case will not exceed 2500 l. per
Annum.) of the said yearly Sum of 140000 l. per Annum. after paying or leaving
sufficient to pay all the said Annuities belonging to the Fortunate and other
Lots, it shall be lawful to reward the Managers, Clerks and Officers, as shall
be thought fit by their Majesty's, or the Commissioners of the Treasury.

XXXII. Allowance for paying beforehand.
He that pays his 10 l. before the 10th of September shall have allowance for
Interest after 14 l. per Gent. from the time of payment, till the 29th of
September 1694. And the Receiver shall have allowance as the Commissioners of
the Treasury shall think fit, not exceeding 1 d. in the Pound.

XXXIII. Transfer Office to be erected; the Books and Tickets to be delivered
there and how to be managed.
And for the due payment of the said Annuities and making them safe and easy
to the Adventurers, there shall be a Transfer Office erected in London, and a
Commissioner or Chief Officer appointed by their Majesty's under the Great Seal
of England. After the adjusting the Fortunate Lots abovesaid by the said
Managers, all the Ticket-Books and Tickets which shall remain in the Hands of
the Managers (except that Book which is to be transmitted into the Exchequer)
shall be committed to the Commissioner of the Transfer Office, who is also to
receive in all the ten pound Tickets delivered out, and to deliver out to the
Bearer of each of those Tickets sixteen Vellom Tickets for the sixteen yearly
Payments upon the Annuities of 20 s. per Annum, and two and thirty Vellom
Tickets for the two and thirty half-yearly Payments upon the higher Annuities.
To discover a Ticket to be disposed, whether it be true or false.
And that Books upon a particular sort of Vellom or Paper, on the backside
clouded, shall be printed, to contain as many Tickets as be necessary for this
purpose, and that three of one sort be alike numbered and flourished. That the
middle Ticket of the three be cut off Indent-wise, to be delivered out as
aforesaid. That one of the other three be bound up in a Book, to remain in the
Transfer Office, for any Person to know whether the Ticket that is offered to
be disposed be a true or false one: And that the other of the three be bound up
in a Book and delivered into the Exchequer to pay by, How to make the payment
easy to the Adventurers and safely to assign and transfer.
when the middle Ticket becomes payable: And that the middlemost Ticket that
shall be delivered to any one that shall be entitled to a Fortunate Lot, be
signed by the Commissioner of the Transfer Office, or his Deputy: And that at
some time within forty days before the growing due of the payment of the said
Annuities, the Commissioner of the Transfer Office or his Deputy, shall examine
the Ticket for that particular Payment, and if it answers the Counterpart in
that Office, he shall sign the Examination thereof without Fee: and then the
Officer of the Exchequer examining the same, and finding it to answer the
Counterpart lodged in his Office, he shall take it up and the Contents thereof
to the Bearer at the time appointed for the payment thereof without any farther
Warrant or Order: And that the Tickets for 20 s. per Annum shall be paid at the
Exchequer without any farther Examination, 20 s. Tickets where to be paid.
False Ticket to pay 5 l.
Warrant or Order by the Commissioner of the Transfer Office. And if a false
Ticket be found, that the Officer of the Transfer Office or Exchequer do cut a
Slip out of it, and the Person that brings it be liable to pay a Fine of 5 l.
and for want of payment to be committed to prison.

XXXIV. 1 d. for examining a Ticket.
The Fee for examining a Ticket in order to make a true Assignment or Transfer,
other than to obtain the Payment thereof in the Exchequer, as aforesaid, shall
be 1 d.

XXXV. Counterfeit Ticket within what time to be proved.
If any Person takes a counterfeit Ticket, and does not come to the Office to
prove it within ten days after his receipt thereof in London, or within ten
miles of London, or within thirty days after the receipt of it in any other
part of England, that then the Party that sold it shall not be liable to any
damage, or to repay the value received for the same.

XXXVI. Taking other Fees than by this Act, forfeiture of Office.
If the Officers of the Exchequer shall take any other Fee or Reward than by
this Act appointed for executing their respective Trusts and Offices, they
shall forfeit their Office, and pay treble Damages with Costs of Suit to any
Adventurer that will sue for the same, without Essoign, Protection or
Privilege of Parliament, etc.

XXXVII. Officer not liable though Ticket be forged, unless he knew it.
If any Officer of the Transfer Office shall pass any Ticket for payment, or
any Officer of the Exchequer shall make any payment of any Shares of the said
Fonds, upon such Tickets as are above directed, such Officer shall not incur
any Penalty, or be liable to any Action of the Adventurers though such Ticket
be forged, except he knew it to be so.

XXXVIII. Money lent to be free from Taxes
Money lent by, or payable to any Persons by virtue of this Act shall not be
chargeable with any Rates, Duties or Impositions whatsoever.

XXXIX. And to be employed as the Act directs.
All Grants or Dispositions of Money arising by this Act, hereafter to be made
by their Majesty's, to any other Person, or in any other manner, or for any
longer Term or Interest than by this Act appointed, shall hereby be made null.

XL. A distinct Office in the Exchequer for payment of Annuities.
There shall be in the said receipt of the Exchequer a distinct Office for
paying the Annuities; the said Office shall continue till all the Payments to
grow due by this Act, during the said Term of sixteen years shall be satisfied.
And an Officer or Officers shall be appointed hereunto by the Commissioners, or
the Treasurer of the Exchequer, Officers to give security.
who shall take security of the Officers for the due paying and accounting the
Moneys they shall receive, and for the faithful performance of their Office.
And the Moneys which shall be brought into the Receipt of the Exchequer, shall
by the Commissioners of the Treasury, or the Under-Treasurer of the Exchequer,
without any farther or other Warrant, and such proportions from time to time,
Moneys how to be issued. Officers to be liable to account and be inspected.
as shall be necessary and sufficient to answer the respective Payments which
shall grow due, be issued or paid over from time to time to the Officers by way
of Impressed, and upon Account to and for the payment of the said Annuities by
this Act appointed: And such particular Officers shall be liable and subject to
such Inspection, Examination, Comptrol and Audit, and to such Rules as the
Commissioners of the Treasury, or the Treasurer and Under-Treasurer of the
Exchequer shall think fit.

XLI. All Officers to observe the Commissioners directions.
The Managers, Directors, Commissioner and Officer of the Transfer Office,
Receivers, and the particular Officer in the Exchequer, and all the Clerks,
Ministers and Servants shall for the better execution of their Trusts, observe
and perform such Rules, Methods and Orders as they shall from time to time
receive from the Commissioners of the Treasury, etc. so as such Rules, Methods
and Orders be conducible to the ends and purposes in this Act.

XLII. The King enabled to borrow Money upon this Act.
If the whole Sum of 1000000 l. be not paid into the Exchequer upon this Act
before the 24th of June 1694. then it shall be lawful for their Majesty's by
way of Loan to borrow so much as to make it up, to be paid with Interest at 8
l. per Cent. out of the Moneys after to be brought in by this Act: And if the
Moneys shall not all come in, then out of the next Supply granted by
Parliament; How the same to be repaid.
and if no such Supply shall be before the 2d of February 1694. then to be paid
out of the Treasury. If the 1000000 l. shall not be advanced, then the Overplus
of the Fond shall be disposed as hereafter shall be directed by Act of
Parliament.

XLIII. When the Receivers of the Salt Money are to deliver in their Accounts.
The Receivers of the Salt Duty shall between the 25th of March 1695. and the
29th of September following, and so yearly during the continuance of this Act
deliver in their Accounts to the Auditors of the Impressed, who shall examine
them upon Oath what Sum was raised, and what part paid into the Exchequer, or
by virtue of any Warrant of Privy Seal or Warrant of the Commissioners of the
Treasury, and to whom and for what Service, and such Account so taken by the
said Auditor, to be declared before the Lord Treasurer, or Lords Commissioners
of the Treasury, and Chancellor of the Exchequer.

XLIV. No Member of the House of Commons to be concerned in the farming or
managing those Duties; except, etc.
No Member of the House of Commons shall directly or indirectly be concerned in
the farming, collecting or managing any Duties granted by this Act, or that
shall be granted by any other Act, except the Commissioners of the Treasury,
the Officers of the Customs and Excise, and those appointed Commissioners for
the Act of 4 s. in the Pound for one year, as to their executing only the
Authority of the said Act, by which they are appointed Commissioners; And also
excepting Thomas Neale Esquire.

The Act upon Tunnage.
I. Stat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 14. It is enacted, That for the Term
of four Years, commencing from the first day of June 1694. Duties upon Tunnage
from the 1st of June 1694.
there shall be throughout England, Wales, and the Town of Berwick, levied and
paid into, and for the use of their Majesty's, their Heirs and Successors, upon
the Tunnage of all Ships and Vessels, whereon during that time there shall be
imported any Goods or Merchandise from the Places in the Act after mentioned,
or shall be carried Coast-wise from Port to Port, within England, Wales, or the
Town of Berwick, these Duties and Impositions, that is to say, For every Tun of
the Burden or Contents of any Ship or Vessel importing Goods o^ Merchandises
from the East Indies, or any Ports Southwards or Eastward of Cabo bona
Speranza, The several Rates.
the Sum of 30 s.

From any Ports or Places in Italy or Turkey 15 s.

From any Ports or Places in Portugal or Spain 10 s.

From any the Plantation, Lands or Places in the West Indies 10 s.

From Holland, or any the United Provinces, Netherlands or Flanders 3 s.

From Norway, Hamborough, or the Baltic Sea, Enstland Gountries, or any other
Ports or Places North of Holland 5 s.

From Ireland or Scotland 2 s.

From any Port or Place in the Mediterranean Sea (not otherwise charged in this
Act) 15 s.

From the Ports or Coasts of Guinea or Africa without the Streights 20 s.

From Hudsons Bay, or any Place within the Limits of that Companies Charter 20
s.

From the Ganaries, Maderas or any the Western Islands 10 s.

From any Ports or Places in Greenland, Muscovia or Russia 10 s.

For every Tun of the Burden of any Ship or Vessel in the Coasting Trade from
Port to Port, in England, Wales or Berwick 6 d.

II. Contents of Ships to be taken by the Officers in the Ports where they
arrive. Ships to be entered, and Duties paid before the unlading, or Security
given. Rebate where Duties paid down. Forfeiture for not paying Duties.
The several Duties imposed shall be accounted and paid, according to the
Measure of such Ships or Vessels, which shall be made by their Majesty's
Officers, in the respective Ports or Places where they shall arrive: And the
Masters, Owners or Freighters, at the Port or Place of the discharge or
unlading of their Ships or Vessels, shall cause them to be entered in the
Custom-house belonging to such Port or Place, and at the time of the entry, or
before any unlading shall pay down in ready Money to their Majesty's Officers of
the Customs the said Duties, or give Security by Bond to their Majesty's with
Sureties, to be approved by the said Officers of the Customs, to pay the Duties
within the space of one Month next after clearing of the Ship: Where the Duties
shall be paid down, there shall be a rebate or deduction out of the same, after
the rate of 10 l. per Cent. per Annum for every hundred pound the Duty shall
amount unto: And where any Goods shall be unshipped to be laid on Land, before
the Duty paid or Security given, the Ship or Vessel out of which they shall be
unladen, together with the Guns, Tackle, Ammunition and Apparel shall be
forfeited and lost, one moiety to their Majesty's, and the other to the Party
that will sue or seize for the same, to be recovered in any of their Majesty's
Courts of Record at Westminster; And over and besides, the Owner, Master or
Freighters shall be chargeable with the said Duties of Tunnage.

III. Duties by whom to be paid, and how.
The Duties upon the Tunnage of Ships importing Goods or Merchandises from
Parts beyond the Seas or Scotland, shall be paid and born by the
Merchant-Freighters, and by the Master and Owners of such Ships, by way of
Average amongst themselves, two third parts by the Merchants and Freighters
according to their Shares in the Freight, and the other third part by the
Masters or Owners: And the Duties upon Ships employed in the Coasting Trade
shall be paid and born by the Master or Owners of such Ships.

IV. Greenland and Newfoundland Ships to pay for their lading, not Tunnage.
What French Goods are to pay if Peace be made during this Act.
Ships belonging to the Company of Merchants of London trading to Greenland
shall pay 10 s. per Tun only for their own Blubber, Whale-Fins or any other
Merchandise, and not be obliged to pay according to the Shipping: And so
likewise Ships trading to New Foundland shall pay only for their Train-Oyl,
and other Merchandise 10 s. per Tun, and not for their measure of their
Shipping.

V. If Peace be made betwixt their Majesty's and the French King during the
continuance of this Duty of Tunnage, then all Ships importing Goods and
Merchandises from any of the French Kings Territories in Europe without the
Streights, shall pay the like Duty as any Ships importing Goods from Portugal
are charged with by this Act, over and above all Duties payable for such Ships.

VI. Barges, etc. not chargeable.
This Act shall not extend to charge or lay any Duty uponany Barges employed in
carrying Sand, Lime or Slate-Stone from Port to Port within England or Wales
for and in respect of such lading only.

VII. Ships and Vessels how to be measured.
All Ships and Vessels liable to these Duties shall be gauged and measured by
the length of the Keel taken within Board (so much as she treads upon the
Ground;) And the breadth to be taken within Board by the Midship Beam from
Plank to Plank; And the depth of the Hold to be taken from the Plank below the
Kelsey, to the under part of the Upper Deck Plank, and the length and breadth
as before; Then multiply the length by the breadth, and the Product thereof by
the depth, and divide the whole by 94, and the Quotient will give the true
Contents of the Tunnage; And the Duties of Tunnage thereby shall be computed
and collected.

VIII. The several Duties of Excise upon Liquors after 17 of May 1697
After the 17th of May 1697. there shall be throughout England, Wales, and the
Town of Berwick raised, collected and paid unto their Majesty's, their Heirs
and Successors by way of Excise over and above all Impositions by any former
Act then unexpired,

For every Barrel of Beer or Ale above 6 s. the Barrel, exclusive of the Duty
of Excise, brewed by the common Brewer, or any other Person who does sell or
tap out Beer or Ale publicly or privately, to be paid by the common Brewer, or
any such other Person, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity,
over and above the Duties payable for the same 9 d.

For every Barrel of Beer or Ale of 6 s. the Barrel or under, brewed or sold as
aforesaid, and so proportionably, to be paid by such common Brewer, or other
Person respectively 3 d.

For every Barrel of Vinegar or Vinegar Beer brewed or made of any English
Materials, by any common Brewer or any other Person, for sale, to be paid by
the Maker thereof, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity, over
and above the Duties of Excise payable for the same 1 s. 6 d.

If it run through Rape, or be made with, or passing through Foreign Materials,
or any mixture with them 4 s. per Barrel, and so proportionably.

For every Barrel of Beer, Ale or Mum imported from beyond the Seas, or Islands
of Guernsy, to be paid by the Importers before landing, and so proportionably
for the quantity, over and above for the Duties payable for the same 3 s.

For every Tun of Cider or Perry imported from beyond the Seas, and so
proportionably, to be paid by the Importer before landing, over and above the
Duties payable for the same 4 l.

For every Gallon of single Brandy, Spirits or Aqua-vitae imported from beyond
the Seas, to be paid by the Importer, before landing, over and above the Duties
payable for the same 6 d. and of double above proof 1 s.

For every Hogshead of Cider and Perry made and sold by retail, to be paid by
the Retailer, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser Measure, over and
above the Duties payable for the same 1 s. 3 d.

For every Gallon of Metheglin or Mead made for sale, whether by retail or
otherwise, to be paid by the Maker 3 d.

And these Duties shall be levied, The several Duties how to be collected.
collected and paid in the same manner and form, and by such Rules and under
such Penalties and Forfeitures as in the Acts made in the 12th year of King
Charles II. and the 15th of the same King are mentioned; or by another Law in
force relating to the said Revenue of Excise, and the Clauses in the said Acts
to be of force for and concerning the Duties hereby granted, as if particularly
recited in the Body of this Act.

IX. The Commissioners of the Excise, Moneys arising by these Duties to be kept
apart.
and the Commissioners and other Officers of the Customs, at the Head-Office in
London, shall separate and keep apart all the Moneys arising by these Duties,
as the same shall from time to time arise, or be paid into the said Office of
Excise, or unto the Receiver-General of the Customs; and the Comptroller of the
Excise, and of the Customs or their respective Deputies shall keep a distinct
account in Books fairly written, of all those Rates and Duties to which all
Persons shall have free access at all reasonable times gratis. Holidays no
pay-days
And the Commissioners of the Excise and Customs are to pay weekly upon every
Week, if it be not a Holiday, and then the next day after that is not a
Holiday, Moneys how to be paid.
these Moneys into the Receipt of the Exchequer, distinct and apart from other
Moneys they shall receive; and in the Office of the Auditor of the Receipt, one
Book shall be kept, in which all the said Weekly Moneys shall be entered apart.
Commissioners neglecting or misapplying, their Forfeiture.
And if the Commissioners shall refuse or neglect to pay into the Exchequer,
all or any of the said Weekly Sums in such manner as hereby required, or shall
divert or misapply any part of the same; or if such Comptroller shall neglect
his Duty in keeping such Accounts, then he or they shall forfeit their
respective Places, and be incapable of any Place of Trust or Office whatsoever;
and such Commissioner shall be liable to pay the full value of any Sum diverted
or misapplied, to any Person that shall sue for the same in any of their
Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster. Necessary Charges to be deducted
Their Majesty's out of the Duties may allow Salaries and incident Charges as
shall be necessary for receiving, collecting and managing the same Duties.
Head-Office to continue in London, or within ten miles.
The Head-Office of Excise now in London shall be continued there for ever, or
within ten miles thereof: And likewise for ever shall be continued there or
within the same distance a Comptroller of the Excise; the Commissioners of
Excise and Comptroller to be appointed by their Majesty's, their Heirs and
Successors.

X. What shall be the yearly Fond.
That yearly and every year, reckoning the first year to begin from the 1st of
June 1694. the full Sum of 140000 l. out of these Moneys, by the said Duties of
Tunnage and Excise, and to be brought into the Receipt of the Exchequer by
weekly payments (in case the weekly payments shall extend thereunto) shall be
the whole and entire yearly Fond. In case of deficiency how to be supplied.
And in case the said weekly payments shall not amount to so much, then as far
as they will extend, shall be part of the yearly Fond, for and toward the
answering and paying of the Annuities and other Purposes in this Act after
mentioned. And in case of deficiency by the said Duties of Tunnage and Excise,
to discharge and satisfy the Annuities and other Benefits and Advantages by
this Act appointed or intended to be paid within any one year, to be reckoned
as aforesaid; or if they shall not amount in their weekly payments to so much
as 140000 l. within such time, then the deficiency shall be made good out of
any Treasure or Revenue belonging to their Majesty's, their Heirs or Successors
(not being appropriated to any particular Uses by any Act of Parliament) and
that to be issued and paid without any farther or other Warrant, but to be done
by virtue of this Act, toward the discharging and paying of the said Annuities
and Benefits, as together with the Moneys brought into the said Receipt for the
Duties hereby granted, shall completely pay off the same within the year
respectively grown due. And the yearly Sum of 140000 l. arising by and out of
the said Impositions and Duties hereby granted, shall be kept separate and
apart in the Receipt of the Exchequer, to be paid from time to time, unto such
Person or Persons, and in such manner, proportion and form as is herein after
directed.

XI. Their Majesty's to appoint Commissioners to take Subscriptions.
Their Majesty's by Commission under the Great Seal of England may authorize
and appoint any number of Persons to take and receive all such voluntary
Subscriptions as shall be made on or before the first day of August 1694. by
any Person or Persons, Natives or Foreigners, Bodies Politic or Corporate, for
and toward the raising and paying into the Receipt of the Exchequer the Sum of
1200000 l. part of the Sum of 1500000 l. And that the yearly Sum of 100000 l.
part of the said yearly Sum of 140000 l. rising by the said Duties and
Impositions, shall be applied, issued and directed, and is hereby appropriated
to the use of such Persons and Bodies Politic, as shall make such voluntary
Subscriptions and Payments, their Heirs, Successors or Assigns, in the
proportion hereafter mentioned, that is to say, The Moneys how to be divided
and proportioned.
That each weekly or other payment rising out of the Duties and Impositions by
this Act granted, shall by the Auditor of the Receipt of Exchequer, from time
to time as the same shall be paid in, be separated and divided into five
seventh parts, and two seventh parts, which is according to the proportion of
the said yearly Sum of 100000 l. to the said yearly Sum of 140000 l. which five
seventh parts of the said several payments arising by the Duties of this Act,
and so set apart, are appropriated toward the payment of the said yearly Sum
of 100000 l. and shall from time to time be issued and paid to the uses of the
Subscribers and Contributors toward the raising and paying into the Receipt of
Exchequer the Sum of 1200000 l.

XII. The 200000 l. and 100000 l. to be assigned or transferred.
Their Majesty's by Letters Patents under the Great Seal may limit, direct and
appoint in what manner and proportions, and under what Rules and Directions the
said Sum of 200000 l. and the said yearly Sum of 100000 l. and every or any
part or proportion thereof may be assignable or transferrable, assigned or
transferred to such Person or Persons only as shall freely and voluntarily
accept of the same, and not otherwise, The Contributors to be incorporated.
and to incorporate all and every such Subscribers and Contributors, their
Heirs, Successors and Assigns to be one Body Corporate and Politic, by the
Name of Governor and Company of the Bank of England, and by that Name to have
perpetual Succession, and a Common Seal, and to be capable in Law to purchase
or grant, Subject to condition of redemption.
to sue or be sued, or answer or be answered in Courts of Record, or any other
Place; subject nevertheless to the Condition of Redemption hereafter mentioned.

XIII. If the 1200000 l. be not paid by 1 June 1694. the Contributors to
receive 8 l. per Cent.
That in case the whole Sum of 1200000 l. shall not be advanced and paid into
the Receipt of Exchequer before the first of January 1694. that then the
Subscribers and Contributors toward the Sum of 1200000 l. their Heirs,
Successors and Assigns, shall have and receive only so much, and such part and
portion to the Sums so respectively paid and advanced as shall be after the
rate of 8 l. per Cent. per Annum; And that any time upon twelve months notice
after the first of August 1705. After 1st of August 1705. upon repayment of
1200000 l. the Corporation to cease.
upon repayment by Parliament of the said Sum of 1200000 l. or such part
thereof as shall be paid and advanced as aforesaid, unto the respective
Subscribers and Contributors of the said Sum of 1200000 l. or such part thereof
as shall be paid and advanced, their Heirs, Successors and Assigns, and of all
the Arrears of the said yearly payments of 100000 l. or such proportionable
part thereof, according to the Sum which shall be paid and advanced, Then and
from thence forward the said yearly payments, and every of them of 100000 l. or
such proportionable part, and every part thereof, and the said Corporation
shall absolutely cease and determine.

XIV. The Commissioners of the Treasury to issue their Warrants yearly for the
payment of the 100000 l. to the Contributors of the 1200000 l. The Officers of
the Exchequer without fee to issue out the Money.
The Commissioners of the Treasury, and the Under-Treasurer of the Exchequer
now being, and the Lord High-Treasurer and Under-Treasurer or Commissioners of
the Treasury for the time being, are by this Act required, without other or
farther Warrant to direct their Warrants yearly for the payment of the said
yearly Sums of 100000 l. to the Contributors of the said Sum of 1200000 l. in
the manner and proportion as herein before directed; and the Auditor of Receipt
of Exchequer, and all other Officers of the Exchequer now and for the time
being are enjoined to issue the said Moneys so set apart for the Uses before
mentioned, without Fee or Reward, from time to to time in the manner and
proportions before mentioned, and under the like Penalties, Forfeitures and
Disabilities as are hereafter inflicted upon any Officer for diverting any Money
appropriated by this Act.

XV. No Person to subscribe above 20000 l. A fourth to be paid at the time of
the Subscription.
No Person or Body Politic shall by themselves or any other in Trust for him
or them, subscribe toward the raising the Sum of 1200000 l. any Sum exceeding
the Sum of 20000 l. and such Subscriber shall at the time of such Subscription
pay to the Commissioners authorized to take Subscriptions, one full fourth part
of such Subscription, and in default of payment, the Subscription to be void;
And the residue of the Subscriptions shall be paid into the Receipt of the
Exchequer as their Majesty's shall direct, before the first of January next,
and in default of such payments, then the fourth part first paid shall be
forfeited, to and for the benefit of their Majesty's, their Heirs and
Successors.

XVI. Before the 1st of July next no person shall subscribe for more than 10000
l. The whole 1200000 l. or a moiety to be subscribed before 1st of Aug. next
else the Corporation to cease. So much of the 100000 l. as belongs to, etc. The
same to be no Fond or applied to other uses than by this Act directed.
No Person or Persons or Body Politic at any time or times before the first
day of July next ensuing, shall subscribe in his own Name or Names, or in any
others in Trust for him or them, toward the raising of the Sum of 1200000 l.
any Sum or Sums exceeding in the whole Sum of 10000 l.

XVII. In case the whole Sum of 1200000 l. or a moiety thereof be not
subscribed on or before the first of August 1694. Then the Powers and
Authorities in this Act for executing a Corporation as aforesaid, shall cease
and determine; And in such case so much of the said yearly Sum of 100000 l. as
shall belong to the said Subscribers, shall be transferrable, and may be
transferred by the respective Persons so subscribing and paying any part of the
same into the Exchequer, or their respective Heirs, Successors and Assigns, to
any Person or Persons whatsoever, by any Writing under the Hand and Seal of the
Person or Persons transferring the same, attested by two or more credible
Witnesses, and entered within twenty days in a Book in the Exchequer by their
Majesty's Remembrancer, for the entering whereof nothing shall be paid, which
Entries the said Remembrancer is from time to time upon request directed to
make; And such part of the said yearly Sum of 100000 l. as shall be due to the
Subscribers, shall not at any time be made use of, or be a Fond or Security
for, or applied to pay any other Sums of Money, save only such Money as shall in
pursuance of this Act be paid into their Majesty's Exchequer within the time by
this Act limited.

XVIII. The Corporation not to borrow more than 1200000 l. Except enabled by
Act of Parliament.
The Corporation so to be made shall not borrow or give security under their
common Seal for any more, farther or other Sum than 1200000 l. so that they
shall not any one time owe more, unless it be by Act of Parliament upon Eonds
agreed in Parliament; And in such case only such farther Sums as shall be
directed and allowed to be borrowed by Parliament, and for such time only until
they shall be repaid: And if any more, farther or other Sums of Money shall be
borrowed under the common Seal, If more borrowed, the Members liable to be sued
in their private Capacities.
then and in such case, every Member or Members of the said Corporation, his
and their respective Heirs, Executors and Administrators shall in his and their
respective private and personal Capacities, be chargeable with and liable in
proportion to their several Shares or Subscriptions to the repayment of such
Moneys which shall be so borrowed, with Interest for the same: And in every
such Case an Action of Debt may be maintained in any of their Majesty's Courts
of Record at Westminster by the respective Creditor or Creditors to whom any
such Security under the common Seal of the said Corporation shall be made,
against all and every, or any one or more of the Members of the said
Corporation, their respective Heirs, Executors or Administrators in proportion
to their respective Shares or Subscriptions, wherein Judgment may be recovered
as if Security were given in their private Capacities, any Condition, Covenant
or Agreement to the contrary notwithstanding; And if any such shall be made to
the contrary it is hereby declared void.

XIX. Corporation not to Trade.
The Corporation to be made shall not Trade, or suffer any Person in Trust for
them to trade with any of the Stock-Monies, or Effects of the Corporation in
the buying or selling of any Merchandises or Goods whatsoever: Penalty for
Trading.
And every Person so trading, or by whose Order such Trading shall be made,
shall forfeit treble the value of the Goods and Merchandises so traded for, to
such Person as will sue for the same in any of their Majesty's Courts of Record
at Westminster. Bills of Exchange, Mortgages, etc. excepted.
But the Corporation may deal in Bills of Exchange, and in buying or selling
Bullion, Gold or Silver, or in selling Goods mortgaged to them, and not
redeemed at the time agreed on, or within three months after, or such Goods as
shall be the produce of Lands purchased by the Corporation.

XX. All Bills obligatory and of credit, Bills under Seal of the Corporation
shall transfer the Property.
under the Seal of the said Corporation, made to any Person or Persons, shall
and may by Endorsement thereon under the Hand of such Person or Persons be
assigned, and so toties quoties; and such Assignment shall transfer the
Property and Right to the Bill and Moneys due upon the same, and the Assignee
may sue in his own Name.

XXI. Governor not to lend more to their Majesty's than by Parliament directed.
If the Governor or other Members of the Corporation to be established, shall
upon the Account of the Corporation, at any time or times purchase any Lands or
Revenues belonging to the Crown, or lend to their Majesty's, their Heirs or
Successors, any Sum of Money by way of Loan or Anticipation on any part of the
Revenue now granted, or hereafter to be granted, other than such part only on
which a Credit of Loan is or shall be granted by Parliament, Then the said
Governor or Members so consenting to lend, being thereof lawfully convict,
shall for every such Offense forfeit treble the value of such Sum so lent,
whereof one fifth part shall be to the Informer, to be recovered in any of
their Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, and the residue to be disposed
of toward Public Uses, as shall be directed by Parliament, and not otherwise.

XXII. All Amerciaments, Fines and Amerciaments not to be pardoned. After
Estreatment may detain so much.
Fines and Issues against the said Corporation, upon Account of any Suits or
Action to be brought against them, shall not be pardoned or discharged by any
Letters of Signet, Privy Seal or Great Seal, or otherwise. And if such be
estreated into their Majesty's Exchequer against the said Corporation, then the
Officers of the Exchequer who are to pay the yearly Sum of 100000 l. to the
said Corporation, may out of that detain so much as the said Amerciaments,
Fines or Issues amount unto.

XXIII. Officers of the Exchequer may satisfy the execution of a Judgment
against the Corporation.
If any Person shall obtain a Judgment in any Court of Law against the said
Corporation for any Debt or Sum of Money, and shall, bring Execution thereupon
unto the said Officers of the Exchequer, Then the said Officers may pay, and
are required to pay the Sum in the Execution mentioned, to the Plaintiff or
Plaintiffs therein named, or their Assigns, whose Receipt shall be a Discharge
for the same; And the said Officers may detain so much of the yearly Sum of
100000 l. as the Debt shall amount unto.

XXIV. Members of the House, etc.
Any Member of the House of Commons may be a Member of this Corporation.

XXV. Any Person Native or Foreigner may contribute toward the advancing of
the Sum of 300000 l. by paying into the Receipt of the Exchequer before the
29th of September 1694. any Sum not exceeding the Sum of 300000 l. upon the
Terms following; Every such Person, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns
out of the Rates and Duties granted by this Act, shall have and receive for
every Sum of 100 l. so advanced and paid, such yearly Annuity and Payment as
herein after is directed: 14 l. per Ann. upon a single life, 12 l. upon 2, and
10 l. upon 3 Lives, for each 100 l. advanced.
If such Contributor shall advance and pay his Money upon one Life only, then he
shall have and receive a yearly Annuity or Payment of 14 l. for every 100 l. If
upon two Lives, then of 12 l. If upon three Lives, then of 10 l. and so
proportionably for a greater Sum, during the Life or Lives, or Life of the
Survivor; the Life or Lives to be nominated by the Person or Persons so paying
the same: And that the Lives be nominated by the several Contributors, The
Lives to be nominated within 30 days after the 29th of Sept 1694
their Executors or Administrators, or such as shall be employed by them to pay
in the said Sums within thirty days after the 29th of the said September 1694.
which yearly Annuity shall commence from the said 29th of September, and shall
be paid quarterly at the four most usual Feasts of the year, by equal Portions:
And every Person on payment of such Sum or Sums as aforesaid, The Annities to
be paid quarterly. Tallies for the payment of the same.
shall immediately have one or more Tally or Tallies importing the Receipt of
the Consideration Money, and Orders for the payment of the said Annuities,
bearing the same date with the Tally; The said Tallies to be levied, and the
said Orders to be signed in the same manner as in and by an Act of this present
Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the granting to their Majesty's certain Rates
and Duties of Excise upon Salt, and upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors, for
securing certain Recompenses and Advantages in the said Act mentioned to such
Persons as shall voluntarily advance the Sum of 1000000 l. toward carrying on
the War against France, is mentioned and directed, touching Tallies and Orders
to be given to Contributors for Annuities upon the said Act: And the said
Orders not to be determinable, Orders not to be countermanded.
revocable or countermandable as touching the aforementioned Orders in the said
recited Act is enacted, which said Orders shall be assignable in such and the
same manner as is mentioned in the said recited Act touching Orders given to
the Contributors in the said Act mentioned: And all the Rates and Duties by
this Act granted, or so much thereof as shall be sufficient, are and shall be
appropriated for the payment of the said Annuities after the several and
respective Rates aforesaid, and not to be directed to any other use, Moneys for
payment of Annuities not to be misapplied.
under the like Penalties, Forfeitures and Disabilities, in respect to all and
every the Officers and other Persons in the recited Act mentioned as are in the
said Act appointed and enacted in case of diverting or misapplying any part of
the Moneys which ought to be paid to the Contributors upon the said Act: And
the said Penalties and Forfeitures shall be sued for, and recovered in such
manner and form as the Penalties in the said recited Act are appointed to be
sued for and recovered, in which Suit no Protection, Privilege of Parliament,
or other Privilege, Wager of Law, or more than one Imparlance shall be
allowed. Books to enter the Names of such as advance Money before the 29th of
Sept.
And the said Officers shall keep Books and Registers, and make Entries of the
Names of all Persons who shall advance any Moneys before the said 29th day of
September, and of all the Sums advanced, and the times of paying in the same,
and the Names of such Persons for whose Lives the several Annuities are to be
payable without Fee or Reward, to which Book all Persons concerned shall have
access, as in the said Act also is directed. All which the said Officers are to
do, under the like Penalties, Forfeitures and Disabilities as in the said
recited Act are mentioned: 10 l. per Cent. for Moneys advanced to the 29th of
Sept.
And every Person who shall advance and pay in any such Sum before the said
29th day of September shall receive out of the Money granted by this Act, for
all Moneys so advanced by him, and paid from the respective day of payment,
unto the said 29th day of September Interest at the rate of 10 l. per Cent. per
Annum. And none of the Moneys payable by this Act shall be charged with any
Rates or Impositions whatsoever.

XXVI. Infant a Nominee and Contributor within this Act.
Any Guardian or Trustee of any Infant may advance and pay the Sum of 100 l. of
the Moneys of such Infant upon the respective Terms and Recompenses herein
mentioned. And if it be upon an Annuity for Life he shall within the time
before appointed for the naming of Lives, name the said Infant to be a Nominee,
and such Infant upon payment of the Sum, shall become a Contributor within the
meaning of this Act, and be entitled to have and receive a Proportion,
Guardian discharged
as any other Contributor: And the said Guardian and Trustee as to the said Sum
of 100 l. so advanced is hereby discharged.

XXVII. Contributor demanding Money shall produce a Certificate of the life of
the Nominee.
Every Contributor upon the Terms of having an Annuity for one, two or three
Lives, his or her Executors, Administrators and Assigns, upon demanding any
Payments, unless the Nominee or Nominees, or one of them appear in Person at
the said Receipt, shall produce a Certificate of the Life of his, her or their
Nominee or Nominees, or one of them signed by the Minister or Churchwarden of
the Parish, where such Nominee shall be then living, Or make Oath.
or make Oath of the truth of the Life of his, her or their respective Nominee,
or one of them, upon the day when the payment shall become due, before one or
more Justices of the Peace of the County, Riding, City or Town wherein such
Person at the time of making the said Oath shall reside, which Oath the Act
gives power to administer: And the Justice or Justices shall make a Certificate
thereof, for which Oath and Certificate no Fee or Reward shall be required. And
the Certificate shall be filed in the Office of Receipt of Exchequer; And if
any Person shall be guilty of a false Oath, Penalty of a false Oath.
or forging a Certificate, and be thereof lawfully convict, he shall incur the
Penalties to be inflicted upon Persons who commit wilful Perjury or Forgery:
And in case any Nominee at the time of such demand be resident in Scotland, or
beyond the Seas, and any one or more Barons of the Exchequer shall certify,
that upon proof to him or them made, which proof may be taken in a summary way,
it does seem probable that the Nominee is living, which Certificate is to be
given and examination made without Fee or Charge, the said Certificate being
filed shall be a sufficient Warrant for making the said Payment: And if any
Person shall receive any payment after the death of his Nominee, Penalty for
receiving Money after death of Nominee.
he shall forfeit treble the value of the Moneys so received, one half to their
Majesty's, their Heirs and Successors, the other half to the Party that will
sue for the same.

XXVIII. If the whole 1200000 l. be not paid, how the deficiency to be supplied.
In case the whole Sum of 1200000 l. shall not be subscribed and paid into the
Exchequer, then so much of the said yearly Sum of 100000 l. hereby intended to
answer the Recompense for the same, as by such deficiency shall by this Act be
undisposed, is hereby appropriated, so far as the same shall amount, to pay any
Person and Persons who shall advance and pay any Sums of Money into the
Exchequer, before the first of February 1694. on account to have an Annuity or
Annuities for one, two or three Lives, such respective Sums for such respective
Life or Lives, according to such rate and proportion, and for such time, and
under such Rules and Directions as are herein before contained, with relation
to such as shall advance and pay the said 300000 l.

XXIX. If the whole 1500000 l. be not paid by the 1st of October. 1694. their
Majesty's may borrow so much as will make it up.
If the whole Sum of 1500000 l. be not paid into the Exchequer upon this Act
before the first of October 1694. then their Majesty's or their Officers in the
Receipt of the Exchequer by their Command and Appointment, may borrow for their
Majesty's use by way of Loan, any Sum or Sums, which together with the value of
the Sums before the said first of October contributed, shall not exceed the Sum
of 1500000 l. which Sum or Sums so taken by way of Loan, may be charged upon
the Credit of their Majesty's Exchequer in general, and Tallies of Loan and
Orders of repayment shall be levied and drawn accordingly, which Orders shall
be assignable and transferrable: All Sums of Money so borrowed, not exceeding as
aforesaid, together with Interest for the same, not exceeding 8 l. per Cent.
per Annum, At 8 l. per Cent.
to be paid every three months until satisfaction of the Principal, shall be
payable and satisfied unto the Lender or Lenders, his, her or their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns out of the Moneys brought into the Exchequer by
Contributions upon this Act, Aids granted by next Parliament to supply defects.
so far as the same shall extend. And in case they be not sufficient, then the
Loans which shall remain unsatisfied, and their Interest shall be repaid out of
the next Aids or Supplies granted in Parliament, and shall be transferred
thereunto as soon as any such Aid or Supply shall be granted to their
Majesty's: For want of such Aids to be supplied out of the Treasury.
And if no such Aids or Supplies be granted before the 2d of February 1694.
then the Sums so borrowed, and their Interest, shall be paid out of their
Majesty's Treasure, not appropriated to any particular use by Act of Parliament
before this time made.

XXX. That out of the Money to be levied by this Act, or another Act of this
present Session of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for granting to their
Majesty's certain Rates and Duties upon Salt, and upon Beer, Ale and other
Liquors for securing certain Recompenses and Advantages in the said Act
mentioned, to such Persons as shall voluntarily advance the Sum of 1000000 l.
toward carrying on the War against France, or any other Act of this present
Session of Parliament, by which any Aids shall be granted to their Majesty's
toward the carrying on the said War, and which shall be paid into the
Exchequer, as well upon Loans as otherwise, (except only the Money appropriated
to pay the Recompenses in this and the before recited Act) the Sum of 1500000
l. (over and above the Sum of 1000000 l. appropriated by an Act of this present
Session of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for granting to their Majesty's an Aid
of 4 s. in the Pound, for one Year, for carrying on a vigorous War against
France, Moneys appropriated to the use of the Navy and Ordnance, and Land
Forces.
is appropriated for the Services of the Navy and Ordnance performed and to be
performed: And that all other Moneys to be paid by this, or any other Act of
this present Session of Parliament, not appropriated to the use of the Navy, or
to pay the Recompenses aforesaid into the Receipt of the Exchequer, as well
upon Loans as otherwise shall be appropriated to the payment of their Majesty's
Land Forces and Armies, Ordnance, Ammunition, and other Charges incident to the
War, and not otherwise.

XXXI. Money to be applied to the use of the Navy.
The half of the Money paid into the Receipt of the Exchequer by this Act, or
any other of this present Session of Parliament (except the Act for granting an
Aid of 4 s. in the pound for one year, etc. (and except what is appropriated to
pay the Recompenses aforesaid) and except also one other Act Entitled, An Act
to supply the deficiency of the Menies raised by a former Act, Entitled, An
Act for granting to their Majesty's certain Rates and Duties of Excise upon
Beer, Ale and other Liquors, for securing certain Recompenses and Advantages in
the said Act mentioned, etc.) shall be applied to answer the said Sum of
1500000 l. hereby appropriated to the use of the Navy, until the same shall be
paid.

XXXII. Money to pay Seamens Wages.
That out of the Sum of 1500000 l. and out of the Sum of 1000000 l.
appropriated for the use of the Navy, the Sum of eleven hundred fifty six
thousand nine hundred ninety four pounds shall be applied to pay Wages to
Officers and Seamen, and other Services belonging, according to the course of
the Navy, to the Head of Wages; Marine Regiment.
and to pay the Officers and Soldiers of the two Marine Regiments. And that
twelve hundred fifty seven thousand two hundred sixty and six pounds be applied
to pay for Victuals, Victuals and Stores.
necessary Provisions and Stores, and other extraordinary Services of the Navy
and Ordnance, eighty five thousand seven hundred and forty pounds to pay the
Wages of the Yards, Yards, etc.
and other ordinary Services of the Navy.

XXXIII. The Rules and Directions appointed in one Act made in the first Year
of their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, Former Act revived for the better
executing this Act.
An Act for a Grant to their Majesty's of an Aid of 2 s. in the Pound for one
Year, for the speedy payment of Money thereby granted into the Receipt of the
Exchequer by the Collectors and Receivers, and for distribution and application
thereof, and keeping distinct Accounts of the same, and all the Penalties and
Forfeitures in case of diversion of any Money thereby appropriated, are hereby
revived, and enacted to be executed and put in ure concerning the distribution
and application of the said Sums hereby appropriated, as fully and effectually
as if the same were here particularly repeated and re-enacted.

XXXIV. The Commissioners of the Customs from and after the end of this Session
of Parliament, shall mark and seal, Lustrings and Alamodes, etc. to be marked
and sealed by the Commissioners of the Customs.
or cause to be marked and sealed all Lustrings and Alamodes which are now
imported, and in the Hands of any Person or Persons whatsoever, and also of all
the said Stuffs so called, which shall be hereafter imported, and keep an Entry
and Registry thereof in the Custom-House in a Book for that purpose provided,
Those imported already, to be so marked, sealed or registered within twenty days
of the said time, for which there shall be no Fee or Reward paid, and those
hereafter imported from the time aforesaid to be so marked, sealed and
registered, without any Fee, before they be delivered out of the Custom-House
Warehouse. And all Lustrings and Alamodes imported after the 15th day of May
1694. Penalty of unsealed Goods.
and not so sealed and marked, shall be forfeited, and the Importers or
Possessors thereof subject to such and the like Penalties and Forfeitures as
Importers of French Goods, by one Act made in the first Year of their Majesty's
Reign, Entitled, An Act for prohibiting all Commerce and Trade with France, to
be recovered as therein directed: Counterfeiting Mark or Seal 500 l.
And if any Person or Persons shall alter or counterfeit the Marks or Seals
used for that purpose, the Offender shall forfeit 500 l. to any that will sue
for the same in any of their Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster.

XXXV. Whereas it is enacted in one Act of this present Session of Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for granting to their Majesty's an Aid of 4 s. in the Pound
for one Year, etc. that over and above the Ships of War for the Line of
Battle, and for Convoys to remote Parts, at the least four Ships of the third
Rate, and sixteen of the fourth Rate, thirteen of the fifth Rate, and ten of
the sixth Rate shall be from time to time directed and appointed by the Lord
High-Admiral, or the Commissioners for executing that Office, Commissioners of
the Admiralty to certify at the next Sessions of Parliament, what Ships have
been set out, and the Places where.
to such proper Stations, as they shall deem meet, to cruise for securing
Merchants Ships in their going out and returning home, The Lord High-Admiral or
Commissioners for executing that Office, shall exhibit to the Commons assembled
in Parliament, at the next Session of this or any other Parliament which shall
happen after the first of August 1694. a Certificate in Writing under his or
their Hands respectively, of the Ships set out, in pursuance of the said
recited Clause, expressing therein the Name and Rates of the Ships set out, the
times when ordered, as also the Stations to which they were directed, and the
times how long they were continued at Sea in that Service.

XXXVI. Fees of the Officers of the Exchequer 1 d in the Pound.
The Officers of the Receipt of the Exchequer may receive and take for their
Fees, one penny in the pound, and no more for all or any the Sums of Money to be
issued or paid to any their Majesty's Garrisons, Landforces and Armies, and
other Charges incident to the same, out of the Money arising by this or any
other Act and Grant of this Session, or any other Session of Parliament, during
this present War, to be distributed in such proportion as the Lord Treasurer or
Commissioners of the Treasury shall appoint.

XXXVII. No Collector, Gauger or Officer of Excise shall give his Vote for
Parliament Man.
After the first day of May 1694. no Collector, Supervisor, Gauger, or other
Officer or Person whatsoever concerned in the Excise, or any Branch or Part
thereof, shall by Word, Message or Writing, or in any other manner whatsoever,
endeavor to persuade any Elector to give or dissuade any from giving his Vote
for the Choice of any Person to be a Knight of the Shire, Citizen, Burgess or
Baron of any City, Borough or Cinque-Port to serve in Parliament; and every
Officer, or other Person offending shall forfeit 100 l. one moiety to the
Informer, The Penalty for offending.
the other to the Poor of the Parish where such Offense shall be committed, to
be recovered by any Person that shall sue for the same in any of their
Majesty's Courts at Westminster; and every Person convict on any such Suit of
the said Offense, shall be disabled and incapable of ever executing any Office
relating to the Duty of Excise, or other Office or Place of Trust whatsoever
under their Majesty's, their Heirs or successors.

XXXVIII. Gaugers to leave Notes in Writing
True Notes in Writing of the last Gauges made or taken by the Gaugers, shall
be left by them with Brewers, Makers or Retailers of Beer, Ale, or other
Excisable Liquors, or some of their Servants, at the times of taking their said
Gauges, Penalty for neglecting.
containing the quantity and quality of the Liquors so gauged, upon the Penalty
of 5 l. for every Offense or Neglect, to be recovered by any Person that shall
sue for the same in any of their Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster.

An Act upon Parchment, etc.
I. Stat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 15. The Act when to commence.
From the 28th of June 1694. shall be paid the several Duties upon Vellum,
Parchment and Paper for four Years thence ensuing, viz. For every Skin or piece
of Vellum or Parchment, Letters Patents.
on which any Grants or Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, or the
Seal of the Duchy or County Palatine of Lancaster, or of any Honor, Dignity,
Promotion, Franchise, Liberty or Privilege to any Person or Persons, Bodies
Politic or Corporate, or Exemplifications of the same shall be engrossed or
written, the Sum of 40 s.

II. Pardons, Reprieves, Relaxations.
For every Skin or piece of Vellum, Parchment or Sheet of Paper on which are
engrossed or written any Pardon of any Crime, or of any Money or Forfeiture, or
of any Warrant or Reprieve or Relaxation from any Fines, Corporal Punishments
or other Forfeiture, shall pay 40 s.

III. Grants of Money by their Majesty's.
For every Skin, etc. upon which any Grant from their Majesty's of any Sum of
Money exceeding 100 l. which shall pass the Great Seal or Privy (not directed to
the Great Seal) shall be engrossed or written 40 s.

IV. Offices above 50 l. per Ann.
For every Skin, etc. upon which any Grant of any Office or Employment which
shall be above the value of 50 l. per Annum, shall be engrossed or written 40 s.

V. Grants of Lands in Fee, for years, etc.
For every Skin, etc. upon which any Grant of Lands in Fee, Lease for Years, or
other Grant of Profit not herein particularly charged, that shall pass the
Great Seal, Exchequer Seal, Seal of the Duchy or County Palatine of Lancaster,
or Privy Seal (not directed to the Great Seal) shall be engrossed or written 40
s.

VI. Ecclesiastical Promotions.
For every Skin, etc. upon which any Presentation or Donation under the Great
Seal, Collation by Archbishop or Bishop, Presentation or Donation by any Patron
to any Benefice, Dignity or Spiritual Promotion (such Benefice, Dignity or
Spiritual Promotion being 10 l. value or above in the Kings Books, shall be
engrossed or written 40 s.

VII. Register, Entry, Testimonial, etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Register, Entry, Testimonial or Certificate
of any Degree taken in the Universities or Inns of Court, shall be engrossed or
written 40 s.

VIII. Dispensations Ecclesiastical.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Dispensation to hold two Ecclesiastical
Dignities or Benefices, or both a Dignity and a Benefice, or any other
Dispensation or Faculty, from the Archbishop of Canterbury or the Master of the
Faculties, shall be engrossed or written 40 s.

IX. Admittance of a Fellow of the College, etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which an Admittance of any Fellow of the College of
Physicians, or of any Attorney, Clerk, Advocate, Proctor, Notary or other
Officers in any Court whatsoever, shall be engrossed or written 40 s.

X. Appeals from the Admiralty etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Appeals from the Court of Admiralty, Arches,
Prerogative Court of Canterbury or York, shall be engrossed or written 40 s.

XI. Deeds enrolled.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Conveyances, Surrenders of Grants or
Offices, Release or other Deed whatsoever, enrolled in any Court of
Westminster, or other Court of Record, or by any Custos Rotulorum, or Clerk of
the Peace, shall be engrossed or written 5 s.

XII. Writs of Covenant and Entry.
For every piece, etc. on which any Writ of Covenant for levying of Fines, or
Writs of Entry for suffering Recoveries, shall be engrossed or written 5 s.

XIII. Exemplifications.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Exemplification of whatever nature that
shall pass the Seal of any Court whatsoever, shall be engrossed or written 5 s.

XIV. Decrees, Dismissions
For every Skin, etc. on which any Decree or Dismission made by or in the
Chancery, Exchequer, Dutchy-Court, or Courts of Lancaster, Chester, Durham, or
other Courts of Equity, shall be written or engrossed 6 d.

XV. Licenses Ecclesiastical.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Institution or License under Seal of any
Archbishop, Bishop, Chancellor or other Ordinary, or any Ecclesiastical Court,
shall be written or engrossed 5 s.

XVI. Writs of Error, etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Writs of Error, Certioraries, Habeas
Corpus's, or Appeals, (except to the Delegates) shall be written or engrossed 5
s.

XVII. Significavit pro Corp. etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Significavit pro Corporis deliberatione
shall be written or engrossed 5 s.

XVIII. Sentences, etc. in the Admiralty etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Sentence in the Court of the Lord High
Admiral or Cinque Ports, exercising Admiralty Jurisdiction, Attachments out of
the said Court of Admiralty, or any Relaxation of any such Attachment shall be
engrossed or written 5 s.

XIX. Licenses of Marriage, etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which any License or Certificates of Marriage, or
Letters of Mart shall be engrossed or written 5 s.

XX. Probate of Wills, etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Probate of Wills, or Letters of
Administration for any Estate above 20 l. value shall be written or engrossed 5
s.

XXI. Recognizances, Statutes.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Recognizance, Statute-Staple or Merchant
shall be engrossed or written, or entered of Record in any Court or Office 5 s.

XXII. Nisi prius Posteas.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Record of Nisi Prius or Postea shall be
engrossed or written 2 s. 6 d.

XXIII. Judgments.
For every Skin, etc. on which are engrossed or written any Judgment which
shall be signed by any Member of the Office or Prothonotaries, their Deputies,
Secondaries or Clerks, or others belonging to any the Courts of Westminster,
who have Power, or usually do or shall sign Judgments 2 s. 6 d.

XXIV. Commissions Ecclesiastical.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Commission out of any Ecclesiastical Court
(not herein otherwise particularly charged) shall be written or engrossed 2 s.
6 d.

XXV. Warrants, Decrees in Admiralty or Cinque Ports.
For every Skin, etc. on which are engrossed or written any Warrant, Monition
or personal Decree in any Courrt of Admiralty or Cinque Ports, any beneficial
Warrant or Order under their Majesty's Sign Manual (except Warrant or Orders
for the Navy, Arms and Ordnance) 2 s. 6 d.

XXVI. Special Bail.
For every Piece, etc. on which are engrossed or written any Special Bail in
any of the Courts at Westminster, or before a Judge, which shall be filed in
the Court, and also Appearances thereof 1 s.

XXVII. Bills, Answers, etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which shall be engrossed or written any Bill, Answer,
Replication, Rejoinder, Interrogatories, Depositions taken by Commission, or
any other Pleadings whatsoever in the Chancery, Exchequer, Duchy and County
Palatine Courts, or other Courts of Equity 1 s.

XXVIII. Admission into Corporations, etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Admission into a Corporation or Company,
Matriculation in either University, Admission into any of the Inns of Court or
Chancery, shall be written or engrossed 1 s.

XXIX. Affidavits.
For every Piece, etc. on which any Affidavit shall be engrossed or written
(except for burying in Woollen, and such Affidavits as shall be taken before
the Officers of the Customs, or any Justice of Peace, or any Commissioner
appointed or to be appointed by any Act of Parliament for the assessing and
levying any Duties or Aids granted or to be granted to their Majesty's, which
Affidavits shall be taken by the said Persons, by virtue of their Authorities
respectively) 6 d.

XXX. Copies of Affidavits.
For every Piece, etc. on which are engrossed or written Copies of Affidavits
(herein charged) that shall be read or filed in any Court 6 d.

XXXI. Indentures, Leases, etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which are engrossed or written, any Indenture, Lease
or Deed Poll (not hereby otherwise charged) 6 d.

XXXII. Original Writs.
For every Piece, etc. on which any Original Writ (except such on which a
Capias issues) Subpoena, Bill of Middlesex, Latitat, Writ of Capias, Quo minus,
Dedimus Potestatem to take Answers, examine Witnesses, or appoint Guardians, or
any other Writ, Process or Mandate that shall issue out or pass under the Seals
in any Court at Westminster, Quarter Sessions in Wales, Counties Palatine, or
any other Court whatsoever, holding Plea, where the Debt or Damage amounts to
40 s. or above, or the demand is of the value, shall be engrossed or written 6
d.

XXXIII. Entry of Actions in Inferior Courts.
For every Piece, etc. on which any entry of any Action in the Mayors or
Sheriffs Courts, London, and in all other Courts or Corporations, out of which
no Writs, Process or Mandate issue, holding Plea for Debts or Damages amounting
to 40 s. or above, shall be engrossed or written 6 d.

XXXIV. Common Bail, Appearance.
For every Piece, etc. on which are engrossed or written any Common Bail to be
filed in any Court, and any Appearance that shall be made upon such Bail 6 d.
which Appearance or Common Bail the Defendant shall cause to be entered or filed
within eight days after the Return of the Process on which the Defendant was to
be arrested, on Penalty of 5 l. to be paid to the Plaintiff, for which the
Court shall immedately award Judgment, and the Plaintiff may take out Execution.

XXXV. Rule of Court.
For every Piece, etc. on which any Rule or Order made in any of the Courts at
Westminster, either Courts of Law or Equity, shall be engrossed or written 6 d.

XXXVI. Copies of Rules of Court, and of Records.
For every Piece, etc. on which any Copy of such Rules and Orders entered, or
the Copies of any other Records or Proceedings in any of the Courts at
Westminster, not hereby otherwise charged, shall be engrossed or written 6 d.

XXXVII. Citations, Monitions, etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Citation or Monition made in any
Ecclesiastical Court, any Libel or Allegation, Deposition or Signal Decree, or
any Inventory exhibited in any Ecclesiastical Court, Courts of Admiralty, or
Cinque Ports, or Copies of them respectively shall be engrossed or written 6 d.

XXXVIII. Charterparties, Policies, etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Charter-party, Policy of Assurance,
Passport, Bond, Release, Contract, or other Obligatory Instrument, any
Protest, Procuration, Letter of Attorney, or any other Notarial Act whatsoever,
shall be engrossed or written 6 d.

XXXIX. Declarations, Pleas, etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Declaration, Plea, Replication, Rejoinder,
Demurrer, or other Pleadings whatsoever in any Court of Law shall be engrossed
or written 1 d.

XL. Copies thereof.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Copies thereof shall be engrossed or written
1 d.

XLI. Depositions, Copies of Bills, etc.
For every Skin, etc. on which any Depositions taken in the Court of Chancery,
or other Court of Equity (except the Paper-draughts taken by the Commissioners
before they are engrossed) which are not herein before charged, or upon which
any Copy of any Bill, Answer, Plea, Demurrer, Replication, Rejoinder,
Interrogatories, Depositions, or other Proceedings whatsoever, in any Court of
Equity shall be engrossed or written 1 d.

XLII. Copies of Wills.
For every Skin, etc. on which a Copy of any Will shall be engrossed or written
1 d.

XLIII. Officers to mark the Writs, Memorandums
From and after the 28th of June 1694. every Officer or Clerk belonging to the
King's Bench, Common Pleas or Exchequer, who shall sign any Warrant or Process
before Judgment to arrest any Person thereupon, shall at the signing thereof
set down upon such Writ or Process, the Day and Year of his signing the same,
which shall be entered upon the Remembrance, or in the Book where the Abstract
of such Writ or Process shall be entered, upon the Forfeiture of 10 l.

XLIV. Not to extend to single Bills.
This Act shall not charge any Bills of Exchange, Accounts, Bills of Parcels,
Bills of Fees, or any Bills or Notes (not sealed) for payment of Money at sight,
or upon demand, or at the end of certain days of payment.

XLV. Nor Seamen or Soldiers Will.
Neither shall it charge the Probate of any Will, or Letters of Administration
of any common Seaman or Soldier, who shall be slain or die in their Majesty's
Service, upon Certificate made thereof.

XLVI. Nor to Paupers.
None of the Rates or Impositions in this Act expressed, shall be paid or
payable to their Majesty's by any Person or Persons that shall be admitted to
sue or defend in Forma Pauperis.

XLVII. Their Majesty's to appoint Commissioners, and they to appoint
Underofficers
Their Majesty's may under the Great Seal of England appoint Commissioners and
Officers for the executing of this Act, who are to keep their Head-Office in
some convenient Place within the Cities of London or Westminster; which said
Commissioners, or the major part are also empowered under their Hands and Seals
to appoint Inferior Officers for the marking or stamping of Vellum, Parchment
and Paper, and for levying and collecting the Duties: Stamps to be made.
And the said Commissioners shall before the 28th day of June 1694. provide six
several Marks or Stamps, differing from each other, with which all Vellum,
Paper and Parchment herein before charged, shall be engrossed or written, shall
be stamped or engrossed, viz. One Stamp for the Vellum, Parchment and Paper
charged with the payment of 40 s. for every Skin, Piece or Sheet shall be
stamped or marked: One other Stamp or Mark with which all Vellum, Parchment and
Paper herein before charged with the payment of 5 s. for every Skin, Sheet or
Piece, as aforesaid, shall be marked or stamped, and so respectively a different
Mark or Stamp with which all Vellun^, Paper and Parchment herein before charged
with the several Duties of 2 s. 6 d. 1 s. 6 d. and 1 d. shall be severally and
differently marked and stamped; Published by Proclamation.
which said several Marks and Stamps shall be published by Proclamation under
the Great Seal, a convenient time before the said 28th day of June, to the end
all Persons may have due notice thereof: And the said Marks and Stamps may be
altered or renewed as their Majesty's shall think fit, public notice being
given thereof by Proclamation.

XLVIII. The Vellum etc. to be stamped before written.
All Vellum, Parchment and Paper hereby intended to be charged with the several
and respective Duties aforesaid, shall before any thing engrossed or written
thereon, be brought to the Head-Office, or some other Sub-Commissioner or
Officer to be appointed for the same, to be stamped and marked, who, upon
demand shall stamp or mark it, upon payment of the respective Duties, without
other Fee, which Stamp or Mark shall be a sufficient discharge for the
respective Duties aforesaid.

XLIX. Penalty of stamping before Duty paid.
If any Commissioner or Officer shall fix the Mark or Stamp before the
respective Duties thereon charged shall be duly paid or secured, he shall
forfeit for every such Offense 100 l.

L. Penalty of writing before it be stamped.
If any Person shall ingross or write, or cause to be engrossed or written upon
any Vellum, Parchment or Paper, any thing for which the said Vellum, etc. is
hereby charged, before it shall be marked or stamped as aforesaid, or upon which
there shall not be some Stamp or Mark resembling the same; Or shall ingross or
write upon any Vellum, Parchment or Paper that shall be marked or stamped, for
any lower Duty, than the Duty by this Act payable, the Offender for every such
Offense shall forfeit 500 l.

LI. Penalty on Officers, Clerks or Attorneys for fraudulent Practice.
Any Clerk or Officer, who in respect of his public Office or Employment, is,
or shall be entitled or entrusted to make, ingross or write any Records,
Deeds, Instruments or Writings by this Act chargable, as aforesaid, shall be
guilty of any Fraud or Practice, by making, engrossing or writing any such
Record, Deed, Instrument or Writing upon Vellum, Parchment or Paper not marked,
or upon which there shall not be some Stamp or Mark resembling the same; or
upon Vellum, Parchment or Paper stamped with this Mark or Stamp which he shall
know to be counterfeited; or upon Vellum, Parchment or Paper that shall be
marked or stamped for a lower Duty, as aforesaid, every such Officer, etc. so
guilty, and thereof lawfully convicted, shall (over and above the Penalty
aforesaid) forfeit his Office, Place or Employment: And if any Attorney shall be
guilty thereof, and convicted, he shall be disabled for the future to practice
as an Attorney. And if any Deed, Instrument or Writing shall be written or
engrossed by any Person (not being a known Officer, or of public Employment,
entitled to write or ingross the same) upon Vellum, Parchment or Paper not
marked or stamped according to this Act, or of a lower Duty, as aforesaid,
Penalty of forging a Stamp.
in every such case there shall be due to their Majesty's over and above the
Duties aforesaid, the Sum of 5 l. for every such Deed; and no such Deed or
Record shall be pleaded or given in Evidence in any Court either of Law or
Equity, till the said 5 l. be paid, and the said Vellum, Parchment or Paper be
stamped with a lawful Mark, which the Officer is to do upon payment of the said
5 l. And if any Person shall counterfeit or form any Stamp or Mark to resemble
any Stamp provided by this Act, or shall counterfeit or resemble the Impression
of the same, upon any Vellum, Parchment or Paper to defraud their Majesty's of
the Duties hereby granted, or shall utter or sell any Vellum, Parchment or
Paper with such counterfeit Mark or Impression, knowing such Mark or Impression
to be counterfeit, then every such Person so offending, being thereof legally
convict, shall suffer Death as a Felon, without benefit of Clergy.

LII. Person to be appointed to inspect Vellum, etc.
The Commissioners to appoint a fit Person to attend in any Court or Office, to
take notice of the Vellum, Parchment or Paper, upon which any thing aforesaid
shall be engrossed or written, and of the Marks and Stamps thereupon, and all
other things tending to secure the Duties arising by this Act: And the Judges
in the several Courts to make good Orders for securing the said Duties: And all
Persons commissionated by this Act, and every Person employed under them for
the marking or stamping of Vellum, Parchment or Paper, as aforesaid, before his
acting in marking or stamping of the same shall take the Oath following, viz I
A. B. do swear, Commissioners and Offieers Oath.
That I will faithfully execute the Trust reposed in me, pursuant to an Act of
Parliament, Entitled, An Act for granting to their Majesty's several Duties
upon Vellum, Parchment and Paper for four years toward carrying on the War
against France, without Fraud or Concealment; and shall from time to time true
Account make of my doing therein, and deliver the same to such Person or
Persons, as their Majesty's, their Heirs or Successors shall appoint to receive
such Account; and shall take no Fee, Reward or Profit for the execution or
performance of the said Trust, or the Business relating thereunto, from any
Persons other than such as shall be paid or allowed by their Majesty's, their
Heirs or Successors, or by the Commissioners of their Majesty's Treasury, or
three of them now being, or by the Treasurer of the Exchequer, or three or more
of the Commissioners of the Treasury for the time being.

LIII. All Parts of the Kingdom to be furnished with Vellum, Stamps, etc.
The Commissioners are to take special care that the several Parts of this
Kingdom, Wales and Berwick, shall be furnished with Vellum, Parchment and Paper
stamped, so as Persons may have their Election either to buy the same of the
Officers, or Persons to be employed by the Commissioners, or to bring their own
Vellum, Parchment or Paper to be stamped.

LIVE. All Deeds, Writs, etc. to be writ as usually.
All Records, Writs, Pleadings, and other Proceedings in Courts of Law and
Equity, and all Deeds, Instruments and Writings whatsoever hereby charged,
shall be engrossed and written in such manner as they have been usually
accustomed to be written, or are now written.

LV. Alteration of Stamp to be by Proclamation.
As often as their Majesty's shall think fit to alter or renew the said Marks
or Stamps, then they unto whom any Blank Vellum, Parchment or Paper enrolled
with the old Stamp, within sixty days after such intention of altering shall be
published by Proclamation, may bring it to the respective Officers to be
appointed as aforesaid, who shall deliver the like quantity of Vellum,
Parchment or Paper, and as good stamped with the new Stamp without Fee under the
Penalty of 100 l. And that which shall not be brought in in the time aforesaid,
the same shall be of no other effect than if it had been never stamped: And all
Persons who shall ingross or write any Matters chargable by the Act, on such
Vellum, Parchment or Paper after that time, shall forfeit as those that write
or ingross on Vellum, etc. u^stampt at all.

LVI. Time of notice of alteration of the Stamp.
The Proclamation for giving notice for the altering the Stamps, shall within
twenty days after the date thereof, be sent to the Mayor, Chief Magistrate, or
other Head-Officer of every City, Corporation, Borough or Market Town, which
Officers shall cause the same to be published to the respective Inhabitants,
either on the next Market Day, or the next Sunday in the Church, immediately
after Divine Service, under the Penalty of 200 l.

LVII. And it shall be lawful for any Person, Native or Foreigner, Body
Politic or Corporate, to lend to their Majesty's upon the Credit of this Act
any Sum not exceeding the Sum of 330000 l. and to receive Interest for the
same, not exceeding the Rate of 8 l. per Cent. per Annum.

An Abstract of what Things are chargable by the ACT for granting Duties upon
Vellum, Parchment and Paper.
Grants of Honors, Dignities, Promotions, Franchises, Liberties or Privileges
under the Great Seal or D. Lancaster. Pardons, Reprieve or Relaxation from
Fines, Corporal Punishments or Forfeitures. Grants of Money above 100 l. Grants
of Offices or Employments above 50 l. per An. Lands in Fee or Leases for Years
under the Great Seal. Grants of Exchequer, D. Lancaster or Privy Seal. 40 s.
For each Skin, Sheet, or piece of Parchment or Paper. Donations, Dignities and
Promotions Ecclesiastical above 10 l. per Ann. in the Kings Books. Degrees in
Universities. Dispensations and Faculties for two Benefices. Admittance of
every Physician in Col. Med. London. Admittance of every Attorney, Clerk,
Advocate, Proctor, Notary, and other Officer in any Court. Appeals from Courts
of Admiralty, Arches and Prerogative. Inrolments of Conveyances, Surrenders of
Grants or Offices, Releases or Deeds enrolled. Writs of Covenant for levying
Fines. Writs of Entry for Common Recoveries. Exemplifications under Seal of any
Court whatsoever. Institutions, Licenses to preach or serve Cures. Writs of
Error, Certiorari, or Habeas Corpus. 5 s. For each Skin, Sheet, or piece of
Parchment or Paper. Appeals (except to Delegates.) Significavits pro Corporis
deliberat. Sentences, Attachments. Relaxations, in Admiralty and Cinque Ports.
Licenses or Certificates of Marriage. Letters of Mart. Probate of Wills.
Administrations above 20 l. Statutes or Recognizances. Records of Nisi Prius or
Postea. Records of Judgments signed in any Courts of Westminster. Commissions
in Ecclesiast. Courts Warrants, Monitions and Personal Decrees in Courts of
Admiralty and Cinque Ports. 2 s. 6 d. For each Skin, Sheet, or piece of
Parchment or Paper. Beneficial Warrants or Orders under Sign Manual, (except
for Navy, Army and Ordnance.) Special Bails and Appearances. Ingrossments, of
Bills, Answers, Replications, Rejoinders, Interrogatories, Depositions, and
other Pleadings in Chancery, Exchequer, and other Courts of Equity. 1 s. For
each Skin, Sheet, or piece of Parchment or Paper. Admissions into Corporations,
Companies, Universities, Inns of Courts and Inns of Chancery. Decrees and
Dismissions. In Chancery, Exchequer, D. Lancaster, Chester, Durham. Common
Bails and Appearances. Rules or Orders at Westminster. Copies of Rules, Orders
or Records. Copies of Citations, Monitions, Libels, Allegations, Depositions,
Answers, Sentences, Decrees Copies of Inventories in Courts of Admiralty,
Cinque Ports and Ecclesiastical Courts. Affidavits and Copies. Indentures,
Leases Deed Polls. 6 d. For each Skin, Sheet, or piece of Parchment or Paper.
Writs Original, Latitats, Capias, Subpoena, Bill of Middlesex, Quominus, Ded.
Potestatem and other Writs. Processes and Mandates in all Courts where Debt is
above 40 s. Actions in London, and other Corporations above 40 s. Charter
Parties, Policies of Assurance, Pasports, Bonds, Releases, Contracts,
Obligatory Instruments, Protests, Procurations, Letters of Attorney or other
Notarial Acts. Copies of Declarations, Pleas, Replications, Rejoinders,
Demurrers, and other Pleadings in all Courts of Law, and for Copies thereof. 1
d. For each Skin, Sheet, or piece of Parchment or Paper. Copies of Depositions,
Bills, Answers, Pleas, Demurrers, Replications, Rejoinders, Interrogatories,
and other Proceedings in any Court of Equity, Copies of Wills.

Things Excepted.
Draughts of Depositions taken by Commissioners before they are engrossed.
Seamens and Soldiers Wills and Administrations, Paupers. Bills of Exchange,
Accounts, Bills of Parcels, Bills of Fees, Bills or Notes (not sealed) for
Payment of Money at sight, or on demand, or at the end of certain days of
payment.
Trade.
I. Stat. 5 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 2. An Act for repealing such parts of
several former Acts as prevent or prohibit the Importation of Foreign Brandy,
Aqua-vitae, and other Spirits, and Bacon, except from France.

I. Importation of fine Thrown Silk.
Stat. 5 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 3. It shall be lawful to or for any Person or
Persons residing within their Majesty's Dominions to import within this Kingdom
from any Port whatsoever (excepting the Ports of France) during the present War
with France, and three Months after, fine Thrown-Silk of the growth or
production of Italy, Sicily or Naples.

II. Provided that this Act, nor any thing herein contained, What sorts to be
imported.
shall extend to give liberty to bring over Land and import any Italian Thrown
Silk, courser than a sort thereof known and distinguished by the name of Third
Bolonia; nor any Sicilian Thrown Silk, courser than a sort thereof known and
distinguished by the name of Second Orsay; nor any sorts of Silks commonly
called Frams of the growth of Italy, Sicily or Naples; nor any other Thrown
Silk of the growth or production of Turkey, Persia, East India or China, The
penalty
under the Penalty and Forfeiture of all such Thrown Silk as shall be brought
over land and imported contrary to the intent of this Act.

III. And that all such fine Italian, To be brought to the Custom-house.
Sicilian and Naples Thrown Silks as are allowed to be imported by this Act,
wheresoever landed, shall be brought to their Majesty's Custom-house, London,
to the intent that no other sort may be imported over-land, than those only
allowed by this Act, under the Penalties beforementioned, any thing to the
contrary hereof notwithstanding.

I. Stat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 3. Whereas by an Act made in the 5th
year of Q. Elizabeth, Entitled, An Act containing diverse Orders for
Artificers, Laborers, Servants in Husbandry and Apprentices, It is enacted in
these words following, Provided always, and be it farther enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That no Person or Persons using or exercising the Art or
Mystery of a Woollen Cloath-Weaver, other than such as be inhabiting within the
Counties of Cumberland, Westmorland, Lancaster and Wales, weaving Frizes,
Cottons or Houswifes Cloth only, making and weaving Woollen-Cloath commonly
sold, or to be sold by any Cloathman or Clothier, shall take and have any
Apprentice, or shall teach, or in any-wise instruct any Person or Persons in
the Science, Art or Occupation of Weaving aforesaid, in any Village, Town or
Place, (Cities, Towns-Corporate, and Market Towns only excepted,) unless such
Person be his Son, or else that the Father or Mother of such Apprentice or
Servant shall at the time of the taking of such Person or Persous to be an
Apprentice or Servant, or to be instructed, have Lands or Tenements, or other
Hereditaments, to the clear yearly value of 3 l. at the least, of an Estate of
Inheritance or Freehold, to be certified under the Hands and Seals of three
Justices of the Peace of the Shire or Shires where the said Lands, Tenements or
other Hereditaments, do or shall lie; The effect of the Indenture to be
registered within three months, in the Parish where such Master shall dwell, and
to pay for such registring 4 d. upon pain of forfeiture of 20 s. for every
month that Person shall otherwise take any Apprentice, or set any such Person
on Work, contrary to the meaning of this Article.

II. St. 5 Eliz. concerning Apprentices in Woollen Manufafacture repealed.
Now forasmuch as such part of the said Act before recited has been found
prejudicial to the Clothing-Trade, It is hereby enacted, That so much of the
said Act as is before recited, is hereby declared to be repeald and made void,
as if the same had never been made.

I. Saltpeter to be brought in for one year
Stat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 10. It shall be lawful for any of their
Majesty's Subjects to import and bring Saltpeter into this Kingdom from any
Place or Country now in Amity with their Majesty's, for the space of one year,
to be computed from and after the 25th day of March 1694.

II. In what Ships.
Provided that such Saltpeter be brought in only in such Ships or Vessels as
are English built, and no other.

III. At what rate to be sold.
Provided that no Person importing Saltpeter by virtute of this Act, nor any
Retailer, shall sell any part of the Saltpeter so to be imported, at above the
price of 70 l. per Tun, not exceeding 18 per Cent. Refraction, upon the Penalty
of 50 l. per Tun.

IV. Their Majesty's Duty.
Provided that the Saltpeter which shall be imported by virtue of this Act,
shall pay to their Majesty's the same Duty, as if the same were directly
imported from the East Indies.

V. Saltpeter imported and mingled, not to be sold at above 70 l. per Tun.
If any Person shall mingle any Saltpeter imported by virtue of this Act, with
any other Saltpeter, and sell the same so mingled, at above the rate of 70 l.
per Tun; or shall by way of Barter or Exchange, take or agree to take any other
Commodity for Saltpeter imported by virtue of this Act (whether by it self or
mingled with other Saltpeter) in any manner, so as to have or receive for the
same, more than the rate of 70 l. per Tun, accounting the Commodity so taken in
exchange at the then current Price, That the sale of such Saltpeter so
mingled, and also such Barter or Exchange, shall be construed and taken to be a
Sale contrary to this Act.

I. Iron, Copper etc. may be transported except to France during the War.
Stat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Sess. 5. cap. 11. It shall and may be lawful to and
for any Person whatsoever, Bodies Politic or Corporate to ship and export all
and all manner of Iron, Copper or Mundick Metal out of this Realm of England,
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed; except unto, or for the use
of the French King, or any of his Subjects residing within his Dominions, or
in, to or for any Port or Place within his said Dominions, during the present
War between their Majesty's and the French King, paying the Duties and Customs
by Law payable for the same.

II. Excepting Port-Metal, Gun-Metal, etc.
Provided this Act shall not extend to the exportation of Port-Metal, Gun-Metal
or Shruff-Metal, or any old Metal, or any mixture therewith, or any Copper or
other Metal than what is made. etc. of English Ore only.

FINIS.

