DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
At the Court at WHITEHALL The Ninth of January 1683.
Present The Kings most Excellent Majesty, Lord Keeper Lord PrivySeal Duke of
Ormond Duke of Beaufort Earl of Oxford Earl of Huntingdon Earl of Bridgewater
Earl of Peterborrow Earl of Chesterfield Earl of Clarendon Earl of Bathe Earl
of Craven Earl of Nottingham Earl of Rochester Lord Bishop of London Mr.
Secretary Jenkins Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer Mr. Chancellor of the
Duchy Lord Chief Justice Jeffryes Mr. Godolphin.


Whereas by the Grace and Blessing of God, the Kings and Queens of this Realm
by many Ages past, have had the happiness by their Sacred Touch, and Invocation
of the Name of God, to cure those who are afflicted with the Disease called the
KingsEvil; And His Majesty in no less measure than any of His Royal
Predecessors having had good success therein, and in His most Gracious and
Pious disposition, being as ready and willing as any King or Queen of this
Realm ever was in any thing to relieve the distresses and necessities of His
good Subjects; Yet in His Princely Wisdom foreseeing that in this (as in all
other things) Order is to be observed, and fit times are necessary to be
appointed for the performing of this great work of Charity, His Majesty was
therefore this day pleased to Declare in Council His Royal Will and Pleasure to
be, That (in regard heretofore the usual times of presenting such persons for
this purpose have been prefixed by His Royal Predecessors) the times of Public
Healings shall from henceforth be from the Feast of All Saints, commonly called
Alhallon-tide, till a week before Christmas: and after Christmas until the
First day of March, and then to cease till the Passion Week, being times most
convenient both for the temperature of the season, and in respect of Contagion
which may happen in this near access to His Majesty's Sacred Person. And when
His Majesty shall at any time think fit to go any Progress, He will be pleased
to appoint such other times for Healing as shall be most convenient: And His
Majesty does hereby accordingly Order and Command, That from the time of
Publishing this His Majesty's Order, none presume to repair to His Majesty's
Court to be Healed of the said Disease, but only at, or within the times for
that purpose hereby appointed as aforesaid. And His Majesty was further pleased
to Order, That all such as hereafter shall come, or repair to the Court for
this purpose, shall bring with them Certificates under the Hands and Seals of
the Parson, Vicar, or Minister, and of both or one of the Churchwardens of the
respective Parishes where they dwell, and from whence they come, testifying
according to the truth, That they have not at any time before been touched by
His Majesty to the intent to be healed of that Disease. And all Ministers and
Churchwardens are hereby required to be very careful to examine into the truth
before they give such Certificates, and also to keep a Register of all
Certificates they shall from time to time give. And to the end that all His
Majesty's Loving Subjects may the better take knowledge of this His Majesty's
Command, His Majesty was pleased to Direct, That this His Order be Read
publicly in all Parish-Churches, and then be affixt to some conspicuous place
there; And that to that end the same be Printed, and a convenient Number of
Copies sent to the most Reverend Fathers in God, the Lord Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, and the Lord Arch Bishop of York, who are to take care that the
same be distributed to all Parishes within their respective Provinces.

PHI. LLOYD.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1683.


