AN ABRIDGEMENT OF THE STATUTES Made In the Thirteenth year of the Reign of
KING CHARLES The Second: Alphabetically digested under apt Titles and Heads for
the ready finding out of the matter.

LONDON. Printed in the year of our Lord M.DC.LXI.

A brief view of this BOOK.
A Recitation of all such Acts by their particular Titles as have received by
this Parliament a Confirmation, viz:

The Repeal of such Statutes as were injurious to the Church, and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

The sole Right of the Militia proved to be in the King.

What Offenses are now made Treason.

The punishment to be inflicted on such as Speak, Write, etc. any thing against
the King or His Government, either in Church or State.

What punishment shall be to those that meet in any disorderly numbers, under
pretense of presenting public Petitions or Addresses.

Moneys, Goods, etc. vested in the King.

How such as are excepted out of the Act of Oblivion are to be called to an
Account for Moneys, Goods, etc.

What Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures are to be inflicted on such persons as
are excepted out of the late Act of Oblivion.

The Government of the Navy, and for punishing all Offenses committed therein.

Concerning the Arrears of Excise.

Killing of Deer, etc.

All which, by the Table following, you will be more particularly satisfied in:
where, by apt and significant Titles you will be directed without any further
trouble to the main matter in the Book.

The Table.
ADdresses and petitions, see Tumults. Attempts against the King, see Treason.
Articles for the Navy, see Navy Orders. Accounts, see Moneys, Goods, etc.
vested in the King. Benevolence, see Present to the King. Bishops, and persons
in Holy Orders, see Holy Orders, and Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical.
Collectors, see Moneys, Goods, etc. Confirmation. page 1. Causes
Ecclesiastical. page 5 Carriages, etc. for the King. page 7 Dear-stealing,
Killing, etc. page 11 Disorders, see Tumults. Excise Arrears vested in the
King. page 12 Free Present, see Present. Forfeitures to the King, see Pains and
Penalties. Holy Orders. page 14 The King's Person and Government, see Treason.
Militia. ibid. Moneys, Goods, etc. vested in the King. page 17 Navy-Orders.
page 19 Progress and Removals, see Carriages. Present to the King. page 27
Pains, Penalties, etc. on excepted Persons. page 28 Preservation of the King's
Person and Government, see Treason. Petitions and Addresses, see Tumults.
Receivers, see Moneys, Goods, etc. Speaking, Writing, etc. against the King,
see Treason. Treasurer, see Moneys, Goods, etc. Treason. page 34 Tumults. page
38 Writing against the King, etc. see Treason.
AN ABRIDGEMENT of the Statutes of the Parliament began at Westminster the 8th
day of May, in the 13th year of the Reign of King CHARLES the Second.
Addresses and petitions, see Tumults.

Attempts against the King, see Treason.

Accounts, see Treasurers.

Bishops, and persons in Holy Orders, see Orders Holy, and Commissioners for
Causes Ecclesiastical.

Confirmation.
STat. 13. Car. 2. cap. 17. Enacted, That all and singular the Acts made or
mentioned to be made by his Majesty (by and with the advice and consent of the
Lords and Commons) upon or since the 25th day of April, in the 12th year of his
Majesty's Reign, herein after particularly mentioned and expressed, shall be
and hereby are ratified and confirmed, That is to say.

1. One Act of Free and General Pardon, Indemonity and Oblivion.

2. One other Act, entitled, A Subsidy granted to the King of Tonnage and
Poundage, and other Sums of money payable upon Merchandise exported and
imported.

3. An Act, entitled, An Act for continuing the Excise until the 20th of
August, 1660.

4. An Act for continuing the Excise till the 25th day of December, 1660.

5. An Act for the speedy provision of money, for disbanding and paying off the
Forces of this Kingdom both by Land and Sea.

6. An Act for Confirmation of Judicial procedings.

7. An Act for the speedy disbanding of the Army and Garrisons of this Kingdom.

8. An Act for Supplying and Explaining certain defects in an Act, entitled,
An Act for the speedy provision of money for Disbanding and paying off the
Forces of this Kingdom both by Land and Sea.

9. An Act to prevent Frauds and Concealments of his Majesty's Customs and
Subsidies.

10. An Act for raising Seavenscore thou sand pounds for the Complete
Disbanding of the whole Army, and Paying often some part of the Navy.

11. One other Act, entitled, A grant of certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale,
and other Liquors, for the increase of his Majesty's Revenue during his life.

12. An Act for taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries and Tenures in
Capite' and by Knights Service, and Purveyance' and for settling a Revenue upon
his Majesty in Lieu thereof.

13. An Act for the better Ordering the selling of Wines by Retail, and for
preventing Abuses in the mingling, corrupting, and vitiating of Wines, and for
setting and limiting the prizes of the same.

14. An Act for the leavying of the arrears of the Twelve months Assessment
commencing the 24 of June 1659. And the six months Assessment commencing the 25
of December, 1659.

15. An Act for Granting unto the Kings Majesty four hundred and Twenty
thousand pounds by an Assessment of Threescore and ten thousand pounds by the
month, for six months, for disbanding the Remainder of the Army, and paying off
the Navy.

16. An Act for further Supplying and explaining certain defects in an Act,
entitled, An Act for the speedy Provision of money for disbanding and paying
off the Forces of this Kingdom both by land and Sea.

17. An Act for the raising of Seaventy thousand pounds for the further supply
of his Majesty.

18. An Act for the Attainder of several persons guilty of the Horid Murder
of his late Sacred Majesty King Charles the first.

19. An Act for erecting and Establishing a Post Office.

20. One other Act, entitled, An Act for putting in Execution an Ordinance
mentioned in this Act. And all and every the Clauses, sentences, and articles
in them and every of them contained shall be and are hereby ratified and
confirmed and declared to have the full force of Acts of Parliament, and so
shall be adjudged and taken to all intents and purpose whatsoever.

Sata. 13. Car. 2. cap. 11. That the Several Acts made or mentioned to be made
by his Majesty (by and with the advice and consent of the Lords and Commons)
upon or since the 25 day of April, in the 12 year of his Majesty's Reign, and
herein after particularly mentioned and expressed are hereby ratified and
confirmed, That is to say.

1. One Act, entitled An Act for the raising of Seaventy Thousand pounds for
the farther Supply of his Majesty.

2. An Act for Confirmation of Marriages.

3. An Act for a perpetual Anniversary Thanksgiving on the 29 day of May.

Stat. 13. Car. 2. cap. 14. The several Acts (of the aforementioned Parliament
b^gun at Westminster the 25. of April in the 12. years of his Majesty Reign
aforesaid herein particularly mentioned and expressed are hereby ratified and
confirmed; That is to say.

1. One Act, entitled, An Act for the Encouraging and increasing of Shipping
and Navigation.

2. An Act for Prohibiting the Exportation of Wool, Wool-fels Fullers-Earth, or
any kind of Scouring Earth.

3. An Act impowring the Master of the Rolls for the time being, for to make
Leases for years, in order to new build the old Houses belonging to the Rolls.

4. An Act for prohibiting the Planting, setting or Sowing of Tobacco in
England and Ireland.

5. An Act for restraining the taking of Excessive Usury.

6. An Act for the present nominating of Commissioners of Sewers.

7. An Act for the incorporating of the Master and Wardens of the Company of
Haberdashers, London, to be Governors of the Free School and Alms-howses in
Newport in the County of Salop, of the foundation of William Adams, and for
settling of lands and Possessions on them for Maintenance thereof, and other
Charitable uses.

And all and every the clauses, sentences and Articles in them and every of
them contained, shall be and are hereby ratified and confirmed, and Enacted and
declared to have the full force and strength of Acts of Parliament.

Causes Ecclesiastical.
Stat. 13. Car. 2. cap. 12. Reciting An Act of the 17. Car. 1. Entitled, An
Act for Repeal of a Branch of a statute, Primo Eliz. concerning Commissioners
for causes Ecclesiastical, whereby the Ordinary course of Justice in Causes
Ecclesiastical has been obstructed; Enacteth that neither the said Act nor
any thing therein contained, does or shall take away any ordinary Power or
Authority from any Archbishop, Bishops, or any other person or persons, etc.
but that they and every of them exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, may
proceed, determine, Sentence, and exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and all Consures and Coercions appertaining and belonging to the
same, before the making of the Act before recited, in all causes and matters
belonging to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, according to the Kings Majecty's
Ecclesiastical Laws used and practiced in this Realm, in as ample manner and
form as they did, and might lawfully have done before the making of the said
Act.

2. That the before recited Act 17 Car. 1. and all the matters and Clauses
therein contained (Excepting what concerns the High Commission Court, or the
New Erection of some such like Court by Commission) shall be and is hereby
repealed, to all intents and purposes whatsoever.

3. Provided that this Act shall not extend to revive or give force to the said
Branch of the said Statute made in the First year of the Reign of the said late
Queen Elizabeth, mentioned in the said Act of Parliament made in the 17 year of
the Reign of the said King Charles, but that said Branch shall stand and be
repealed in such sort as if this Act had never been made.

4. That it shall not be lawful for any Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar-Generall,
etc. or any other person having or exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, to tender or administer unto any person whatsoever the Oath
called the Oath Ex Officio or any other Oath whereby such person to whom the
same is tendered or administered, may be charged or compelled, to confess or
accuse, or to purge him, or herself, of any criminal matter or thing, whereby
he or she may be liable to any censure or punishment.

5. That This Act shall not extend to give unto any Archbishop, Bishop, or any
other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, etc. any Power or Authority
to exercise, execute, inflict or determine any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
Censure or Coercion, with they might not by Law have done before the year of
our Lord 1639. Nor to abridge or diminish the Kings Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical matters and affairs, Nor to confirm the Canons made in the year
1640. nor any of them, nor any other Ecclesiastieal Laws or Canons not formerly
confirmed, allowed, or enacted by Parliament, or by the established Laws of the
Land as they stood in the year of our Lord 1639.

Carriages, etc. for the King.
Stat. 13 Car. 2 cap. 8. Reciting the Act made in the 12 year of his Majesty's
Reign, entitled, An Act for taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries,
Purveyance, etc. and mentioning some great incoveniences which may ensue to his
Majesty thereupon in respect of his Majesty's Royal Progresses and Remonvals.
It is Enacted, That the Clerk, or chief Officer of his Majesty's Carriages,
shall three days at least before his Majesty's arrivial, by Warrant from the
Green cloth, give notice in writing to two, or more Justices of the Peace next
adjoining, to provide such a number of Carts and Carriages from the places next
adjacent, as his Majesty shall have present use of, expressing the certainty of
that number, as also the time and place when and where the said Carts and
Carriages are to attend, which Carriages shall consist of four able Horses, or
six Oxen, or four Oxen and two Horses, for each of which Cart or Carriage, the
respective Owners shall receive 6d. for each mile they shall go laden: and in
case of refusal to provide and furnish his Majesty that now is, or his Queen
that shall be, or his or her Household in their Progress, or Removals, with such
sufficient and necessary Carriages, for ready moneys tendered to them; or shall
without just and reasonable cause refuse to make their appearance with such
sufficient Carts and Carriages, as are before expressed; That then upon due proof
and conviction of such neglect and refusal, by the Oath of the Constable or
other Officer, or two other credible Witnesses before the said Justices of the
County, or Major, or other chief Officer of the City, or Corporation where he
or they in habit (which Oath they shall have power to administer) the party
shall for such his refusal and neglect forfeit the sum of Forty shillings to
the King's use, to be sorthwith leavied by distress and sale of his goods and
chattels, (rendering the overplus) by warrant from the said Justices, Major, or
other Officer.

2. No Horses, Oxen, Cart or Wain, shall be enforced to travel above one days
journey from the place where they receive their loading; and that ready payment
shall be made in hand for the said Carriages, at the place of lading, without
delay according to the aforesaid rates.

3. If any Justice of the Peace, Major, chief Officer, or Constable shall take
any gift or reward to spare any person from making such Carriage, or shall
injuriously charge any through envy, etc. who ought not to make such Carriage,
or shall Impress more Carriages then shall be diceted from the Greencloth, that
then upon due proof and conviction thereof the party so offending shall forfeit
10 li. to the party grieved, or any who shall sue for the same by Action of
debt, etc. wherein no Protection, Essoyn or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

4. Any person presuming to Impress any Horses, Oxen, Cart, Wain, or Carriages
for his Majesty's service, other then the person so empowered, shall upon due
conviction of the said offense suffer the punishment contained in the first
recited Act.

5. That none of his Majesty's said Servants shall be compelled to pay above 1
s. by the night for every Bed that they shall use for themselves, nor above 6d.
for the same for their servants: And that in all such houses where any of his
Majesty's said Servants shall pay for their Diet, or for Hay and Provender,
convenient Lodging shall be provided for themselves and their servants without
paying any thing for the same.

6. That any two or more Justices of Peace near the Road through which his
Majesty is to pass, shall immediately after notice in writing from the said
Green-cloth, and Avenor, under their hands and seals set down and appoint such
reasonable rates and prices to be pai'd during his Majesty's abode there both
for Hay, Oats and other accommodations for Horses, as they shall think meet,
which Rates the Justices shall cause to be proclaimed one day at the least
before his Majestles coming to such place in the Market Town next to such
place, and in such other places as they shall think fit to the end that notice
may be taken of such prices. And if any take above the rates so limited either
for Lodging, Horse-meat, Stable-room, or other such accommodations, and thereof
be convicted by confession, or Oath of one credible Witness before any one
Justice of Peace, (who is to administer the said Oath) every person so
offending shall forfeit and pay to the party grieved 40 s. to the leavied by
distress (by warrant from the said Justice) and sale thereof, returning the
overplus (the charge of the distreining being first deducted.)

7. This Act to continue till the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament and no longer.

Collectors, see Treasurers.

Dear-stealing, Killing, etc.
Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 10. That if any person or persons shall after the first
day of August, 1661. unlawfully Course, Kill, hurt or take away any Red or
Fallow-Deer in any Forest, Chase, etc. or other Ground where Deer are or have
been usually kept within the Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, without
the consent of the Owner, or person chiefly entrusted with the Custody thereof,
or shall be aiding or assisting therein, and shall be convicted thereof by
confession, or by the Oath of one credible Witness before a Justice of Peace
(who is hereby empowered to-administer an Oath to that purpose) such person
being presented within six months after such offense done; shall forfeit for
every such offense 20 li to be leavied by distress upon the Goods and Chattels
of the Offender, by warrant under the Justices hand, before whom such
conviction shall be made, the one moiety to the Informer, the other to the
Owner of the Deer: and for want of Sufficient distress, the Offender shall be
committed to the House of Corection for six months, or to the Common Goal for
one whole year without Bail or Mainprise, at the Justices discretion and not to
be discharged, till sufficient security be given for their good behavior for
one whole year next ensuing their enlargement No offender punished hereby shall
incur the penalty of any other Law or statute for the same offense.

Disorders, see Tumults.

Excise, Arrears vested in the King.
Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 13. That all and every Sum and sums of money any ways
due, or owing from or by any person or persons, for or touching the Imposition
or Duty called the Excise, here o'ore imposed and made payable upon Beer, Ale,
or any other Commodities, by any Laws of pretended Laws or Ordinances: And all
Debts therefore owing, whether by Obligation or upon Account from the Farmers
of Excise, or any other person or persons whatsoever, or any of their
Securities, and not pardoned by his Majesty's Act of Pardon and Oblivion, be
and are hereby vested in the King, his Heirs and Successors; and that his
sacred Majesty, his Heirs and Successors may from time to time and at all times
hereafter, have, demand, sue for, and recover the same of all and every person
and persons, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, having Assets, who are
any way accomptable for the same, or any part thereof, and from his and their
respective Sureties and Securities, as if the same Duties of Excise had been
lawfully assessed, imposed and collected; and as if the several pretended Acts,
Orders and Ordinances, assessing and imposing the same, had been legal Acts of
Parliament, and had in express words given and granted all and every the said
Duries unto his Majesty; and as if the Obligations and Recognizances entered
into by the respective Sureties and Securities had been taken in his Majesty's
name.

2. That all persons accomptable by virtue of this Act, shall have all such due
allowance in their Accounts, as all such persons whose Accounts are excepted in
the Act of Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, are or ought to have.

3. No person shall be questioned or molested for any of the Duties herein, or
hereby vested in the King, except he shall be sued or prosecuted with effect
before the 25 of December, 1662.

4. That all persons Accomptable hereby, are hereby enabled to sue for, leavy
and recover from any person who stands indebted unto them in any Sum of money
for the Duty of Excise, for which they are hereby accomptable, all Sums of
money and arrears unsatisfied, in as full manner as they might have received
and levied the same when they first grew due.

Free Present, see Present.

Forfeitures to the King, see Pains and Penalties.

Holy Orders.
Stat. 13 Car. 2. c. 2. Whereas an Act was made by the Parliament begun at
Westminster the 3 of Nov. in the 16 Caroli 1. entitled, An Act for disinabling
all persons in Holy Orders to exercise any Temporal Jurisdiction or Authority.
Which Act has made several Alterations prejudicial to the Constitution and
ancient Rights of Parliament, and contrary to the Laws of this Land, and is by
experience found otherwise inconvenient: It is Enacted that the said Act, and
every Clause, matter and thing therein contained, shall be and is hereby from
henceforth repealed and made void to all intents and purposes.

The King's Person and Government, see Treason.

Militia.
Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 6. A Recitation being made, that it is and ever was by
the Laws of England the undoubted Right of his Majesty and his Royal
Predecessors, Kings and Queens of England to have the sole Supreme Government,
Command and Disposition of the Militia, and of all Forces by Sea and Land, and
of all Forts and places of strength, and that both or either of the Houses of
Parliament cannot, nor ought to pretend to the same; nor can, nor lawfully may
raise, or leavy any War offensive or defensive against his Majesty, his Heirs
or lawful Successors; and yet the contrary has of late been practiced almost
to the ruin of the Kingdom: And whereas during the late Usurpation many
rebellious Principles have been distilled into the minds of the People, which
unless prevented may break forth into disturbance; And whereas an Act for
exercising the Militia (with most safety and ease to the King and people) is
under consideration, which cannot as yet be perfected, It is enacted, That the
Militia and Landforces of this Kingdom and Dominions, etc. now under the
power of Lieutenants, or their Deputies, shall be exercised, ordered and
managed until the 25 of March, 1662, in such manner as the same now is
actually exercised, ordered and managed according to such Commissions and
Instructions as they formerly had, or from time to time shall receive from his
Majesty.

2. That whereas since the 24 of June 1660. there have been Insurrections by
occasion whereof diverse have been murdered, and for the security of the Nation
diverse have been assaulted, arrested, detained or imprisoned, and diverse Arms
have been seized, and houses searched, etc. It is enacted that all persons who
have or shall have acted, or done any thing in execution of any Commission or
Commissions of Lieutenancy, issued by the King, or by color of them or any of
them touching, or concerning the same, or any of them, or relating thereunto,
shall be and are hereby saved harmless, and indempnified in this behalf.

3. And also all magistrares, Justices of the Peace, Officers and Ministers of
Justice, and all that have or shall have acted by or under them or by their or
any of their Commands since the said 24 of June 1660. until the 20 of July
1661. as to any assaulting, arresting, detaining, or imprisoning any suspected
Phanatick, Sectary, or disturber of the Peace, or seizing of Arms, or searching
of Houses for Arms, or for suspected perssons, shall be and are hereby saved
harmless and indempnified.

4. That this Act shall not after the 20 of March 1661. be prejudicial to any
County, City, or place within this Kingdom which are overcharged with men and
Arms beyond their Ancient proportion.

5. That this Act shall not extend to the giving of any power for the
transporting of any Subjects of this Realm, or any way compelling them to march
out of this Kingdom, otherwise then by the Laws of England ought to be done.

6. That no person be capable of acting as Lieutenant, or Deputy Leiutenant or
other Officer or Soldier, by virtue of this Act, who has not taken the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, since his Majesty's return until he shall take
the same, which Oaths any 6 of the Lord of the Council are to administer to any
Peer, who shall be Commissionated etc. and any two of the Deputy Lieutenants in
their respective Counties to any Commoner.

Moneys, Goods, etc. vested in the King.
Stat. 13. Car. 2. cap. 3. That all sums of money, Goods, Plate, Jewels,
Horses, Arms, Ammunition, and other things whatsoever, leavied, received, or
taken since the 30 of January 1642. by any of the late pretended Authorities,
or by pretense or color from them, or any of them for any public use, (not
pardoned by the Act of Oblivion, made at the Parliament begun at Westminster
the 25 of April in the 12 year of His Majesty's reign,) which are not otherwise
vested and settled in the King, And all Bonds, Obligations and other Securities
entered into for the same or any part thereof, be and are hereby vested and
settled in the King his Heirs and Successors, who may from time to time, and at
all times hereafter have, demand, sue for, and recover the same of all persons,
their HeiRs, Executors and Administrators who are accomptable for the same, or
in whose hands or possessions soever the same were, or are, as if the same had
been leavied, received, collected or taken in the King's name, by his
Authority, or to his use.

2. That all persons who have received any the aforesaid sums of money from any
Treasurer or Receiver for any public use by way of Impressed, to be accounted
for, and not pardoned, as aforesaid, shall be liable to Account, and called to
account in such manner, as if they had received the same of the Exchequer or
other Public Treasury, and particularly those who have received, or collected
the Revenues of any Churches or Vicatidges in Wales, or in the County of
Monmouth since the year 1648.

3. Provided they all have due allowances in their accounts, as all whose
accounts are excepted in the Act of Oblivion, ought to have.

4. That the King his Heirs and Successons, shall and may issue out Commissions
as shall be thought fit, either under the Great Seal, or Seal of the Exchequer
for the Discovering, Leavying, receiving and discharging the same.

5. That all persons accountable hereby are enabled to sue for, leavy, and
recover from the parties from whom the same was, and is due, and for which they
are hereby accomptable, all sum of money and Arears in such manner and form as
they might have recovered and leavyed the same when they first grew due.

6. That no man shall be called to account or questioned for any Goods or other
things in his hands, which shall not be called to account or some Information
against him in the Exchequer, or to Commissioners to be appointed as aforesaid,
before the 24 of June 1662. and such information prosecuted with effect within
Twelve months after the Exhibition thereof.

Navy-Orders.
Stat. 13. Car. 2. cap. 9. All Officers at Sea, shall cause the Public worship
of God according to the Liturgy of the Church of England established by Law, to
be Solemnly, orderly, and reverently performed in their Respective ships, and
that Prayers and Preachings by Chaplains in Holy Orders, of the respective
ships be diligently performed, and that the Lords day be observed according to
Law.

2. Every Person in the Kings pay, using unlawful and rash Oaths, Cursings,
Execrations, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, or other scandalous Actions, shall be
punished as the Court Martial shall think fit.

3. It shall be Death to every Person in the Fleet who shall give, hold, or
entertain Intellgence to or with any King, etc. being enemy to, or any persons
in Rebellion against the King, his Heirs and Succeflors, without the Kings
leave or the leave of the Lord High Admiral, Vice Admiral, or Commander in
Chief of any Squadron.

4. Every person in the Fleet who shall receive any Letter or Message from any
King, Potentate etc. being enemy to the King, etc. or on their behalf, and do
not within twelve hours after (having an opportunity so to do) acquaint the
superior Commander with it: Or if a Superior officer or Matiner, being
acquainted therewith, or himself in his own person receiving a Letter of
Message from any such enemy, or Rebel, and shall not in convenient time reveal
the same to the Admiral, Viceadmirall, or the Commander of the Squadron, such
person shall suffer Death, or other punishment as the Court-Martiall shall
think fit.

5. No Person in the Fleet shall relieve any Enemy or Rebel, in Time of War
with any Supply whatsoever, upon pain of death, or as the Court-Martiall shall
think fit.

6. All the Papers, Charter-Parties, Bills of Lading, Pasports and other
Writings whatsoever that shall be found aboard any ship which shall be seized
as Prize, shall be preserved and not torn, nor made away, but the very
Originals sent up entirely, and wathout fraud to the Court of Admiralty, or
such as shall be appointed for that purpose, upon pain of loss of all the
shares of the Takers: and such further punishment on the Offenders as the
Court Martial shall impose.

7. None in the King's pay shall take out of any prize, or ship or Goods seized
on for Prize, any money, Plate, Goods, Lading or Tackle, before Judgment
thereof passed in the Admiralty Court, but the full account of the whole shall
be brought in without imbezilment, and judgment pass entirely upon the whole
without fraud, upon pain of being punished by a Court Martial or the Court of
Admiralty, Excepting that it shall be lawful for all Captains, Seamen, etc. to
take to themselves as Pillage, without account to be given, all such Goods and
Merchandise (other then Arms, Ammunition, Tackle, Furniture, or Stores of such
ship,) as they shall find upon or above the Gun-deck of any ship taken in fight
or prize.

8. None shall Imbezle, Steal, etc. any Cables, Anchors, Sails, Furniture,
Powder, Arms, or Ammunition of the Ship upon pain of death, or as a
Court Martial shall adjudge.

9. If any Foorein ship, etc. shall be taken as prize, without resistance, then
none of the Captains, Masters, or Mariners, being Foreiners, shall be stripped
of their Clothes, pillaged or beaten, upon pain that the offender forfeit
double damages, but such ships and Goods so taken, shall be preserved entire,
to receive Judgment in the Admiralty according to Justice and Right.

10. Every Captain or Commander, who upon signal or Order of fight, or view or
sight of any ships of the Enemy, Pirate or Rebel, or likelihood of Engagement,
and shall not put all things in a posture for fight, and shall not in his own
person according to his place, encourage the inferior Officers, etc. to fight
courageously, and not faintly to behave themselves, shall be cashiered, And if
such yield to the Enemy, etc. or cry for Quarter; such person or persons shall
suffer death, or punishment according to his desert.

11. Every Captain, Commander or others of any ship of War shall duly observe
all the Commands of the Admiral, or other superior Commander, upon pain of
Death or punishment as the offense shall deserve.

12. Every Captain, and Officers, Mariners and Soldiers of every ship, etc.
that shall not in any fight do his utmost against the enemy, etc. and assist
and relieve all the King's ships, shall be tried, and suffer Death or other
punishment as the Court Martial shall Judge fit.

13. That the Captains, Officers, and Seamen of all ships appointed for Convoy,
etc. who shall not faithfully perform the same, and defend the ships and Goods
in their Convoy, without diverting to other parts or occasions, or neglecting
to fight in their defense, etc. and submitting those in their convoy to hazard,
or shall exact any Reward, from any Merchant or Master for conveying of any
ship, or Vessel, etc. belonging to his Majesty's Subjects, they shall make
reparation of the damage as the Court of Admiralty shall adjudge, and also be
punished criminally either by death or otherwise as the Court Martial shall
judge fit.

14. All persons whatsoever belonging to the Fleet, who shall forbear to pursue
or chase an Enemy, etc. beaten, or flying, or shall not assist a known friend
in view to his utmost power; shall suffer death, or punishment as the
Court Martial shall think fit.

15. Upon the Command of any Service or action, no man shall presume to stop or
discourage the said service and action upon any pretense of wages whatsoever
upon pain of death.

16. All See-Captains, Officers and Seamen, that shall betray their Trust, or
turn to the Enemy, etc. and either run away with their ship or any Ordnance,
Ammunition, or Provision, or yield the same up, shall suffer death.

17. All See Captains, officers, or Mariners that shall desert the Service or
employment in the ships, or shall run away, or entice other so to do, shall
suffer death.

18. All persons that shall come or be found in the nature of spies, to bring
seducing Letters, etc. or shall endeavor to corrupt any Captain, etc. to bettay
their trust, etc. shall suffer death.

19. No person in or belonging to the Fleet, shall use seditious or mutinous
words, or make or endeavor to make any Mutiny, upon pain of Death.

20. None shall conceal any Traiterous or Mutinous practices, design, or words,
or any words against the King, or Government, or any words or designs tending
to the hindrance of the service, but shall forthwith reveal them to his
superior, upon pain of Punishment as a Court Martial shall think fit.

21. None shall quarrel with his Superior Officer upon pain of severe
punishment, nor strike him, upon pain of death, or as a Court Martial shall
adjudge.

22. If any find cause of complaint upon any just ground, he shall quietly make
the same known to his Superior or Commander in Chief, and they are presently to
remedy the same, but none shall upon any pretense whatsoever privately attempt
to stir up disturbance, on pain of such severe punishment as the Court Martial
shall inflict.

23. None shall quarrel or fight in the ship, nor use provoking speeches,
tending to make Quarrel, etc. upon pain of imprisonment and other punishment as
the Court Martial shall adjudge fit.

24. There shall be no wastful expense of any Ammunition, etc. or other stores
in the Fleet, nor any imbezilment thereof, but that the same be carefully
preserved, upon pain of such punishment, upon the offenders, Abetters, buyers
and Receivers, as the Court Martial shall adjudge.

25. That such as shall be found guilty either through wilfullness, negligence,
or other defaults in the conducting and Steering of the ships, that none be
stranded, etc. or split, or hazarded upon pain of such punishment as a
Court Martial shall adjudge.

26. Every one that shall willingly set on fire any ship, Magazine, Store,
boat, Ketch, Hoy, or Vessel, Tackle or Furniture, not appertaining to an
Enemy, or Rebel, shall be punished with death.

27. None shall sleep upon his Watch, neglect the duty imposed, or forsake his
Station, upon pain of death: or as the Case shall require.

28. All Murders and wilful Killing of any in the ship shall be punished with
death.

29. All Robbery and Theft shall be punished with death, or as the
Court-Martiall shall think fit.

30. No Provost-Martiall, shall refuse to receive or keep any Prisoner
committed to his charge, nor suffer such to escape, nor dismiss him without
order, on pain of the same punishment, which should have been inflicted upon
the party dismissed, or permitted to escape, or as the Court Martial shall
think fit.

3. All Captains, Officers, and Seamen, shall do their endeavors to detect,
apprehend and bring to punishment all Offenders, and shall assist the Officers,
for that purpose, on pain of being punished by the Court-Martiall.

32. Every one committing the unnatural and detestable sin of Buggery or Sodomy
with man or Beast, shall suffer death without mercy.

33. All Faults, Misdemeanors, and disorders, committed at Sea, nor herein
mentioned, shall be punished according to the Laws and Cuctoms used in such
Cases at Sea.

34. The Lord High Admiral for the time being, shall grant Commissions to
inferior Vice Admirals, or Commander in Chief of any Squadron of ships, to call
Court-Martials, consisting of Commanders, and Captains, and no Court-Martiall,
for inflicting death, shall consist of less then five Captains, the Admiralls
Lieutenant to be as to this purpose esteemed as a Captain: and in no case
wherein Sentence of Death shall pass, by virtue of any of the artiels aforesaid
(except in ease of Mutiny) shall such sentence be executed, without the leave
of the Lord High Admiral, if the offense be committed within the Narrow Seas;
But if beyond the narrow Seas, the offense shall be committed, whereupon the
Sentence of death shall be given, etc. then Execution shall not be done but by
order of the Commander in chief of that Fleet, etc. wherein sentence of death
was passed.

35. The Judge Advocate of any Fleet for the time being, shall have power to
administer an Oath to any person or witness in order to the Examination or
Trial of any of the offenses aforesaid, and in his absence the Court-Martiall
shall appoint one to administer an Oath as aforsaid.

36. That this Act, etc. shall not extend to give unto the Lord Admiral of
England for the time being, or to any his Vice-Admiralls, etc. or to any
claiming Admirall-power, etc. within any the King's Dominions, any other power,
right, Jurisdiction, etc. then he or they or any of them, lawfully have, or
ought to have and enjoy before the making of this Act, other then for such of
the offenses Specified in the several Articles herein contained, as shall he
hereafter done upon the main Sea, or in ships or Vessels, being and hovering in
the main stream of Great Rivers, only beneath the Bridges of the same Rivers,
nigh to the sea within the Admiralty Jurisdiction, and in none other places
whatsoever, and committed only by such as shall be in actual service and pay in
the King's Fleet, or ships of War.

Present to the King.
Stat. 13 Car. 2. c. 4. enacted, That the King may issue out such and so many
several Commissions, under his Great Seal of England, into the several
Counties, Cities, Towns Corporate, and all other places in England and Wales,
and Berwick upon Tweed, directed to such as the King shall think fit, for the
receiving of such Subscriptions, as his Subjects shall voluntarily offer, for
supply of his Majesty's pressing occasions, and likewise to issue such other
Commissions to such other persons as the Kings shall think fit, for Collecting
and receiving the moneys so subscribed, and the Acquittance of any one of which
respective Receivers, are immediately to be made and given upon pay so made
without any Fee, and shall be a discharge for the sum so subscribed, And in
case such subscriptions shall upon any occasion be returned into the Exchequer,
or other place, the payment thereof shall be likewise returned together with
the same.

2. Process shall issue out of the Exchequer against any Subscibers, but within
two years after the passing of this Act.

3. The said Commissioners of the respective Counties and places aforsaid are
after the issuing out and receipt of the said Commissions to meet at the common
place of meeting for each County and place, etc. and so many of them as shall
be present at the said first General meetings, or the major part of them, may
sever themselves into Hundreds and other places, etc. within their limits, as
they shall think fit, and shall from times to time give notice of the
respective times and places of their meetings to the end that all persons may
resort to them to make such offers or Present to his Majesty as their own
hearts shall prompt them to.

4. Provided, no Peer of this Realm, shall in such Offer or Present exceed the
sum of 400 li. Nor any person not being a Peer of this Realm exceed the sum of
200 li.

5. That No Commissions to be issued out by Virtue of this Act shall be of
sorce as to the receiving of any moneys or Subscriptions for moneys after the
24 of June 1662.

6. It is declared that no Commissions or aids of this nature can be issued out
or Leavied but by Authority of Parliament, and that this Act and the supply
granted shall not be drawn into example for the future.

Pains, Penalties, etc. on excepted Persons.
Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 15. Reciting the Sense of the Act of Indemnity touching
Pains, Penalties, and Forseitures, to be inflicted on such as were the wicked
Instruments of that Horrid and execrable Treason the Murder of King Charles the
first, etc. It is, enacted, That all and every the Manours, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Remainders, Possessions, Rights, Conditions,
Interests, Offices, Fees, annuities and all other the Hereditaments, Leases for
years, Chattels real, and other things of what nature soever they be, of Isaac
Ewer, Sir John Danvers, Sir Thomas Maleverer, William Puresoy, John Blakiston,
Sir William Constable, Richard Deane, Francis Aleyn, Peregrin Pelham, John
Moore, John Aldred alia Alured, Humphry Edwards, Sir Gregory Norton, John Venn,
Thomas Andrews Alderman, Anthony Stapley, Thomas Horton, John Fry, Thomas
Hammond, Sir John Bourchier, all deceased. -- William Lord Mounson, James
Challoner deceased, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, John Phelps,
Robert wallop, and Sir Arthur Hazlerigge, (who during his life committed many
horrid and traitorous crimes, etc.) which they or any of them or any other to
their or any of their uses or in trust, etc. had the 25 of March in the year of
our Lord 1646. or at any time since, shall stand and be forfeited to the King,
his Heirs and succeffors, and shall be adjudged to be in the actual and real
Possession of the King without any Office, etc.

2. And also that all and every the Goods, Debrs, and other the Chattels
personal whatsoever, of the aforesaid persons deceased, whereof they or any of
them atthe time of their respective deaths, or any other in trust for them or
any of them stood possessed or interessed in Law or Equity, and all the Goods,
Debrs, and other the Chattells personal whatsoever of them the said William
Lord Mounson, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, John Phelps, and Robert
Wallop, whereof upon the Eleventh day of February in the year of our Lord 1659.
they or any of them or any other in trust for them or any of them stood
possessed either in Law or Equity, shall be adjudged forfeited to the King, and
are hereby put into the actual and real possession of the King without any
further Office, etc.

3. That no Conveyance, Assurance, etc. whatsoever, of or out of any Manours,
Lands Tenements or Hereditaments, not being the Late King's, Queens, or Prince,
or of any Archbishop, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, nor being Lands or
Hereditaments sold or given for Delinquency or pretended Deliquency, by pretext
of some Act, Order, Ordinance or pretended Order since the first day of January
1641. Nor any Statute Judgment or Recognizance, hand made, etc. to any person,
Bodies Politic, or Corporate before the 29 of September, 1659. by any of the
aforesaid offenders, or their Heirs, or by any others claiming by, from, or
under them, or any of them, other then the Wife or Wives, Child or Children,
Heir or Heirs of the said persons, for money bona fide, to them or any of them
paid, or lent, or other valuable Consideration, nor any Conveyance, Assurance,
etc. made before the 25 of April 1660. by any person or persons to the
offenders aforesaid in trust, and for the benefit of any other person, or
persons, not being any of the offenders aforesaid, or in trust for any Bodies
Politic, or Corporate, shall be impeached, defeared, made void, or frustrated
hereby, or by any of the Convictions, and attainders as aforesaid, But the same
shall be held and enjoied, by the Purchasees, Grantees, Leasees, Assigns,
Cestuy que use, Cestuy que trust, and every of them, their heirs, etc.
respectively, as if this Act had not been made, so as the said Conveyances and
all and every the Grants and Assurances with by vertut hereof ought to be held
and enjoyed as aforesaid, shall before the first day of January 1662. be entered
and enrolled of Record, in the Exchequer and not otherwise.

4. That William Lord Mounson, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, Robert
Wallop, Esquire; and John Phelps, shall be and are hereby degraded from all Titles
of Honor, Dignities and preheminences, which they now have, or hereafter may
descend unto them, And none of them shall bear or use the style of Lord,
Baronet, Knight, Esquire, or Gentleman, nor any Coats of Arms or other Legal
Title or addition, but hereby are made persons of Dishonor and Infamy.

5. That the said William Mounson, Henry Mildmay, James Harrington, Robert
Wallop, and John Phelps, shall upon the 27 of January 1661. or so soon after
as they shall be apprehended, carried to the Tower of London, and from thence
drawn upon Sledges with Ropes about their necks, quite through the Streets unto
the Gallows at Tiburn, and in like manner be brought back again, and be
imprisoned during the term of their natural lives.

6. That no executor or Administrator to any of the dead persons whose Estate
is herby forfeited, shall be sued, or molested for any Debt or Legacy, by them
pai'd, as Executors or Administrators, to any person to whom the same was due
or bequeathed, and was paid bona fide; but the respective Legatees who have
received, etc. shall be accountable and pay tho same to the King.

7. Nothing herein shall be construed to forfeit the term, estate or interest
which Sir William Jews of Borden in the County of Southampton, had, or has in
the Custody of the Park called East-Mean Park in the said County and in the
Game of Conies therein, for the Term of three years to come from Our Lady Day
last being the remaining years of a greater term (the said Sir William being
formerly possessed thereof) the which Park and premises belonging to the
Bishop of Winchester the said Sir William has surrendered to the Bishop of
Winchester, and has now taken a new Lease for three Lives, the which said
Lease for three lives to the said Sir William, shall notwithstanding this Act,
remain firm and Good; saving always to every person, etc. their heirs etc. all
such Estate, Right, Title, and Interest in Law and Equity which any person has
or ought to have therein, not being in trust for any of the said offenders, nor
derived by, from, or under them since the 25 of March 1646. saving always and
reserving to Cuthbert Collingwood Esquire; and George Collingwood, Gent. his Son,
their and every of their Heirs and Assigns, and the Farmers and Tenants of the
said Cuthbert and George, or either of them, and of their Heirs and Assigns,
All such Right, Title of Entry, and Action, Use, Interest, and Possession,
which any of them, or any in trust for them, have, or had, or ought to have of,
into or out of the Manors, Townships, Villages, Hamblets and Precincts of
Eslington, Whittingham, Barton, Throunton, Frawden, Keinton, West-Brunton,
East-Brunton, Dunnington, Blakedon, alias Blagdon, and Wetslade, or any of them
in the County of Northumberland; and of, in, to or out of the Lands, Tenements,
etc. and Appurtenances to any of them belonging.

8. That this Act shall not prejudice the Estate and Interest in Law or Equity,
of Rachell Power Widow, of, in, and to one Copyhol-Messuage and Mill, with the
appurtenances, being in Chepmansford in the County of Southampton, which by
Order and Decree of the High Court of Chancery of the 21 June 1661 she is to be
forthwith restored unto and put into possession of, etc. but that she shall
hold and enjoy the same according to the said Decree.

9. That it shall be lawful for Barrington Bourchier Esquire; Son and Heir of Sir
John Bourchier before mentioned, to hold and enjoy all and singular the Lands,
etc. to him lately granted, etc. by Letters Pattents under the Great Seal of
England, bearing date the 22 day of March in the 13 year of his Majesty's
Reign, against his Majesty, etc. for ever, according to the full intent and
meaning of the said Letters Patents.

Preservation of the King's Person and Government, see Treason.

Petitions and Addresses, see Tumults.

Treason.
Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 1. That if any person after the 24 of June 1661. during
the natural life of the King, shall within the Realm or without, compass,
imagine invent, devise, or intend death or destruction, or any bodily harm
tending to death or destruction, maim or wounding, imprisonment or restraint of
the person of the King, or to deprive or depose him from the style, Honor or
Kingly name, of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, or of any other his
Majesty's Dominions or Countries, or to Levy war against his Majesty within
this Realm or without, or to move or stir any foreiner or strangers with force
to invade this Realm, or any other his Majesty's Dominions or Countries, being
under his Majesty's obeisance: And such compassings, imeginations, inventions,
devices or intentions, or any of them, shall express, utter or declare by any
Printing, Writing, Preaching, or malicious and advised speaking, being legally
convicted thereof, upon the Oaths of two lawful and credible Witnesses, upon
Trial, or otherwise convicted or attainted by due course of Law, then every
such person so offending as aforesaid shall be adjudged Traitors, and shall
suffer death, and lose and forfeit as in cases of High Treason.

2. If any person after the 24 of June, 1661. during his Majesty's life, shall
maliciously and advisedly publish or affirm the King to be an Heretic or a
Papist, or that he endeavors to introduce Popery; or shall maliciously or
advisedly, by Writing, Printing, Preaching, or other speaking, express,
publish, utter or declare any words, sentences, or other thing or things, to
incite or stir up the people to hatred, or dislike of the person of his
Majesty, or the established Government; then every such person and persons
being thereof legally convicted, shall be incapable of having any place,
office, or Promotion Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military, or any other employment
in Church or State, other then that of his Peerage, and shall likewise be
liable to such further punishments as by the Common Laws or Statutes of this
Realm may be inflicted in such Cases.

3. If any person or persons after the 24 of June, 1661. shall maliciously and
advisedly by Writing, Printing, Preaching or other speaking, express, publish,
utter, declare or affirm, that the Parliament begun at Westminster the the 3
day of November 1640. is not yet dissolved, or determined, or that it be in
being, or has yet any continuance or existence, or that there lies any
Obligation upon him, or any other person, from any Oath, Covenant, or
Engagement whatsoever, to endeavor a change of Government either in Church or
State, or that both or either House of Parliament, have, or has a Legislative
Power without the King, or any other words to the same effect, then every such
offender shall incur the danger and penalty of a Praemunire, 16 R. 2.

4. That the Oath usually called the Solemn League and Covenant, was in it self
an unlawful Oath, and imposed against the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom,
and that all Orders, Ordinances, or pretended Orders and Ordinances of both or
either Houses of Parliament, for imposing of Oaths, Covenants or Engagements,
Leavying of Taxes, or raising of Forces and Arms, to which the Royal assent
either in person or by Commission, was not expressly had or given, were in their
first Creation and still are, and so shall be taken, to be null and void.

5. That all persons who have been or shall be questioned for any thing done by
color of any the Orders or Ordinances herein before mentioned to be null, and
are Indempnified by the late Act of Indemnity, or shall be indempnified by any
Act of Parliament, shall and may make such use of the said Orders and
Ordinances, for their Indemnity, according to the true intent of the said Act,
and no other, as might have been done if this Act had not been made.

6. That no Person be prosecuted for any of the Offenses in this Act (other
then such as are High Treason) but by order of the King, etc. under the Sign
Manual, or by Order of the Council Table, etc. directed unto the Attorney
General for the time being, or some other of the King's Council learned.

7. None shall incur any of the Penalties herein (before mentioned) unless
prosecuted within six months next after the offense committed, and indicted
within three months after such prosecution.

8. None shall be indicted, arraigned, condemned, convicted, or attainted for
any of the Treasons, or offenses aforesaid, unless accused by two lawful and
credible Witnesses upon Oath, which Witnesses shall be brought face to face, at
the time of the Offenders arraignment, and there avow and maintain upon oath
the Treason, etc. unless the parties arraigned shall willingly confess the
same.

9. Nothing herein contained shall extend to deprive either Houses of
Parliament or any of their Members of their just ancient Freedom and
Privilege of debating, etc. or at any Conferences or Committees, etc. but that
the said Members of either of the said Houses, and the Assistants of the House
of Peers, and every of them, shall have the same freedom of Speech and all
other Privileges, as they had before the making of this Act.

10. No Peer of this Realm, shall be tried for any of the said offenses, but by
his Peers; and that Every Peer convicted of any of the said offenses, after
such conviction, be disabled, during his life, to sit in Parliament, unless the
King shall pardon him; and if the King shall grant his pardon to any Peer of
this Realm or Commoner, convicted as aforesaid, the Peer or Commoner so
pardoned, shall be restored to all intents, as if never convicted.

Tumults.
Stat. 13 Car. 2. c. 5. That no person or persons whatsoever shall from and
after the first of August 1661. Solicit, labor or procure the getting of
hands, or other consent, of any persons above the number of Twenty or more, to
any Petition, Complaint Remonstrance, Declaration or other Address to the King,
or both or either Houses of Parl. for alteration of matters established by Law
in Church or State, unless the matter thereof has been first consented unto,
and Ordered by three or more Justices of that County, or by the Major part of
the Grand Jury of the County, or Division of the County, where the same matter
shall arise at their Public Assizes, or General Quarter Sessions; or if
arising in London, by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in Common Council
assembled.

2. That no person or persons whatsoever, shall repair to the King, or
Parliament, upon pretense of presenting any Petition, Complaint, Remonstrance,
or Declaration, or other Adresses accompanied with excessive numbers of people,
nor at any one time, with above the number of Ten persons, upon pain of penalty
not exceeding 100 l. in money, and three months imprisonment without Bail or
Mainprize for every offense, which offense to be prosecuted at the King's
Bench, or at the Assizes, or General Quarter Sessions, within six months after
the offense committed, and proved by two or more credible Witnesses.

3. That this Act shall not extend to hinder any persons not exceeding the
number of Ten (as aforesaid) to present any Public or private Grievance or
Complaint to any Members of Parliament after his Election, and during the
Parliament, or to the King for any Remedy to be had thereupon, nor to extend to
any address whatsoever to the King, by all or any the Members of both or either
Houses of Parliament, during the sitting of the Parliament; but that they may
enjoy their freedom of access as formerly.

The End.

