W R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lords Justices,
A PROCLAMATION.
Tho. Cantuar. J. Summers C. S. Shrewsbury.


WHereas We have received Information upon Oath, That the Persons hereafter
mentioned have Committed High Treason in Clipping and Counterfeiting the
Current Coin of this Kingdom, for which several Warrants for High Treason have
been Issued out against them, but they have withdrawn themselves from their
usual Places of Abode and are fled from Justice: We have therefore thought fit,
by the Advice of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to Issue this
Proclamation, and We do hereby Command and Require all His Majesty's Loving
Subjects to Discover, Take and Apprehend Captain William Wintour of Dymock in
the County of Gloucester, he is a Tall Lusty Big Man, of a Brown Complexion, of
about Five and forty Years of Age, He speaks Loud and Hoarse; Anthony (...)
his Servant, of a Middle Stature, a Black Swarthy Complexion, Short Black
Curled Hair, about Five and twenty Years Old, he speaks in the Welsh Tone;
William Barnes a Sadler without the Southgate-street at Gloucester, he is a
Short Thick Man, with a very Red Face, about Fifty Years Old; William Trigg of
Mitchel Dean in the said County, a Black Short Thick Man, between Twenty and
Thirty Years Old, with a Black Curled Head of Hair; William Cutler of Mitchel
Dean aforesaid, a Tall Thin Black Man, Pale Visaged, between Thirty and Forty,
shot through one of his Hands, wears his own Hair; Richard Beard of Dymock
aforesaid, a Middle-sized Man, about Eight and twenty Years Old, Brown hair,
goes a little Splayfooted, with his Toes out; William Broadly of Mitchel-Dean
aforesaid, Blacksmith, a Tall Lusty Man, of a Brown Complexion, a little
Disfigured with the Small Pox, about Thirty Years Old, his own Hair Thin and
Lank; John Tanner of the Parish of Box in the County of Wilts, a very Little
Short Thin Man, between Thirty and Forty, of a Brown Complexion, wears his own
Hair; Thomas Tanner, Brother of the said John, of the Parish aforesaid,
somewhat Taller and of the same Complexion with his Brother, where ever they
may be found, and to carry them before the next Justice of the Peace, or other
Chief Magistrate, who is hereby Required to Commit them to the next Goal, there
to Remain till they shall be Delivered by due Course of Law. And We do hereby
Require the said Justice or other Magistrate immediately to give Notice thereof
to His Majesty's Privy Council or one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of
State. And We do hereby Publish and Declare to all Persons who shall Conceal
the Persons above named, or any of them, or be Aiding or Assisting in the
Concealing of any of them, or Furthering their Escape, that they shall be
Proceeded against for such their Offense with the utmost Severity according to
Law. And for the Encouragement of all Persons to be Diligent and Careful in
endeavoring to Apprehend and Discover any of the said Persons, We do hereby
further Declare, That whosoever shall Discover and Apprehend the said William
Wintour shall have the Reward of One hundred Pounds, and whosoever shall
Discover and Apprehend the said Anthony (...) shall have the Reward of Fifty
Pounds, and whosoever shall Discover and Apprehend any of the other Persons
above named, and shall bring them before some Justice of the Peace or Chief
Magistrate, as aforesaid, shall Have and Receive as a Reward the Sum of Twenty
Pounds. Which said several Sums the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's
Treasury are hereby Required to Pay accordingly, over and above the Sum of
Forty Pounds Appointed to be Paid for the Apprehending and Convicting any
Person Guilty of Clipping or Coining, by an Act of Parliament made in the Sixth
and Seventh Years of His Majesty's Reign. And We do hereby further Declare, in
case the said Anthony shall Surrender himself to any Justice of the Peace or
other Chief Magistrate, and shall make a full Confession and Discovery of his
Knowledge of any Persons being Guilty of Clipping or Counterfeiting the Current
Coin of this Kingdom, he shall have His Majesty's most Gracious Pardon for his
said Offense.

Given at the Council Chamber at Whitehall, the Tenth Day of September 1696. In
the Eighth Year of His Majesty's Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1696.


