W R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
7. May. 1697.
Requiring ye Collectors and Receivers to take collect, and receive Hammered
Silver Coin at 5s 8d per ounce for ye several taxes required by Act of
Parliamt.
Tho. Cantuar. J. Summers C. Devonshire, Sunderland, Romney.


WHereas by one Act Made and Passed in the last Session of Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for the further Remedying the ill State of the Coin of the
Kingdom, all His Majesty's Receivers, Collectors, and other Officers concerned
in the Receipt or Collection of any Aids or Taxes, are Empowered and Required
to Take and Receive in Payment from any of His Majesty's Subjects all such
Hammered Silver Coin as should be by them Tendered, before the First Day of June
next, to such Receiver, Collector or other Officer, for or in Discharge of any
future Aid or Tax at the Rate of Five Shillings and Eight Pence for every Ounce
of such Hammered Silver Coin so Tendered; and the Tender or Payment of every
Ounce of such Hammered Silver Coin should be as good a Discharge to the Person
Tendering or Paying the same, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators for the Sum
of Five Shillings and Eight Pence, as though the said Sum of Five Shillings and
Eight Pence had been Tendered or Paid in the Lawful Current Coin of this
Kingdom. And whereas by another Act of the same Session, Entitled, An Act for
Granting an Aid to His Majesty, as well by a Land Tax, as by several Subsidies
and other Duties payable for One Year, it was Declared, That it should and
might be Lawful to and for any Person or Persons, at any time before the First
Day of June, One thousand six hundred ninety seven, to Satisfy and Pay to the
respective Collector or Collectors in such Hammered Silver Moneys at such Rate,
as aforesaid, all or any of the said Monthly Payments Assessed upon him, her or
them, by Virtue of the said Act, for the said whole Year, or for any Months
thereof before hand. And by another Act made in the same Session, wherein there
is Granted to His Majesty an Additional Aid of Twelve Pence in the Pound upon
Land and other things, it is Provided, That every Person liable to pay the said
Rate or Duty of One Shilling in the Pound or Double Duties by that Act Charged,
should have the same Advantages and Privileges as in the like cases any Person
or Persons ought to have by Virtue of the Act last before mentioned, for the
Aid of Three Shillings in the Pound thereby Granted, as by the said several
Acts of Parliament, Relation being thereunto respectively had, may more fully
appear. And whereas great Complaints have been made by His Majesty's good
Subjects in several Parts of this Realm, That the Receivers and Collectors of
the said Aids or Taxes are very Negligent in Demanding, and Difficult in
Receiving such Aids or Taxes, as by the Acts of Parliament before mentioned may
be Paid in Hammered Moneys, at the Rate aforesaid, till the said First Day of
June next; after which time such Hammered Moneys are not to be Received at that
Rate for the said Aids or Taxes, or any of them: We have thought fit, by and
with the Advice of His Majesty's Privy Council, to Issue this Proclamation,
strictly Charging and Requiring all and every the said Receivers General, and
their Deputies, and all and singular the Collectors of such Aids or Taxes,
which by the said Acts, or any of them, may be Paid to His Majesty's Use in
Hammered Silver Moneys, at the Rate of Five Shillings and Eight Pence an Ounce,
until the First Day of June, as aforesaid, That they and every of them do
forthwith Proceed in their respective Receipts and Collections with their
utmost Diligence, so that all His Majesty's Loving Subjects who are desirous,
before the said First Day of June next, to make their Payments in such Moneys
at the Rate aforesaid, may not be Deprived of the Benefit and Advantage
intended to them by the said Acts; and that the said Receivers, Deputies and
Collectors, and every of them, be Careful in their respective Stations, not to
Refuse such Hammered Silver Moneys as they ought to Receive pursuant to the
said Acts, as they Tender His Majesty's High Displeasure, and would Avoid such
Pains and Penalties as by Law may be Inflicted for such their Neglect or
Refusal.

Given at the Court at Whitehall the Sixth Day of May, 1697. In the Ninth Year
of His Majesty's Reign.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1697.


