royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT At the Court at Whitehall the 16th
of February, 1680.
Present,
The Kings most Excellent Majesty, His Highness Prince Rupert Lord Chancellor
Lord Privy Seal Lord Chamberlain Earl of Chesterfield Earl of Ailesbury Earl of
Conway Lord Bishop of London Mr. Hyde Mr. Finch Lord Chief Justice North Mr.
Secretary Jenkins Sir Thomas Chicheley Mr. Godolphin.
WHereas since the Expiration of the Act of Parliament made in the 22d and 23d
year of His Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for Regulating the Plantation
Trade; Whereby the word Ireland was directed to be left out of all such Bonds
as should be taken for Ships setting Sail for any English Plantation in
America, Asia or Africa, several Bonds have been given for many Ships and
Vessels, That in case the said Ships or Vessels should Load any Sugars,
Tobacco, Cotton-wooll, Indico, Ginger, Fustick, or other Dying Wood of the
Growth, Production or Manufacture of any English Plantations in America, Asia,
or Africa; The same Commodities shall be by the said Ship or Vessel brought to
some Port of England, Wales, to the Port or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or
Ireland, according to the Act of Navigation made in the Twelfth year of His
Majesty's Reign.

And whereas for the better keeping the Trade of His Majesty's Plantations to
this Kingdom, and for the further good of the Trade and Navigation thereof, It
is since Provided and Enacted by One Act of Parliament made in the 25th year of
His Majesty's Reign, Entitled. An Act for the better Securing the Plantation
Trade. That if any Ship or Vessel which by Law may Trade in any of His
Majesty's Plantations, shall come to any of them to Ship and take on Board any
of the aforesaid Commodities, and that Bond shall not be first given with one
sufficient Surety to bring the same to England or Wales, or the Town of Berwick
upon Tweed, and to no other place, and there to unload and put the same on
shore (the danger of the Seas only excepted) that there shall be answered and
paid to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, for so much of the said
Commodities as shall be Laded and put on Board such Ship or Vessel, the several
Rates and Duties appointed by the said Act to be paid for the same; To be
Levied, Collected and Paid at such Places, and to such Collectors and other
Officers as are or shall be appointed in the respective Plantations, to
Collect, Levy and Receive the same before the Lading thereof.

By means and virtue of which said last recited Act, all Ships and Vessels
which shall Lade any of the aforesaid sorts of Commodities in any of His
Majesty's said Plantations, although that Bond has been given to bring the
same to some other place then England, Wales, or Berwick, are liable to pay for
the same, the several Rates and Duties imposed by the said Act, to be paid
before the Lading thereof in the respective Plantations.

NOw for Encouragement of all His Majesty's Subjects in their Trade to His
Majesty's Plantations, His Majesty was pleased this day to Order in Council,
That for the avoiding of the payment of the Duties appointed to be paid by the
aforesaid Act of the 25th year of His Majesty's Reign, any person or persons
concerned in any Ships or Vessels Entering for any of His Majesty's aforesaid
Plantations (which by Law may Trade thither) shall voluntarily offer Bond with
one Surety, to bring their Lading of the abovesaid enumerated sorts of Goods to
England, Wales, or Berwick upon Tweed, and to no other place, and there to
Unload and put the same on Shore (the danger of the Seas only excepted) That
the Chief Officers of the Custom-house of such Port or Place from whence the
said Ship shall set Sail, shall accept of, and take such Bond accordingly, and
give Certificates thereof, as in such cases has been accustomed. And as to
such Ships and Vessels as have already, or may before the Publication of this
Order happen to have given Bond to bring their Ladings of the said Goods to
England, Wales, Berwick, or Ireland, That if any person or persons concerned in
the said Ships, shall desire to take in the said Bonds, or any of them, and to
give new Bonds with one Surety, for the coming of the said Ships with their
Ladings of the said sorts of Goods to England, Wales, or Berwick, and to no
other place, and there to Unlade and put the same on Shore, That the Officers
who have the keeping of the said Bonds, shall deliver the same to them, and
take new Bond from them, as aforesaid, and give Certificates of their having
delivered up the former Bond, and having taken such New Bonds; And in such Case
His Majesty is hereby pleased to remit the taking, or demanding from any such
Ships or Vessels, any of the Duties and Rates Imposed by the aforesaid Act made
in the Twenty fifth year of His Majesty's Reign. And the Commissioners of His
Majesty's Customs, and all His Majesty's Officers of the Customs in England,
and in the respective Plantations, are required to take notice thereof, and to
take care that the same be duly observed.

And for the better Information of all His Majesty's Loving Subjects in these
Matters, It was this day further Ordered by His Majesty in Council, That Notice
hereof be given to all His Majesty's Loving Subjects, by the Public Affixing
of this Order in all the Custom-Houses in England and Wales, and Town and Port
of Berwick upon Tweed.

And the Commissioners of His Majesty's Customs are hereby required to take
care that the same be done accordingly: And also that Notice of this His
Majesty's Order in Council be given to the Collectors of His Majesty's Customs
in His Majesty's respective Plantations.

JOHN NICHOLAS.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, Thomas Newcomb and Henry Hills,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1680.


