royal blazon or coat of armsAt the Court at WHITEHALL The Nineteenth of
December 1684.
Present
The Kings Most Excellent Majesty, Lord Keeper Lord President Lord Privy Seal
Duke of Beaufort Earl of Huntingdon Earl of Bridgwater Earl of Peterborow Earl
of Sunderland Earl of Clarendon Earl of Bathe Earl of Craven Earl of Middleton
Lord Viscount Falconberg Lord Dartmouth Lord Godolphin Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys Sir Leoline
Jenkins.
HIS Majesty minding to secure all His Loving Subjects in Traveling and going
about their Lawful Occasions, is this day in Council pleased to Order; And it
is hereby Ordered, That all his Majesty's Officers of Justice, and other His
Loving Subjects, do use their utmost Diligence and Endeavor, for the
Apprehending all Robbers or Highway-men, to the end they may be proceeded
against according to Law: And for the Encouragement of such as shall Apprehend
any such Offender or Offenders, It is further Ordered by His Majesty that such
Person or Persons who shall at any time from the Day of the Date hereof, till
the 19th of December, which shall be in the Year of our Lord 1685, and after
that Day till His Majesty shall please to Recall this Order, either by
Proclamation or His Order in Council, Apprehend any Robber or Highway-man, and
Cause him to be brought into Custody, shall within fifteen days after his
Conviction have a Reward of Ten pounds for every such Offender so Apprehended
and Convicted. And all and every Sheriffs and Sheriff of the respective
Counties and Sheriffwicks where such Conviction shall be had, are, and is
hereby required upon the Certificate of the Judge, or two or more Justices of
the Peace, before whom such Person or Persons shall be Convicted of such
Apprehension and Conviction, to Pay unto the Person or Persons who shall
Apprehend such Offender or Offenders the Reward aforesaid, within the time
aforesaid, for each and every Offender so Apprehended and Convicted as
aforesaid, out of His Majesty's Moneys received by such Sheriff or Sheriffs in
that County, where such Conviction shall be, which shall be allowed unto him or
them upon his or their Accounts in the Exchequer. And the Right Honorable the
Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury, are hereby Authorized and
Empowered to give sufficient Warrants to the Officers and others concerned in
the Exchequer, to give Allowance thereof accordingly. And it is also further
Ordered, That all Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace,
Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other Officers and Persons whatsoever do take
notice hereof, and give due Obedience accordingly, and also be Aiding and
Assisting in all things tending to the Execution hereof, as they tender His
Majesty's Displeasure, and upon pain of being proceeded against as Contemners
of His Majesty's Royal Authority.

FRANCIS GWYN.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1684.


