CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
At the Court at WHITEHALL, This Tenth of November, 1682.
Present, The Kings most Excellent Majesty, His Highness Prince Rupert Lord
Chancellor Lord President Lord Privy Seal Duke of Ormond Lord Chamberlain Earl
of Oxford Earl of Chesterfield Earl of Sunderland Earl of Clarendon Earl of
Bath Earl of Craven Earl of Aylesbury Earl of Conway Lord Viscount Hide Lord
Finch Lord Bishop of London Lord Chief Justice North Mr. Secretary Jenkins Mr.
Chancellor of the Exchequer Sir Tho. Chicheley Mr. Godolphin.


FOr the Preventing Tumultuous Disorders which may happen hereafter upon
Pretense of Assembling to make Bonfires, and Public Fireworks, and
disappointing the Evil Designs of Persons Disaffected to the Government, who
commonly make use of such occasions to turn those Meetings into Riots and
Tumults:

It is this day Ordered by His Majesty in Council, That no Person or Persons
whatsoever do Presume to make, or encourage the making any Bonfires, or other
Public Fireworks upon any Festival-Day, or at any other Time or Times
whatsoever, without particular Direction or Order first had from His Majesty,
or this Board, or from the Lord Mayor of London, or by the Justices of the
peace in their Respective Limits, upon Pain of His Majesty's Displeasure, and
being Prosecuted with the utmost Severity of the Law. Whereof all Persons whom
it may concern, are to take notice, at their Peril: And the Lord Mayor and the
Aldermen of London, and His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the County of
Middlesex, and the City and Liberty of Westminster, are hereby Strictly Charged
and Required to take Care therein accordingly.

Francis Gwyn.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1682.


