Licensed,

January 16th. 1678/9. Roger L'Estrange.

A COLLECTION Of all The ACTS, MEMORIALS, and LETTERS, That passed in the
Negotiation of the PEACE: With the TREATIES Concluded at NIMEGVEN. Translated
from the French Copy, Printed at Paris with Privilege. The Articles of Peace
between the Emperor and the French King, and those between the Emperor and the
King of Sweden; Translated from the Latin Copy, Printed at Nimeguen.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, and are to be sold by Walter Kettilby, at the
Bishop's-head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1679.

THE CONTENTS.
HIs Majesty's Letter to the States General of the United-Provinces. page 6 A
Letter from the States General of the United-Provinces, to the Most Christian
King. p. 8 The Kings Answer to the Letter of the States General of the
United-Provinces. p. 9 The Memorial which the King Ordered to be delivered to
the Sieur Van Beverning, Ambassador Extraordinary, from the States General of
the United-Provinces, to his Majesty. p. 10 The Memorial of the Deputies
Extraordinary of the States General, etc. to the Duke De Villa Hermosa, of the
27th. of May. p. 12 A Declaration given by the Spaniards, containing their
consent to the Conditions proposed by his Majesty, in order to a Peace. p. 14 A
Declaration on the behalf of the King of Denrnark. p. 16 A Declaration on the
behalf of the Elector of Brandenburg, upon the Subject of the Peace. p. 20 A
Declaration on behalf of the Emperor. p. 22 A Letter from the States General of
the United-Provinces, to the King, Written at the Hague, the 22. of June, 1678.
p. 27 The King's Answer to the Letter of the States General of the
United-Provinces, Written from St. Germain, the 30th. of June, 1678. p. 28 An
Extract of the Resolution of their Lordships the States of Holland, and
Friesland, at their meeting on the 11th. of July, 1678. p. 31 A Memorial of the
French Ambassadors, delivered the 17. July, 1678. to the Ambassadors of the
States General of the United-Provinces of the Low Countries. p. 36 A Memorial
delivered to the Plenipotentiaries of France, by the Nenipotentiaries of
Holland, July the 26th. 1678. p. 41 A Memorial delivered to the
Plenipotentiaries of France, by the Plenipotentiaries of Sweden; July the 27th
1678. p. 59 The second Memorial of the Ambassadors of France, given into the
Ambassadors of the States General, 29th. of July, 1678. p. 62 A Memorial given
in by the Ambassadors of the States General, to the Ambassadors of France, the
4th. of August, 1678. p. 65 The third Memorial of the Ambassadors of France,
given in to the Ambassadors of the States General of the United-Provinces, the
6th. of August, 1678. p. 69 A Memorial given by the Ambassadors of Sweden, to
the Ambassadors of France, this 9th. of August, 1678. p. 70 The Treaty made,
and passed between the Commissioners deputed on behalf of the King, and those
deputed likewise on behulf of the Catholic King, and of the States General of
the United-Provinces of the Low Countries, about the demenour of the Troops,
and Garrisons of both sides, in the said Low Countries, till the Ratisitations
of the Treaty of Peace are Exchanged. The 19th. of August, 1678. p. 75 Treaties
of Peace and Commerce, Navigation and Marine, betwixt France, and the
States General of the United-Provinces of the Low Countries, concluded at
Nimeguen the 10th. of August, 1678. p. 80 The Ratification of the Treaty of
Peace, by the States General. p. 91 Here follows the Tenor of the Power of his
Majesty's said Ambassadors. p. 93 The Tenor of the Power of the said
Ambassadors of the States General of the United-Provinces. p. 96 A separate
Article concerning the Prince of Orange. p. 98 The Ratification of the separate
Article concerning the Prince of Orange, by the States General. p. 101 A Treaty
of Commerce, Navigation, and Marine, betwixt France and the States General of
the United-Provinces of the Low Countries. p. 103 A Formulary for Pass-Ports,
and Letters to be granted by the Admiralty of France, to Ships outward bound,
in pursuance of an Article of this present Treaty. p. 122 Another form of
Letters, to be granted by the Sea-Port-Towns of the United-Provinces, to Ships
and Barks outward bound, in pursuance of the aforesaid Article. p. 124 Here
follows the Tenor of his Majesty's said Ambassadors Power. p. 125 Here follows
the Tenor of the Power of the said Lords, the Ambassadors Extraordinary of the
Lords the States of the United-Provinces. p. 127 A separate Article concerning
the Imposition of Fifty Sols per Tun, upon Stranger's Ships, sailing out of
Ports in France. p. 131 The States General's Ratification of the Treaty of
Commerce. p. 134 By the King's Order. p. 136 By the King's Order. The Provost
of Paris, Or Lieutenant Civil. p. 137 A Memorial of the Deputies Extraordinary,
of the States General of the United-Provinces, to the Duke de Villa Hermosa, of
the 8th. of May. p. 138 Answer of the Duke de Villa Hermosa, of the 9th. of
May, to the Memorial of the Deputies Extraordinary, of the States General of
the United-Provinces, of the 8th. of May. p. 140 A Memorial of the Deputies
Extraordinary, of the States General, etc. to the Duke de Villa Hermosa, etc.
of the 14th. of May. p. 141 The Answer of the Duke de Villa Hermosa, of the
16th. of May, to the Memorial of the Deputies Extraordinary, of the
States General, etc. p. 144 A Declaration of the Emperor's Ambassadors, at a
Conference Extraordinary of the Allies at Nimeguen, the 20th. of June, 1678. p.
145 A Declaration of the Ambassadors of Spain, at an Extraordinary Conference
of the Allies, the 20th. of June, 1678. p. 148 A Declaration of the Ambassadors
of Denmark, at an Extraordinary Conference of the Allies at Nimeguen, the 20th.
of June, 1678. p. 149 A Declaration of the Ambassador of the Elector of
Brandenburg, on Monday the 20th. of June, 1678. p. 152 A Declaration of the
Ambassador of Prince Charles of Lorrain, at a Conference Extraordinary of the
Allies at Nimeguen, the 20th. of June, 1678. p. 155 A Letter from the Lords the
States General, to Mons. the Duke of Luxemburg, the 22. of June, 1678. p. 156 A
Memorial presented to his Majesty of Great Britain at London, by Mons. de
Borgomanero, etc. the 5th. of June, 1678. p. 157 A Remonstrance of the
Ambassadors of the Elector of Brandenburg, to the Ambassadors of the Lords the
States General, concerning the present Affairs of the Treaties of Peace. Given
at Nimeguen, this 31. of July, 1678. p. 158 The Protestation of the
Ambassadors, and Plenipotentiaries, of the King of Denmark, the Elector of
Brandenburg, etc. against the separate Peace of the States General, of the
United-Provinces. Made the 10th. of August, 1678. at Nimeguen. p. 162 A second
Protestation of the Ambassadors, and Plempotentiaries, of the King of Denmark,
of his Electoral Highness of Brandenburg, etc. Made the 18th. of August, 1678.
at the Hague, etc. p. 167 A Memorial of the Ambassadors of Denmark, and of the
Elector of Brandenburg, given in to those of the King of Spain, of the 22. of
August. p. 169 A Letter of the Ambassadors of the Lords, the States General of
the United-Provinces of the Low Countries, to the Lords Ambassadors
Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries of France, for an Explanation of the 13th.
Article of the Treaty of Peace. p. 174 The Answer of the Lords Ambassadors of
France, to the Ambassadors of the Lords, the States General of the
United-Provinces, in Explanation of the 13th. Article of the Treaty of Peace.
p. 175 The Ratification of the Explanation of the thirteenth Article, of the
Treaty of Peace, betwixt France and Holland. p. 177 A separate Article, for a
general indemnification of the Subjects, both of France, and Holland. p. 178
The Treaty of Peace, betwixt France and Spain, Concluded at Nimeguen, the 17th.
day of September, 1678. p. 181 The Power of the Lords Ambassadors, of his Most
Christian Majesty. p. 204 The Powers of his Catholic Majesty's Ambassadors. p.
206 Articles of Peace between the Emperor, and the French King, Concluded, and
Signed at Nimeguen, the 5th. day of February, 1679. p. 212 Articals of Peace
between the Emperor and the King of Sweden, Concluded and Signed at Nimeguen
the 5th. day of February, 1679. p. 230
A PROJECT OF Conditions of Peace.
HIs Majesty's inviolable fidelity in adhering to his Alliances, has induced
him never to listen to any Proposals of Peace, other than such as shall give a
full and perfect satisfaction to the King of Sueden: which likewise having been
absolutely promised to his Majesty by the King of Great Britain, who was
earnest to gain this point, both for him and for the States General; he now
likewise makes it the first Article that he insists upon, and without which he
cannot come to any conclusion upon the rest.

And because the Interest of the Duke of Gottorp is so united to that of
Sueden, that it makes a part of the Treaty of Copenhagen, for the performance
of which, his Majesty gave his Garranty to that Crown; his Majesty desires,
that he may now likewise be comprehended within this Treaty, upon such terms as
shall be satisfactory to himself.

As for the Prince and Bishop of Strasburgh, the King does precisely insist
upon the restitution of that Prince, and of all his Family, to all their
Estates, Goods Honors, and Prerogatives; and particularly upon the restitution
of his Brother Prince William of Furstemburg: whose Liberty must be provided
for by one of the first Articles of the Peace.

For what concerns the Empire, as his Majesty does still continue in the same
intention which he has expressed for its Peace, that he has been troubled to
see it disturbed; that it was with much trouble of mind he found himself
compelled to carry the War thither; so he does yet adhere to these public
Declarations, which he has so often made, That he will insist only upon the
restoring of the Treaties of Westphalia in all their points, and to have them
once more to be the means of restoring Peace to Germany Which induces him to
offer this Alternative to the Emperor; Either that the Emperor shall restore
Philipsburg, and have Friburg restored to him; or else keep Philipsburg, and
let his Majesty continue in possession of Friburg, without making any the least
alteration in the other matters contained in the said Treaties.

As for what concerns Spain, since its Interest appears to be the most
considerable in this War, and both England, Holland, and some Estates bordering
upon Flanders have further expressed their desire, that that Crown should
retain such a Frontier in the Low Countries, as might be able to make that a
Bar, which they judge is so very important to their safety; his Majesty has
been pleased, at the instance of the King of Great Britain, to agree to the
means for the settling it. And upon this consideration it is, as his Majesty
declared himself to that Prince, that he has offered already, and does yet
offer to restore to Spain those following Places, Viz.

The Place of Charleroy.

Limburg, and its Appurtenances.

Binch, and the Provostship thereof.

Aeth, and its Chastellany.

Oudenard, and its Chastellany there.

Courtray, and its Chastellany; the Verge of Menin only excepted.

Gand, and its dependances.

St. Guillain; but with its Fortifications rased.

For so many Places of importance, and which his Majesty has taken so much
care, and been at so great expense to Fortify; he requires in exchange, that
the King of Spain quit his right to those Places which his Majesty has
possessed himself of in this last War.

All Franche Compte.

The Town of Valenciennes, and its Dependances.

Bouchain, and its Dependances.

Conde, and its Dependances.

Cambray and Cambresis.

Air, St. Omers, and their Dependances.

The Town of Ipre, and its Chastellany.

The Places of Werwick and Werneton, on the River Lis.

Bavay and Maubeage, with their Dependancies.

Poperingue, Bailleul, and Cassel, with their Dependances.

In a word, that he quit his Right to all such Places and Countries as his
Majesty has now in his possession; excepting those before mentioned, which his
Majesty is willing to restore to Spain; The Town of Charlemont, or in lieu
thereof, the Towns of Dinant and Bouvines; upon condition that he, at the
choice of the King of Spain, will charge himself, that the Bishop of Liege
shall quit his right to Dinant, and that the Emperor and Empire shall give
their assent thereunto. By this means the Spanish Frontier in the Netherlands,
would for the future begin from the Sea, to the Meuse, Newport, Dixmude,
Courtray, Oudenard, Aeth, Mons, Charleroy, and Namur.

As for the Articles which concern the States General, they are so very
favorable, that they cannot but conclude, that his Majesty does fully purpose
to receive them into the former Friendship, after the Peace shall be concluded.
His Majesty is willing to restore them Maestricht, and to agree to the Treaty
of Commerce, in such form as it was framed at Nimeguen with the Sieur Beverning.

And to the end his Majesty may give the World the utmost testimony of his
sincere intentions for the Peace, his Majesty, notwithstanding any reason that
might induce him to continue in possession of Lorrain, is willing that Prince
Charles be restored to it, upon one of these two Alternatives, of which he
gives him his choice.

First, That he be restored according to the Articles expressed in the
Pyrenaean Treaty, without any change or alteration in any of them.

Or secondly, That he be restored generally to his whole Estate, except the
Town of Nancy, which his Majesty will retain, with plenary Right of
Sovereignty, and excepting such a way as was agreed upon at the Treaty of 1661.
to pass from the Frontiers of France into Alsatia, and all such ways as shall
be necessary to pass from France to Nancy; and from Nancy to Metz, Brisac, and
Franche Compte; upon condition nevertheless, that to make him some compensation
for the Town of Nancy, his Majesty shall resign to him that of Toul,
considerable for its extent and situation, and much more in respect of its
Bishopric.

His Majesty demands likewise, that Long-Wic and its Provostship be quitted to
him: but offers withal to recompense the Prince of Lorrain with another
provostship of equal value within one of the three Bishoprics. And whereas
Marsal having been quitted to his Majesty by a particular Treaty, is not at
present any part of Lorrain, so it is not to be understood to be comprised in
this restitution.

These are the Terms which may, and ought to make the Platform of a General
Peace, and upon which his Majesty has long ago declared himself to the King of
Great Britain. His Majesty desires that they may be imparted to the Assembly at
Nimeguen; and that his own Plenipotentiaries there propose them to the
consideration of the rest, as containing the lowest Conditions that he can
admit; and upon which his Enemies may make choice either of War or Peace.

Given at St. Germans the 9th. day of April, 1678.
His Majesty's Letter to the States General of the United Provinces.
Written from the Camp at Deinse, the 18th. of May, 1678.
Most dear great Friends, Allies, and Confederates,

OUt of the sincere affection which we have always born to the promoting of the
Peace of Europe, we are very much satisfied to understand, by our
Plenipotentiaries at Nimeguen, the account given unto them in your name, by one
of your Ambassadors, concerning your thoughts upon the conclusion of so great a
Work, which you had imparted to them by one of your Ambassadors. We are glad to
understand, that the terms which we proposed at that Assembly appear to you to
be reasonable, and that you are fully persuaded of the sincerity of our mind,
in a matter of so great importance: And it is with the greater fatissaction to
our selves, that we confirm the same unto you by this Letter; because
notwithstanding those advantages which we have already acquired by our Arms,
and may justly hope for by the prosecution of the War; yet we place our
chiefest glory in making all the steps we can toward a Peace. But because it
appears by the Discourses that have been made to our Plenipotentiaries by your
order, that how desirous soever you are to conclude the Peace, yet there
remains some scruple with you concerning the Seventh Article of the Treaty of
Commerce, which has been debated at Nimeguen between our Ambassadors and yours;
and trouble of mind, lest we should make an entire Conquest of the
Low Countries, in case Spain should reject the Terms we have offered, we are
willing to impart our thoughts unto you upon those two Points. We cannot do it
more favorably, as to the first of them, than by granting, that the Seventh
Article should be as your selves desire it. And in taking such measures with
you upon the second Point, as may ease you of the fear you express for the loss
of Flanders. And this we will then do, when Spain having refused to consent to
the Peace, there shall be a Treaty concluded between us and you, upon such
Terms as have been already proposed with relation to your selves, and that you
shall have returned to our Alliance, and shall oblige your selves to continue
Neuters during the War. We shall be always ready for your sakes to grant to
Spain the same Terms, with relation to Flanders, which they are at liberty now
to accept: And we are further willing to assure you, that in all that time we
will not Attaque any one Place in those Provinces. Thus you shall always find
us readily inclined, not only to form that Bar which you think so necessary
for your own safety, but to secure it; and to let you enjoy, together with the
reestablishment of Commerce, whatever other advantages you can expect from our
Friendship. And if for the prosecuting this Negotiation you shall think it
necessary to send Deputies to us, they will find us near Ghent till the 27th.
day of this Month, and in the same dispositions we have declared to you in this
Letter. In the mean time, we pray God to take you, most dear great Friends,
Allies, and Confederates. into his holy protection. Given at our Camp at
Deinse, the 18th. day of May, 1678.

Your good Friend, Allie, and Confederate, LOUIS.
Underneath was Signed, Arnauld.

A Letter from the States General of the United Provinces, to the Most
Christian King.
Written from the Hague, the 25th. of May, 1678. To his Most Christian Majesty.
SIR,
WE received with great respect the Letter which your Majesty did us the honor
to write to us, and were transported with an excess of joy to understand
thereby your Majesty's unfeigned desire to promote the peace of Europe, and
that your Majesty places your chiefest glory in making all the steps that may
conduce to the effecting a matter of so great importance. Sir, we think our
selves obliged to return your Majesty our most humble thanks, and we have
thought fit for this purpose to send to your Majesty the Sieur Beverning, Baron
of Teylingham, one of our Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries at
the Treaty of Peace at Nimeguen, in quality of our Ambassador Extraordinary,
to acquaint your Majesty with our earnest desire to give your Majest^ (...)
assurances of our Sincere intentions for the ^^^d Peace; and we hope your
Majesty will grant him a favorable Audience, and give all credit to him as a
Person thoroughly acquainted with our resolution, ever to remain,

Sir, Your Majesty's Most Humble Servants, the States General of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries.

The Kings answer to the Letter of the States General of the Unitedd Provinces.
Written at the Camp at Wetter, the first day of June, 1678.
MOst dear, great Friends, Allies, and Confederates, We have with much pleasure
understood, as by the Letter you writ us, so by the Assurances which the Here
Van Beverning, your Extraordinary Ambassador, has in your Name given us, the
dispositions, in which you profess your selves to be, to a Peace. We cannot let
you better know, how firm and sincere our intentions are, to procure so great
and so general a good for Europe, than by the Writing, which we have commanded
to be put into his hands. You will see the new Facilities we offer to put you
in a state to bring your Allies to consent to the conditions, which we cannot
doubt but you judge equitable. And having nothing farther to add thereunto, We
only assure you of the satisfaction we shall have, in giving you back with the
Peace, our old and real friendship, and in entering with you into the strongest
and most capable Engagements, for securing ever your Liberty; which we have
more amply explained our selves upon to the Here Van Beverning, whose Conduct
and Person has been very acceptable to us. There remains only, That we pray
God to have you, Most dear, great Friends, Allies, and Confederates, in his
holy keeping. Given in our Camp at Wetteren, the first day of June, 1678.

Your good Friend, Allie, and Confederate, LOUIS.
Underneath was Signed, Arnauld.

The Memorial which the King Ordered to be delivered to the Sieur Van
Beverning, Ambassador Extraordinary from the States General of the United
Provinces to his Majesty.
THe King has with pleasure seen, as by the Letter of the Heeren the States
General, so by the Assurances which they have given him by the Here Van
Beverning, their Extraordinary Ambassador, that their Intentions to a General
Peace, correspond with the desire his Majesty has had to procure the same, and
that they are ready to accept the Conditions which his Majesty has offered
them by his Ambassadors and Plenipotentaries at Nimeguen. But at the same time
that the Here Van Beverning has thus made known to him the Sentiments of the
said States General, he has in their Name prayed his Majesty would grant a
Cessation of Arms for six Weeks, and has represented to him, that they had
need of that time, to communicate with their Allies, and to obtain their
consent for the concluding of so great a work. The condition in which his
Majesty's Arms are at present, and the favorable opportunity that would be
lost in deferring their acting, would not permit him to consent to this
Proposal, if the desire to give Peace to Europe, did not much more prevail in
him, than that of enlarging his Frontiers by new Conquests. It is in this
consideration to contribute to the Public Repose, that he will agree, at the
desire of the said States General, to a Cessation of Arms for six weeks, to
begin the first day of the next month, such an one as was stipulated between
France and Spain in the year 1668. But forasmuch as it would not be just, if
the Enemies of His Majesty should let that time pass fruitlesly, and that
instead of its serving to advance the Peace, they should make advanttge
thereof, to avoid the effect of his Majesty's Arms, that he should have lost
the advantageous conjuncture which is at present in his hand; His Majesty
desires of the said States General, that they do promise him in case, during
the time of the said Cessation of Arms, they cannot bring their Allies to
accept the conditions which he has offered, They will not assist them directly
or indirectly against him, or against his Allies, during the whole course of
the War. In exchange his Majesty will in such case renew to them the same
Engagements which he has taken with them by his Letter of the 18 of the last
Month, as well for what concerns the same Conditions, which he will be always
ready to agree to Spain, as for the security of the Places in the Netherlands.
His Majesty has thought fit to make known to the said States General, by this
Memorial, which he has appointed to be delivered to the Here Van Beverning,
the sincerity of his intentions for a Peace. And to give them a yet far greater
testimony thereof, he does command the Duke of Luxemburg, General of his Army,
to go and expect their Answer, during this Month, in the Neighborhood af
Brussels, with orders not to Attaque any Place during that time. Given in the
Camp at Wetteren, the first day of June, 1678.

Signed, LOUIS.
And underneath, Arnauld.

The Memorial of the Deputies Extraordinary of the States General, etc. to the
Duke De Villa Hermosa, of the 27th. of May.
THe Lords, the States General of the United Provinces, are extremely satisfied
to understand, by the Answer your Excellency was pleased to return to the
Memorial presented on their behalf, by us their underwritten Deputies
Extraordinary, the 14th. instant, That your Excellency did agree, and consented
to treat of a Truce, or Cessation of Arms, for the space of six weeks; and
could have wished, That you had as positively declared your self touching the
second Point contained in the said Memorial, namely, the Conditions of Peace
proposed some time ago, by the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of the King of
France at Nimeguen. But because in the said Answer, no mention is made of so
considerable a Point, their Hi. and Mi. have again commanded us to make
instance, and represent unto your Excellency, of how great moment it is, as
well with relation to the common Cause, as more especially for the preservation
of what remains to his Catholic Majesty in the Low Countries; that your
Excellency declare, in the name of the King of Spain, your acceptance of the
said Conditions of Peace, such as they are, considering the present state of
affairs, and the risque and great danger there may be, in continuing the War
against so powerful an Enemy as the King of France is, who has already brought
his Army together, and is himself at the head of it in the Field, and that in
the heart of the Low Countries. For these and other reasons represented in the
preceding Memorials, we earnestly entreat your Excellency to take such a
resolution, as may be agreeable to the desires of our Lords and Masters, and
that without loss of time, since a few days, considering the condition wherein
things are at present, may produce fatal Revolutions, and such as would
extremely embarass as well your Excellency as the Allies, and be likewise very
prejudicial to the Peace of all Europe.

Done at Bruxels the 27th. of May, 1678. Jacob Boreal,
De Weed.

A Declaration given by the Spaniards, containing their consent to the
Conditions proposed by his Majesty in order to a Peace.
HIs Excellency having seen and considered this Memorial, and at the same time
made particular reflection upon the former ones of the 8th. and the 14th. of
May; though the States General of the United Provinces know very well, that the
terms upon which the King of France has offered to make Peace with Spain are
very hard; yet considering the misfortune and extremities that the
Low Countries are exposed to, and that their Hi. and Mi. (though otherwise so
much concerned also in the Interest of their preservation) do yet find
themselves at present deprived of all means to effect it, their People not
being in condition to carry on the War; and considering that in this Juncture
of Affairs, nothing can be of so great importance, as the preservation of that
miserable Remainder of Flanders, by strict Alliances, which they persuade us to
accept of, and value. And whereas in the said Memorial, the States General do
represent their instances of, and desire to admit of the said Conditions, in
order to the conclusion of a Peace; his Excellency being willing to second
them, as he has done from the very first time that his Master entered into the
War, which he undertook first for the preservation of the Confederates Estates
of the Low Countries, and has since continued to assert the common Interest, is
now likewise willing to comply with the desire of the States General, and to
admit of a Peace upon such terms as the King of France has proposed, to the
end that so convincing a proof of his Excellencies servent desire to unite him
with the said States General, may contribute to strengthen their mutual
Alliances, and conduce to the preservation of both their Estates. Still
provided, That whatsoever Conquests the most Christian King may have made in
any part of the World, within the Dominions of the King his Master, and not
specified in the abovesaid Propositions, shall be restored to his Majesty:
Hoping moreover, that the States General will so far interpose with his most
Christian Majesty, as that he will be pleased not to insist upon those terms,
which it is not in his Majesty's power to perform; and to grant us such terms
as may be effectual for the preservation of what we have left; and that the
States General will likewise take care, that the Borders and Fronteers may be
so fixed, as to prevent for the future any such Accidents and Occurrences, as
may prove the seeds of a new War, and contribute to the greater satisfaction of
the Confederates High Allies.

Given at Brussels the 13th. day of June, 1678. Signed, The Duke de Villa
Hermosa, Earl of Luna.

A Declaration on the behalf of the King of Denmark.
THe Ambassador Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiary of his Majesty the King of
Denmark and Norway, at the Treaty of Peace held at Nimeguen; has seen by the
communication which the Deputies of the States General of the United Provinces,
have made to the Ministers of the Confederates at the Hague, what his Most
Christian Majesty was pleased to Order the delivery of in writing to his
Excellency the Sieur de Beverning their Ambassador Extraordinary, as well
touching his consent to a Cessation of Arms for Six weeks, as concerning his
demand of a promise from the States General, that in case they shall not be
able during that Cessation, to prevail with their Allies to accept of such
Terms as his Majesty has offered, that then they will no longer Assist them
directly or indirectly, against him or his Allies during the continuance of the
War; And having thereupon considered what he conceives is fit and necessary for
the Kind his Master to do upon occassion of his Most Christian Majesty's said
agreement and demand; He thinks it his duty to represent to their Excellencies,
the Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries of the High Allies at this
Congress, that presupposing, which he does without any doubt, the constancy and
resolution of the States General, wherewith they have always hitherto
maintained the Credit and Honor of their Treaties, which is the true band and
most proper support of a free Commonwealth, That they will not do any thing
that may cast the least blemish upon the Reputation which they have hitherto
honorably accquired and maintained, His Majesty assures himself that in this
juncture, they will not set one step to the Prejudice of those mutual
engagements that are betwixt himself and them: in discharge of which he has
vouchsafed to hazard his own sacred Person, and the choicest blood of his
Subjects, to the expense of what the utmost of the revenue of all his Kingdoms
and Estates would amount to. Every one may remember into what extremity of
Affairs his Majesty was willing, when requested, to throw himself in the midst
of those Calamities, that then oppressed the United Provinces, and some of the
Confederates, with intention to deliver them from the ruin that threatened
them, and to take part with them in their most dangerous Events: What course he
took to effect this, and the benefit which has accrewed by his Engaging in it,
both to the common cause of all the Confederates, and to their Hi. and Mi. the
States General of the United Provinces in particular, is sufficiently known to
all the World: so that it would be to no purpose to make a repetation of them
here. A sure and honorable Peace is what every one now aims at: For the
obtaining whereof, if the mutual engagements which the Confederates stand in
one to another, continue in force, we ought to Treat upon terms, and not take
them ready made to our hands. It has been demonstrated more then once by
pregnant and undeniable Arguments and Reasons, that a Cessation of Arms must
needs come attended with many great mischiefs and inconveniences: if there are
more cogent Arguments why the States General of the United Provinces, in
respect of their own Affairs in particular, and the concerns of such whose
interest is the same with theirs, should accept of a Truce with France, we may
well hope at least that that consideration will not be thought sufficient to
oblige others, whose Affairs are in quit different circumstances, to come into
the Truce likewise: And that they will so qualify the conditions of their
Truce, as that what makes for the advantage of one part of the Allies, may not
be to the utter ruin of all the rest; though the Arms of France are attended
with a strange current of Success, yet the faithfulness of which the Most
Christian King makes profession, in adhering to his Allies, ought not to
triumph over their constancy, whom common interest has linked together in a
sacred bond for their mutual preservation. This virtue will make them respected
even among their enemies; whereas the contrary would blast all their
Reputations, and lead them one by one into Calamities, which they would
discover the cause of too late, when the effects would be remediless. His Most
Christian Majesty has given the States General a very short time to declare
themselves upon the contents of his Memorial, the foresight of his Council saw
very well, that the time would be too short for all the parties concerned to be
well advised: and we may easily judge with what design the matter was so
Ordered: But if we must take the things as they are, and make the best we can
of them, we may certainly assure our selves that their Hi. and Mi. will not
shorten the time, but will allow their Friends as large a Term as their Enemies
have allowed them: and that they will not precipitate themselves into such
resolutions as the events that half a day may produce, may likely make them
repent of their forwardness in taking up But above all things his Majesty
aforementioned, and his said Ambassador Extraordinary, in his name and on his
behalf does most earnestly entreat their Excellencies the Ambassadors
Extraordinary of their Highnesses, that they will interpose to the utmost of
their power, and make use of the credit that they have with the States General
their Masters, to prevent their putting themselves out of all possibility of
doing any thing for those that have done all for them (which power our Enemies
reserved to themselves, for the sakes of such as have not contributed at all or
but very inconsiderably to the putting them into the condition in which now
they are in) and that at least they will continue a readiness of mind to do
what may be in their power, though they should happen to be destitute of such
means as might enable them to do what they ought. Their Hi. and Mi. may be well
assured that his Majesty will never reject their Council and Advice in any
thing whatsoever that may be reasonably thought to conduce to the public
Peace, in which if he could have any assurance that he might find his security,
he would immediately put an end to the War, and lay down his Arms as mildly, as
he took them up generously, for the interest and at the request of his Allies.

Given at Nimeguen, the 10th of June, 1678.
A Declaration on the behalf of the Elector of Brandenburg upon the Subject of
the Peace.
THe Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of his Electoral Highness of
Brandenburg; having seen what has been communicated to the Ministers of the
Confederates at the Hague; to wit, that his Most Christian Majesty, upon the
overture made to him by his Excellence the Sieur de Beverning Ambassador of the
States General, has granted to their Highnesses by a Declaration in writing,
dated the first of June, at Wetteren, a Cessation of Arms for Six weeks, to
commence from the first of July next, to the end that in the mean time they may
confer with their Allies, and obtain their consent to the Peace, upon condition
that their Highnesses would promise his Most Christian Majesty, in case they
shall not be able during the said Truce to persuade their Allies to accept of
the Terms which France had offered, that then they should no longer assist them
against him or his Allies, during the present War: To which Declaration the
Duke of Luxemburg has Order to expect their Highnesses answer to the end of
this Month; has not failed to acquaint his Electoral Highness his Master with
the Contents of that Declaration, and to require his Order therein, which he
now waits for. But in the mean time he thinks himself obliged to say
beforehand, that his Electoral Highness having always reposed great confidence
in the Sincerity, Integrity, and Justice of their Highnesses, the States
General of the Low Countries, as those that have been his ancient Friends and
Confederates, and whose interests are in many respects the same with his own,
assures himself that their Highnesses will not make any promise to his Most
Christian Majesty, that shall at all interfere with their Alliances, or be
prejudicial to his Electoral Highness, who has not spared his own Estates, nor
his Blood, to save their Country from utter ruin and destruction, with which
it was threatened when three whole Provinces were torn from it though since by
God's great mercy they have been reunited. Besides, his Electoral Highness
promises himself that their Hi. and Mi. will be so reasonable, since even his
Most Christian Majesty has been willing to allow them the whole month of June
to acquaint the Duke of Luxemburg with what they shall think fit to resolve
upon his said Declaration, as not to anticipate the Term to the prejudice of
his Electoral Highness, but will allow him a convenient time for mature
deliberation, and the dispatching of such Order as shall be necessary to his
Ministers here and elsewhere. His Electoral Highness takes it likewise for
granted, that their Hi. and Mi. will never come to a Treaty, much less conclude
any thing whatsoever with France, without first procuring for his Electoral
Highness the satisfaction promised him in the 14 and 24 Article of their
Alliance, and without reserving the same Liberty to themselves with relation to
their Allies, which his Most Christian Majesty might or should reserve in
favor of his; Especially since it is evident, that his Electoral Highness did
not engage in this War out of an airiness of mind, but for the safety of the
Low Countries, the preservation of his own Estates, and to secure himself
against the injuries and attempts of others, and that he has not been more
desirous of any thing since the first beginning of this War, than of a firm and
sure Peace upon reasonable Terms. And that he will always take in good part the
good offices that shall be used to attain it, and that he will make appear as
well his moderation with relation to the Terms and Conditions of it, as his due
consideration of the reasons and necessities alleged by their High and Mighty
for a Peace. Provided things may be so ordered, that he may obtain his ends,
which are no other than the safety of the public, and that of his own
Country. This is what the said Ambassador has thought fit to represent by
this writing to their Excellencies, the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of
their High and Mighty that are here present, desiring them not only to
recommend the Contents thereof to their Lords and Masters, to the end they may
make their joint Reflections, when they shall come to deliberate upon a matter
of so great importance, but also to support it as much in them lies by their
own credit and wise conduct. Given at Nimeguen the 10th day of June, 1678.

A Declaration on behalf of the Emperor.
THe Ambassadors of his Imperial Majesty being advertised, that the States
General of the United Provinces will shortly meet, to consult upon the
Declaration which his Most Christian Majesty delivered in writing to their
Ambassador Extraordinary Monsieur de Beverning, in the Camp at the Bourg of
Wetteren on the first day of this present month, do promise themselves
assuredly from the eminent Wisdom, Integrity, and Justice of the said States
General, upon which foundations their Commonwealth has hitherto stood and
continued in a flourishing condition, that they will not upon any pretense
whatsoever act contrary to the Faith of their Alliances, or prejudicial to his
Imperial Majesty, the Empire, and the rest of the Confederates, who have
already engaged themselves as well in the dangers, and expenses of this long
and Bloody War, not only for their own common safety, to the end they might
thereby deliver these United Provinces, together with the Public, from utter
ruin and destruction. It is needless to put them in mind of what has formerly
passed; this is evident, that the Confederates have to do with an Enemy, who as
he is hard enough for them all, cannot but be terrible to any one of them
apart. Perhaps some Provinces may reap a present advantage, but in lieu
thereof, all those that are near must inevitably fall under his yoke, and be
destroyed. There are so many instances in Histories how dangerous the
neighborhood of France is, that it has given occasion to a Proverb. This the
States themselves have found by experience in this very War, when the Bar of
the Spanish Netherlands was stronger. What will they do now that those Bars are
almost broken down, and they shall have separated themselves, as the French
earnestly press them to do, from the rest of the Confederates? Then their
safety must solely depend upon the sincerity and moderation of the French. His
Imperial Majesty undertook the War together with the rest of the Confederates
for their common safety, for the defense of the Empire, and particularly that
of these Provinces: he has carried it on hitherto, not for his own private
interest, but in such place and manner as was thought best good for the
public: And he is yet willing, if the Confederates please, to continue it in
conjunction with them, and will be ready to lay down his Arms, when that shall
make more for the Common interest. And whenever he shall make a Peace, he will
have the same regard to the circumstances of the United Provinces and of all
the Low Conntreys, which he has appeared hitherto to have had in the
undortaking and carrying on the War.

The King of France has proposed some conditions of Peace, but in such a manner
as if he were giving Laws to us. He will not suffer us to Treat with him
concerning them. Which to be so received by the Emperor, the Empire and the
Confederates, is not only inconsistent with their Honor, Safety and Interest,
contrary to the very nature of the thing it self. Besides which no
specification at all is made in these conditions, what satisfaction it is in
particular, the French would have stipulated in behalf of Sweden, so it is but
too evident they are far from any intentions of Peace, since they will not so
much as treat concerning it, according to those Forms and Methods which are
observed betwixt Sovereign Princes and Estates, and are grounded upon the Law
of Nations. It is not a Peace that France aims at, but a division amongst the
Confederates: that conquest may be the more easy, when he shall have to do
with them apart: if there be any urgent reason or necessity of making a Peace,
the Emperor is willing to do it forthwith upon such terms as will be neither
dishonorable nor prejuaical to France, and manifest to the whole World his
moderation, according to his High Function; and that although he has great
regard to the safety of the Empire, yet that he prefers the common safety and
the preservation of the United Provinces and of all the Low Countries before
any particular interests of his own. This will be made apparent whenever a
Peace shall be treated of, and the States General shall employ their offices
for it, which will be always acceptable to his Imperial Majesty, which being
so, it cannot without injury to the constancy, prudence, and integrity of the
States General be prefumed that they will upon any rash resolution abandon
their most faithful Confederate, and thereby expose them to manifest danger.
They have Twenty days time yet before the end of this month to resolve in. But
all our interests, our common liberty, and the safety of all the Confederates
is now at stake. The enemy endeavors to precipitate their resolutions, because
he is their enemy, and would lead them to a precipice: the Confederates Council
is to proceed safely and deliberately, as being engaged in one and the same
common cause with the States General, when once the Enemy shall observe that
the States resolve to Treat separately, France will obtain what is desired, the
general Peace will be desperate, which otherwise might have been expected, if
all the Confederates would have made appear to the common Enemy their unanimous
constancy and moderation. Let the States General therefore represent speedily
and seriously to the Ambassadors of his Most Christian Majesty, that it is that
they hinder the restoring of Peace to Christendom, in that they deny the
Confederates liberty to Treat about those matters without which there can be no
Peace: the Ambassadors of his Imperial Majesty do hereby oblige themselves to
represent the whole matter that the motives and necessiries which induced the
States General to choose even a disadvantageous Peace, rather than the
continuance of the War, are not at all displeasing to his Imperial Majesty, who
will be ready to comply therewith, and to concur with them as far as in him
lies, to endeavor a Peace, so as the safety of the Empire be in some degree
provided for; and that he will jointly consult with the States General and the
other Confederates, by what way and means the same may be established and
rendered secure.

And as the Imperial Ministers have thought it their duty to remonstrate these
things to the Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the High and
Mighty Lords, the States General of the United Provinces, so they do earnestly
beseech and entreat them seriously to weigh of how great importance this matter
is: and to support it with their offices and recommendation, in which they will
do a thing becoming themselves, glorious and beneficial to their Country,
desired by the Confederates and every one else that loves the public safety
and security, and which will be transmitted to posterity, to their immortal
praise and merit.

Given at Nimeguen, the 10th of June, 1678.
A Letter from the States General of the United Provinces to the King, written
at the Hague the 22th of June, 1678.
SIR,
IT was with an equal mixture of Joy and Reverence, that we understood by your
Majesty's answer of the first of this instant, from your Camp at Wetteren,
which the Sieur De Beverning delivered us, the reality of your Majesty's
intentions to put an end to the present war: to which end, your Majesty was
pleased to allow us all this month, to induce our Allies to accept the Peace
upon the terms which your Majesty has proposed: to which unfeigned purpose of
your Majesty's, that we might answer with the like sincerity on our parts, and
give your Majesty all the satisfaction we possibly could, we have left nothing
undone to induce our Allies to a compliance: and though we could not promise
our selves that they would join with us in making a peace upon those terms, yet
we have given orders to our Ambassadors at Nimeguen, to conclude and Sign the
Treaty of Peace with your Majesty's Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, and such
of the Confederates as should be disposed to come into it before the end of
this month. In the mean while, having some assurance that his Catholic Majesty
will join with us in accepting the Peace, we make it our request that your
Mejesty will be pleased to give necessary orders to surcease all acts of
hostility by Land, and to cause such of your Mejesties Forces as are in his
Country, to retire about the end of this month, and that your Majesty will be
pleased to forbid your Majesty's Men of War and Privateers, to set upon any
such Ships belonging to this State, or any of our Subjects, as are employed
about the Fishing-Trade, and to give them Passports and letters of
Safe Conduct, that they may follow their employment with safety; accordingly we
shall be willing to do on our part; hoping and promising our selves, that this
will conduce to the good both of your Majesty's Subjects and our own, and to
the increasing the good understanding, which ought to be firmly established by
the Peace. To conclude, We pray God,

SIR,

To heap prosperity upon your Majestics Reign, and to bless your Royal Person
with Health, and a long Life. Hague the 22th of June, 1678.

Your Majesty's Most Humble Servants the States General of the United Provinces
of the Low Countries.

The King's Answer to the Letter of the States General of the United Provinces,
written from St. Germain the 30th of June, 1678.
Most Dear, Great Friends, Allies, and Confederates,

You will easily judge, after all that we have done toward the Facilitating of
a Peace, that we were very well satisfied to understand by your Letter, that
before the time which we had agreed to allow for a Cessation of Arms, you had
sent instructions to your Plenipotentiary Ambassador at Nemiguen, to Sign the
Treaty of Peace before the end of this month. And by the assurance which you
give us, that at the same time those of the Catholic King will accept of it,
we see your inclinations are well disposed toward the general quiet of Europe.
We Promise our selves likewise that it cannot be long retarded by those of your
Allies, that hitherto, notwithstanding all the good Offices which you have done
toward it, refuse to join with you in the procuring so great a good and so
universally desired. In the mean time as the Peace, which we doubt not but will
immediately be concluded with you at Nimeguen, since we have your word for it,
puts us into a condition of rendering you our entire affection, of which we take
delight in letting you feel the effects, we are willing at your desire from
hence forward to surcease all acts of hostility to the Low Countries, and
whatever obstruction our Men of War, or Privateers may give to your Commerce.
Common usage would require, that things should continue in the same posture
they now are, till the Peace were fully consummated by exchange of the
Ratifications and publication of Treaties: but without staying till they, that
are now to be Signed betwixt our Plenipotentiaries Ambassadors at Nimeguen,
those of the Catholic King and yours, shall be come to our hands; out of our
respect to you, we will send order immediately to the Duke of Luxemburg, to
retire our Army from about Brussells into that part of the Country, that is now
under our subjection. We will charge him to concert upon this subject with the
Duke De Villa Hermosa, and even with your Envoy there, and to settle some
regulation for those Officers to be under, that shall command the Troops which
we are obliged to leave about Mons, and on what manner they may continue
without any acts of hostility on either side, but in a good understanding, and
so as the country may be open, till the Ratifications are exchanged with Spain.
Having thus quieted all things at Land, we are willing at your instance to do
the same by Sea. The Treaty which Our Ambassadors must Sign with Yours, will
ascertain the Places and Times, within which what ever shall be taken on either
side, shall be deemed lawful Prize. But for the present security of such
Vessels as shall Sail out of your Ports, whether for Trade, or Fishing, we
think good to send a competent number of Passports to our Ambassadors at
Nimeguen, whom we will order to deliver them to Yours, as there shall be
occasion. They shall do the same to the Ambassador of Spain. But upon this
condition, that when the Ambassador of the Catholic King and your Ambassador
shall receive them, they shall be obliged at the same time to put into my
Ambassadors hands such quantities of Passports as they shall demand of them. We
are well satisfied in not suffering more tedious forms, though ordinarily
observed in Treaties of Peace, to impair the benefit that ought to accrue to
your people by this, and in letting them taste the sweetness of Peace from this
very time, and in procuring the same ease to those of the Catholic King, for
your Sakes. You may see by this new testimony of our Friendship, that we retain
the same good disposition toward your Commonwealth, which our Predecessors
have had, who did so much toward the Raising of it, and which we hope will help
to render it more happy and flourishing for the future. We pray God to take
you, Most Dear, Great Friends, Allies and Confederates, into his Holy
Protection. Written at St. Germain in Lay, the 30th of June, 1678.

Your Good Friend, Allie, and Confederate, LOUIS.
Underneath was Signed, Arnauld.

Extract of the Resolution of their Lordships the States of Holland, and
Friesland, at their meeting on the 11th of July, 1678.
THe Pensionary Fagel has shown to the Assembly a Letter of the 10th of this
instant, from the Ambassador Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiary at the Treaty
of Peace at Nimeguen, written to himself, importing that the Ambassadors of
France have declared to them, that the King their Master is not minded to
Evacuate Mastricht, nor the other places of the Bar, till a complete
satisfaction be made to the King of Sweden. Where, upon deliberation, we have
thought fit that this matter be put in as from the States aforesaid to the
States General, to the end that answer may be returned to the Ambassadors of
the States: that it could not be believed nor expected that his Most Christian
Majesty would have made the least difficulty in the Evacuation of those places,
after the Peace Signed, concluded and ratified betwixt his Most Christian
Majesty and Spain and this State: and that the States could not foresee that
there would arise any new obstructions or difficulties on his Most Christian
Majesti's part, after he had given them himself and by his Ministers so many
assurances of his unfeigned inclinations not only to a general Peace, but
particularly to a Peace with this State.

It is very true, that when his Mejesty composed a general platform for us to
take our measures by, it was put down in the first Article, that his Majesty
would never listen to any Terms of Peace, other than such as should give the
King of Sweden full and complete satisfaction: and his Majesty might with good
reason insrst upon it, and take care to have it effected, if we had been able
to dispose the Confederates to accept the conditions of that Project. But since
the Confederates did not think it their interests to make Peace upon those
terms, as the States foresaw at first they would not, and that his Catholic
Majesty would make some scruple, as the Ambassadors of the State intimated to
those of France, desiring them to let them know what places the King their
Master intended should make the Bar in the Spanish Netherlands: and his Most
Christian Majesty was pleased to assure the States by a Letter of the 18th of
May, written from his Camp, in case his Catholic Majesty should refuse the
Peace upon the said Terms, and that the States would conclude their Treaty, and
oblige themselves to remain neuters, that then his Majesty would always be
willing to grant to Spain the conditions of the Project, and promised not to
lay Siege to any place in the Spanish Netherlands during the whole. War without
making any mention of Sweden, or the rest of the Confederates: Whereupon their
Lordships the States confiding in the King's Word, did their duty for the
inducing his Catholic Majesty to accept of those conditions, and labored on
the otherside to the utmost of their power to persuade the rest of the
Confederates also; with which they acquainted his Majesty, by Monsieur de
Beverning their Ambassador, declaring that for their own parts they accepted of
his Majesty's Terms; and desiring his Majesty that he would be pleased to agree
to a Truce for Six weeks, that they might labor with their Allies, and get
them to consent to a general Peace, and that his Majesty was pleased to agree
to such a Truce for Six months, to begin from the first of July, and as himself
wrote from his Camp at Wetter, the first of June, upon the same foot that the
Truce in 1668 was agreed betwixt France and Spain, upon condition that the
States would engage themselves, in case they should not be able in Six weeks
time to persuade their Allies to admit of the conditions, then not to assist
their said Allies directly nor indirectly against his Majesty or his Allies
during the War, and that in requital thereof his Majesty would renew the
engagements which he made in his Letter of the 18th. of May, both concerning
the conditions to be granted to his Catholic Majesty, and the securing of the
places in the Low Countries: leaving the Duke of Luxemburg near Brussels to
stay to the end of June for an answer, with Order not to attack any Place
during that time; and without making any alteration in the said conditions, or
any mention either of the Allies of this State, or of giving satisfaction to
the King of Sweden: that the States acting heartily, and being ready on their
part to perfect that Treaty, and having induced his Catholic Majesty to accept
it also, as they advised his Most Christian Majesty by their Letter of the 22th
of June, assuring him that they had given Order to their Ambassador, to
conclude a Peace before the end of that month, with such of the Confederates as
would join with them in it, without so much as staying for the Truee, which was
to begin on the first of July; and that his Majesty by his Letter of the 30th
of June, declared himself to be extremely well satisfied therewith: and was so
far from obliging the States or his Catholic Majesty to make any satisfaction
to the King of Sweden, that he expressed in the same Letter, that he observed
in the proceedings of the States a good inclination to the general Peace of
Europe: and he persuaded himself it would not be long delayed by such of the
Allies as hitherto had not been able to help forward so great a good: that his
Majesty doubted not but the Peace would be concluded by his Ambassadors, and
should take delight in making this State sensible of its effects, and in
forbearing all acts of hosility in the Low Countries, and obstructions to
Commerce by Sea, though it be customary to let things continue in the same
condition, till the Peace be Ratified by exchange of Ratifications, and
publishing of Treaties; without suspending the effects of the Peace upon any
Treaty with the Confederates, or any satisfaction to be made to the King of
Sweden That the States may say with good reason, that his Most Christian
Majesty is the cause why the Peace is not concluded, and not they: since his
Majesty advances new Conditions, which never were proposed to themselves, nor
to the King of Spain, it never having been pretended, that the Peace, or its
effects, should depend upon the King of Sweden's receiving satisfaction, but
only upon the States standing Neuter, in relation to his Majesty and his
Allies, against those that should reject the Conditions of the Project. So that
it is evident, that the most Christian King has promised to restore those
Places to the King of Spain, and to this State; and that himself has directed
to have the Treaty perfected, by Exchanging the Ratifications, and publishing
it: That the States pretend to no new matter concerning the said Evacuation:
That the things of no small concern to the Catholic King, and to this State,
who cannot arrive at peace and quiet, in getting rid of the War, if at the same
time they continue deprived of the effects of Peace; much less if they must be
sent back, and made to depend upon the chances of War betwixt other Parties;
which who knows when it will end in a satisfaction, that is not limited to any
thing in particular? Especially considering, that the King of Sweden contimes
an Enemy to this State, without giving order to put an end to the differences
that are, and that daily grow betwixt him and it; and does perpetually molest
the Inhabitants of this State, contrary to the Treaty of Commerce made with him.

That order be given to the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of this State, to
enquire of the Ambassadors of the most Christian King, in a friendly and loving
manner, without the least sharpness, whether the King their Master be resolved
to persist in his demand, and to advise the Estates as soon as may be, that
they may take proper measures, and conser with the Ministers of the
Confederates, to know whether they can either come to a resolution to accept
the Peace upon the terms offered, or find means, if there shall be occasion, to
make a more vigorous opposition to their Enemies, than heretofore.

A Memorial of the French Ambassadors, delivered the 17. July, 1678. to the
Ambassadors of the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries.
THe Ambassadors of France being troubled to see, that the difficulties arisen
concerning the time for the Evacuation of the places, which the King their
Master is willing to restore, give occasion to those that are averse to the
Peace, to render the sincerity of his Majesty's intentions suspected, have
thought it their duty to manifest the same to the Ambassadors of the States
General by this Memorial.

And to justify the Reasons his Majesty has, not to quit those Places, until
Sweden is entirely satisfied, it will be sufficient to go no higher than the
beginning of the Negotiation, by which the Peace is at present so far advanced.
And we may say, that the same are grounded on the Conditions, proposed in his
Majesty's name by the said Ambassadors of France, since they have been all of
them accepted, first, by Holland, and not long after by Spain. We may farther
say, that when the States General, in consequence of the Letters his Majesty
writ unto them the 18th. of May last, and of the Memorial delivered the first
of June to Monsieur de Beverning; as also of the message of the Sieur de Lanoy
to his Majesty, and the Letter he presented unto him on the part of the States,
declared, they were ready to sign the Treaty on those Conditions, they obliged
themselves to the execution of that which relates to Sweden, it being the first
of all of them. And as they were all joined together, so they ought not to be
separated in the meaning of the said States General, to cause his Majesty to
consent unto them; and he doubts not at all, that since he made but one thing
of his own Interest and that of his Allies, their meaning was not, but that he
should procure both the one and the other.

His Majesty had likewise reason to hope, that by advantaging both them and
Spain, in being willing to quit so many important Places for the sake of
Sweden, they would have joined with him to procure the reestablishment of that
Crown; and though his Majesty has not desired them to unite their Forces to
his, to put that Crown in possession of the Places it has lost; yet they ought
not to hinder him from making use of those Means that are in his power, for the
effectual executing of a Condition, to which they have so solemnly consented.
They know well, that his Majesty has no other effectual means, whereby to
contribute to the re-establishment of the King of Sweden in Pomerania and the
Duchy of Bremen, than by making War upon the Elector of Brandenburg, and the
Princes that are possessed of the Estates of that Crown; and they know as well,
that in order to his acting against those Princes, his Majesty will have
occasion for those Places he now possesses, as being equally useful for the
passage of his Armies, as for erecting Magazins there for them. Lastly, they
cannot look upon the Peace which his Majesty is willing to make, otherwise than
as one and the same Treaty, as well for himself as his Allies: nor think it
strange, if he take all necessary Cautions, to see all the Conditions of it
performed.

This practice is conformable to that of all Treaties; and for an example might
be alleged the practice of that of the Pyrenaeans, in which Treaty, the Places
his Majesty was to restore to the Catholic King, were evacuated proportionably
as he on his side executed the Conditions he had agreed to; and Verceil, which
the Catholic King was to surrender to the Duke of Savoy, was restored in the
same manner: for that the Interests of his Majesty and his Ally were not to be
separated. In like manner, the States General being obliged to look upon as one
and the same convention, the Conditions offered by his Majesty, and accepted of
by them at Nimeguen, they ought to do what lies in them, that the same be
executed all together, as well with relation to his Majesty as to Sweden.

And his Majesty has the greater reason to believe they would concur with him
in so just a thing, for that in the Project of the Treaty, which their
Ambassador delivered to those of France, there is no mention made therein of
the time of the Restitution of the Places. This silence shows, that they did
not pretend to it, till all the conditions that they had accepted should be
executed, and that therefore they would make the less difficulty, that
Maestricht remained in the hands of his Majesty, in order to oblige the Enemies
of Sweden to Peace, for that the said States General were by their Treaty to
deliver that Place unto Spain.

And to evidence yet further to the States General, how sincerely his Majesty
intended, after the many paces he made to give Peace to Europe, to restore unto
them his first Friendship, to promote the advantage they might receive from it,
and to desist from all future Enterprises upon the Low Countries; they need but
reflect upon his Majesty's Conduct, since they declared by the Letter, which
the Sieur de Lanoy delivered to his Majesty, that they would sign the Peace
before the end of June, and that Spain would likewise sign it at the same time.

They may have observed, how at their entreaty, without expecting the Exchange
of the Ratifications, his Majesty gave order to his Army to withdraw from the
Neighborhood of Brussels: How he was ready to open again the free Commerce and
Navigation, by the Passports he allowed his Ambassadors to Exchange: How he
offered to take measures with them about the manner how his Troops should live
near Mons, and about the means for the subsistence of that City, till the
exchange of the Ratifications: How for the ease of the Low Countries, and the
speedy obliging the Elector of Brandenburg to consent to the Peace, his Majesty
has reinforced the Marshall de Schomberg with a considerable Detachment of
his Army in Flanders, which he has already caused to march into Germany, and
was upon the point of ordering others to follow them. All which Conduct does
sufficiently show, that his Majesty looking upon the Peace with Spain as
certain, his intention only was to employ his Forces against the Elector of
Brandenburg, thereby to oblige him to make his Peace with Sweden.

But because his Majesty observes, by the Reports which his Enemies spread
abroad, that they endeavor to render the fidelity of his words suspected, and
would make it believed, That when by the Peace he had broken the measures of
Spain and Holland for the War, he wouldmake use of the Places he should retain,
to act with more, advantage against the Low Countries; his Majesty is very
desirous, as much as in him lies, to cure them of these vain apprehensions.
The only aim he has, in what he insists upon, is to procure the satisfaction
of Sweden; and he is willing to believe, that the States General have always
the same intention; and therefore he is ready to use all such means, in
conjunction with them, as they shall think fit to be effectual to that end,
either by obliging themselves to restore that Crown to th Places and Countries
it has lost, or by disposing its Enemies to surrender them; provided they give
his Majesty full security of its re-establishment. His Majesty will willingly
embrace such Expedients as they shall propose unto him, and shall be esteemed
most speedy and effectual to make the Peace General. And for the treating of
this business, they may either discuss it with the said Ambassadors of France
at Nimeguen, or appoint some Minister to repair to his Majesty, or send
Deputies to the Frontiers of Flanders and Ghent, as nearest to their Countries,
to confer thereupon with those to whom his Majesty shall entrust the care of
it. His Majesty will rest satisfied, if they can but agree upon a safe, speedy,
and certain way of procuring the reestablishment of Sweden.

The said Ambassadors of France are persuaded, that the said Ambassadors of the
States General, and all indifferent men, will be equally convinced, as well of
the Right his Majesty has to demand the Execution of a Condition so positively
accepted, as of procuring the same by such means as are in his power, unless
the States General shall adjust others with him, to obtain it.

The long time his Majesty has lost in Flanders since the 18th. of May, that
he writ unto the said States, does also show, how sincerely he desired the
Peace. Considering the Condition in which his Majesty and his Enemies then
were, every body will easily believe, that only the desire of giving Peace to
Europe, was capable of making him loose so favorable a Conjuncture: And it is
from the same desire, that he is still disposed to admit of Propositions, that
may secure the entire satisfaction of Sweden, and procure the Tranquillity,
which Christendom expects from this Assembly.

A Memorial delivered to the Plenipotentiaries of France, by the
Plenipotentiaries of Holland, July the 26th. 1678.
THe Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries of their Lordships, the
States General of the United Provinces, having received from the hands of the
Lords Ambassadors of France, the 11th. instant, a Memorial, whereby they
pretend to justify the particular of the Retension of the Places, the
Restitution whereof were promised by his most Christian Majesty; and wherein,
at the same time, they invite their Lordships to enter into some way with his
Majesty, whereby they might draw and assure a perfect Satisfaction to the King
of Swedes, are obliged by express order from their Lords and Masters, to
represent to their Excellencies, That their Lordships making a due reflection
upon the method of his Majesty's proceedings to terminate the present War; and
upon the advantageous expressions, whereby he has particularly declared himself
upon their account; they cannot entertain so much as a thought, that he would
at present delay the accomplishment and conclusion by the said Retension; being
fully persuaded, that such kind of obstructions cannot proceed from so generous
a Soul as his Majesty's, but rather from the persuasion of those who are averse
to a Peace. They strongly possess themselves with this perswaasion, that they
cannot lay a more solid Basis for their justification, than to give an
ingenuous account of the beginning and progress of this Affair.

It Is notorious, that the Lords the States General have done their utmost
endeavors, without intermission, to determine this present War by a General
Peace, wherein all Parties Interested might have had that satisfaction which
they have so passionately desired, as might have disposed all Persons
whatsoever thereunto. But such was their misfortune, that the pretenses of the
other Allies being far different, and very far from it, and his most Christian
Majesty having caused his Ambassadors at Nimeguen to propose those Conditions,
which might and ought to serve as a Platform to a general Peace; and upon that
consideration, explaining himself, that it was the last point that he could
possibly dispense with; and hereupon his Enemies might make choice either of
Peace or War, without being obliged, after the 10th. of this present May. And
the Lords the States General taking into their consideration, that the major
part of the said proposed Conditions, did concern their puissant Allies, did
carefully explain themselves, that they might find out some Expedients, and
have endeavored to dispose of Affairs so, as that they might enter upon a
Negotiation according to the said Platform, to see what the Parties concerned
at designed but to their great regret, they have been informed, That it was not
at all his Majesty's intention to cause a Treaty, or to admit any debate upon
the Conditions proposed; but that the Potent Parties, that were at War, ought
simply to declare themselves before the Term of the 10th. of May was expired,
whether or no they would subscribe the said Conditions. Whereupon their
Lordships have labored continually with the Ministers of their Allies, to
understand their Sentiments. But they excusing themselves, upon the small time
allotted for this great Affair, and want of Order from their Masters, wherewith
they could not possibly be instructed before the Expiration of the term;
therefore their Highnesses not being able to assure themselves of the
intentions of their powerful Allies, especially the King of Spain, in regard of
the Acceptance or Refusal of the said Conditions: And considering, that the
Stop proposed by his most Christian Majesty, must also give them particular
satisfaction, have applied their farther endeavors to inform themselves, how
this stop should be considered, in case the King of Spain should refuse to
accept the said Conditions; and thereupon his Most Christian Majesty has been
so kind as to honor them with a Letter written from his Camp. May the 18th:
and to acquaint them, that if the King of Spain denied to accept of the Peace,
and they judged it proper to conclude a Peace with him, on the Conditions
proposed upon their account, and that they would engage to remain Neuter,
during the whole course of this War: His Majesty in such Cases, would upon
their consideration, grant the said King of Spain the same Conditions, which he
was at liberty to accept of at this present, and that during that time, he
would not attack any place in the Low Countries, and if my Lords the States
General, in order to the advancement of this Negotiation, should find it
convenient to send Deputies to him, that they would find his Majesty in the
neighborhood of Ghent, till the 25th. of the said month, and under the same
dispositions.

Farthermore, the Lords of the States General, having declared before the 30th.
of May, to the Lords, Ambassadors of France; that for their parts they were
resolved to conclude a Peace with his Majesty, upon the Conditions proposed on
their account, and having desired a convenient time, to the end that they might
dispose their Allies to the same Peace, and after the Receipt of the aforesaid
Letter from his Majesty, having determined to send to him the Sieur Beverning,
their Ambassador Extraordinary, to represent unto him, how earnestly they
desired a general Peace, that they did accept of the Conditions offered, and
that they desired his Majesty to grant them a Cessation of Arms for Six weeks,
that they might have time to discourse with their Allies, upon the affairs of
Peace, and to gain their consent, for the conclusion of so great a Work. His
Majesty was Graciously pleased to declare by his answer the first of June,
dated in his Camp at Wetteren, that he did condescend to that Cessation, for
the space of six weeks, as it was desired, to commence from the first of July,
and the same according to the stipulation between France and Spain, Anno Dom.
1668. With this proviso, they should promise his Majesty that in case, during
the said Cessation of Arms, they could not prevail with their Allies to accept
of the Conditions offered, they would neither, directly nor indirectly assist
them, against his Majesty or his Allies, during the continuance of this War:
And upon this consideration his Majesty was willing to Render by way of
exchange, the same engagements that he had obliged himself unto, with them, in
his said Letter of the 18th. of May; as well in regard of the same Conditions,
which he would be always inclinable to grant to Spain; as for the security of
the Places in the Low Countries. And to give them a larger Testimony thereof,
his Majesty has charged the Duke of Luxemburg, General of his Forces, to
attend their answer, during the month of June, in the neighborhood of
Brussels, with orders not to attack any place during that time.

That consequently, the States General, to give pregnant proof of the desire
they have to conclude the War, and to testify the Candor of their
preceedings, would not wait till the expiration of the month of June, much less
make use of the said Cessation of Arms, which was to begin on the first of
July, as it was at their liberty to do: but from the 22th of June, have assured
his Majesty by their Letter, that though they had labored very strenuously
with their Allies, to dispose them to the said Peace, and that they could not
be satisfied that all would concur therein; yet they had ordered their
Ambassadors at Nimeguen, to Conclude and Sign the Troaty, with his Majesty's
Ambassadors, together with those of their Allies, who were willing to
condescend thereunto; and that they were very certain, his Majesty the King of
Spain would also accept of the Peace, upon the Conditions proposed on his
account, And his Most Christian Majesty has been so gracious as to give them an
answer, by Letter dated the 30th. of June, that he understood, with
satisfaction, by their said Letter, that without expecting the time which he
had granted them for a Cessation of Arms, they had sent the said Orders to
their Ambassadors, to Sign the Treaty of Peace, before the end of June, and
that the assurance they gave his Majesty, that those of the Spanish King would
accept of them at the same time, did give him to understand, that there were
very favorable inclinations for the quiet of all Europe, and that likewise his
Majesty did persuade himself, that he could not be long retarded by their
Allies; who till this very hour, what instances soever they had made, had
refused to give their Concurrence to so great a Benefit, and so Universally
desired.

His Majesty Declaring farther, that though the usual Custom in such Cases
requires, that things should continue in the same condition they are in, till
the Peace be absolutely Consummated by an exchange of Ratifications, and a
publication of the Treaties; that yet upon their account, he had sent his
immediate Orders to the Duke of Luxemburg, to withdraw his Army from the
adjacent parts of Brussels, and March them into his own Countries; and that he
Charged the said Duke, for this purpose, to agree with the Duke de Villa
Hermosa, as also their Envoys with him, about the Conduct that should be among
the Officers that were to Command the Troops, which his Majesty was obliged to
leave in the places about the Town of Mons; as also how they should live of one
side as well as the other, without Hostility in a good understanding, and with
Liberty in the Low Countries, till the Exchange of the Ratisications with Spain.

From all this, it evidently follows, that the Intentions, as well of his
Majesty as the Lords the States General, have been from the beginning, to make
a General Peace, upon such Conditions as all the Allies might have agreed unto;
and being very uncertain, whether the said Allies would regulate themselves by
the Conditions his Majesty had proposed, and having Explained himself, that he
would admit of no Alteration, their Lordships have desired an Explanation of
his Majesty's Intentions toward them, and of the Conditions that concerned
them, and have had the good fortune to receive Instructions, not only from the
mouth of his Ambassadors, but also by two Letters from his Majesty himself;
that in respect to them, they should enjoy the said Conditions, and
particularly those relating to the Spanish Netherlands, though his Catholic
Majesty, or any other of his Allies should obstruct the Peace, upon condition,
that when they Conclude the Treaty, they should not directly. not indirectly
Assist their Allies, against his Majesty or his Allies whilst the War should
continue; by which it is manifestly apparent, that it has been no ways his
Majesty's intention to retard, or protract the Peace or the effects thereof by
any means whatsoever: as to those that should, who would be ready, and in a
condition to make a Conclusion, though some other persons should not as yet
prove so; and to contract only, that those who should subscribe the Peace,
should not assist directly nor indirectly those that would continue the War
against his Majesty or his Allies. And thus it is altogether incredible that so
Generous a soul as his Majesty's, after such clear and Indisputable
Declarations, as are contained in his Letters could entertain such a Sentiment;
and certainly their Lordships the States General would be extremely surprised,
if his Majesty's Intentions should be found Conformable to the Expressions of
the said Memorial it being a very Erroneous Position, that their Lordships the
States General did ever Declare, that they found all the Conditions equitable
which his Majesty had proposed, having never explained themselves, but in those
things which related to their own particular interests, and having also
demanded time to Dispose their Allies to what may farther be required.

Besides that, it is most certain, a Declaration of that Nature was never
required of them; that even his Majesty himself having weighed the Scruple,
which they were to be satisfied in, that all their Allies could not possibly be
Inclined to accept of the Conditions proposed, did anticipate them, by his
Declaration, that not withstanding all this, upon their own, as well as the
King of Spains account, he would ever condescend to them, provided they would
put a period to their Treaty upon the conditions that were offered, and has
given sufficient Testimony, that it was neither his own, nor the Intentions of
the States General, that they should be obliged to the Loan or Payment of any
other thing, but what concerned them particularly, or related to such of their
Allies, as were ready to Concur with them in making a Peace; and that his
Majesty as to those that should continue the War, would require only a
Neutrality of them, having in no respect proposed or agreed to Second his
Allies, and to afford them that Satisfaction they pretend to; which
nevertheless, the French Ambassadors do now lay claim to in the forementioned
Memorial, directly contrary to his Majesty's Declarations, if the said
Ambassadors would please to call to mind the Answer they gave at the Conference
on the 17th of June passed, when they openly cleared themselves upon the point
of the Conclusion and Signing of the Treaties, they must necessarily agree in
this, that he has been, and that they were ready to Sign with all those
Allies, who would declare themselves to Condescend thereunto without any
stipulation for the Swede, or any Delay on that account, having only
recommended to them the Continuance of their endeavors with the Allies, with a
promise that they would effect as much with their own Confederates: being
farther most certain, that during the whole Course; of the Negotiation they
never intended any thing as to the Swedish Interest; nay not when the Matter of
the Restitution of the places, which should serve as a Bar, was Debated.

And it is somewhat surprising, that the foresaid Ambassadors should positively
affirm in the said Memorial, that his Majesty did never Condescend to the
Restitution of Places to the King of Spain, unless it were in Consideration of
an equal Restitution, which should be made to the King of Swedes Advantage,
since the Original and the very words of the said Conditions do expressly
import, that those Places ought to serve as a Boundary to the Spanish
Netherlands, upon which the King of Great Britain, the States General, and the
other Neighboring States of the said Countries have so much insisted: and that
his Most Christian Majesty would Surrender them with this Prospect, and on such
Conditions, that the King of Spain should yield up in Exchange all those
Places, which are likewise specified in the said Conditions; and that the
aforesaid Restitution to the King of Spain should also be one part of the
Satisfaction due to their Lordships without any manner of Limitation, nor be
directly, nor indirectly tied to give any manner of Satisfaction to the Swedish
King: and it is very Clear, that the French Ambassadors are themselves
Convinced of this, since that they confess in the said Memorial, that his Most
Christian Majesty did not in the least pretend, that They, or the King of Spain
ought to join their Forces with his, to Repossess the King of Swedes with those
Territories and Places that he had lost, Grounding it only upon the account of
the Retention of them, in regard that in the Conditions of the General Peace,
the Swede's Satisfaction is mentioned in the first Article; and that before all
others; without considering that this entire and full Satisfaction of the
Swede, cannot by any means be Applicable to their Lordships, who had never
conquered or carried any Place that belonged to that Crown; and that it is very
Irregular to pretend to Charge them with a Restitution who never took any
thing, and have no manner of Possession, that even they would draw a
Consequence from so General and Ambiguous a proposition to all particular
Conditions, which in pursuance of that proposition are expressed by very
different ways and Stipulations; no otherwise than if they would deduce the
same Consequence from that which is after mentioned concerning the Princes of
Strasburg and Fustemberg: viz, That their Interests ought to make up one of the
first points of that Peace, it being however an Affair that concerns none of
the Confederates, the Emperor excepted, and that particularly too. Nor besides
have the Ambassadors considered, that his Majesty by his Letters of the 18th of
May, and 1st of June, did explain himself so clearly and so positively, that he
was Content, provided the States General did on their part, Conclude and Sign
the Peace, and that he would always agree to the Conditions proffered to the
King of Spain, they only promising not to Assist their Allies that are willing
to continue the War against his Majesty, or his Confederates: so that the
Conditions offered, as well to the King of Spain, as their Lordships ought to
be performed, though the other Allies will not Concur in the making of a Peace;
not only when the King of Swedes should be re-established; and receive
Satisfaction, but when they had promised the said Neutrality.

The Lords the States General desire servently and Cordially, that the War in
the Northern parts should be ended by convenient means: but his Most Christian
Majesty and the King of Swedes, not being able to Agree upon Conditions with
the Allies of their Lordships they will look upon the Continuation of the War
with great Dissatissaction; but yet in the interim they are apt to believe,
that the French Ambassadors are mistaken, when they would Infer from thence,
That his most Christian Majesty might lawfully make use of the Territories and
Places belonging to the King of Spain, and their State, to make a more
advantageous War.

They call his Countries and Territories their own, because that according to
the Treaty of Peace, they ought to belong to them, by the same right as the
other Lands and Provinces, which, beyond all controversy, appertain to them.

It is very certain, that the Country of his Electoral Highness of Brandenburg
may be infested, and also those belonging to the Bishop of Munster, more
commodiously by those Countries which the States General at present possess;
but as his most Christian Majesty did never pretend, and his Ambassadors would
do ill to pretend, that his Majesty might lawfully make use of their
Territories and Places to that purpose; nor can they pretend any more, that his
Majesty can make use of those Places, which he has engaged to restore, having
reserved no such kind of Right to himself, nor any thing whatsoever in order to
such a design; but only the said Neutrality of the Parties contracting with
him; it being observable, that nothing in the world can be more opposite to the
Neutrality, than to grant one Party the power to employ those Territories and
Places to infest and indemnisie the other Parties, nor more prejudicial to the
Interests of their Lordships, than thereby to bring upon themselves the
mischiefs and inconveniences of a War in their Neighborhood, and even to their
very Frontiers; so that in lieu of enjoying the sweetness and effects of a
Peace, and being ascertained of a Boundary for their security and repose, they
shall find themselves destitute on one side, and infested by a thousand
inconveniences on the other.

What the French Ambassadors say farther in that Memorial, merits 2 very
particular reflection, that their Sentiments in the present case are
conformable to the practice in all other Treaties; it being very notorious,
that when there is a General Treaty made, all the Contractors ought to have
satisfaction, which cannot be applied to the case in hand. His most Christian
Majesty having thought good to enter into a particular Negotiation with the
King of Spain and the States General, without sharing with the other Allies,
which would not concur therein. It Is true, that if the King of Spain, or the
States General, should not perform the Conditions of such a General Treaty, but
fail therein, his most Christian Majesty might justly demand the effect of the
Conditions agreed unto: but these two Powers being altogether disposed to
satisfy in all, and by all, which they are engaged to, on their behalf, his
Majesty cannot have the least pretense, that they should be frustrated of the
accomplishment of what should be promised them by particular Treaties, and upon
consideration whereof, they should set their hands. Over and above, that his
Majesty, having put into the first Article of his Propositions, the entire
satisfaction the Swede should have, which is now made the ground of all the
present difficulties, explains himself in the same Period by these words, [That
without them, he could not conclude upon all the rest.] Whence it ought to be
inferred, without all manner of dispute, that he would not desist in case of a
General Treaty; but that it was not intended to apply it to the case of
particular Conventions, which is now in question.

The Allegations which are made to this Proposal of the Pyrenaean Treaty, and
the example of Verceil, the restitution whereof the King of Spain has
promised, are not at all applicable here; for that Places was in his own hands,
and he might dispose of it as he thought good: but in our case, they have not
only not demanded any restitution, either from the King of Spain, or the
States General, as indeed it could not justly be required of them, because they
were not all possessed of any thing that appertained to the Swede; his most
Christian Majesty proposing no other matter to them, but the Neutrality only:
and there might, on the contrary, be drawn a solid Argument from the same
Treaty of the Pyrenaeans, to justify what is at present pretended to,
concerning the Evacuation, alleging, that his most Christian Majesty has
consented to the restitution of the Places to Spain, notwithstanding the
continuation of the War between that Crown and Portugal.

It Is true, that in the project of Treaties, there is no mention at all made of
the Time when the Places should be restored; but it is certain and notorious,
that the Consequence of a Treaty is the immediate Exchange of Ratifications,
after which, full satisfaction ought to be given to all that is promised and
agreed unto, without any limitation of time; and to that end there can be
nothing applied more Authentic, than what his Majesty. was pleased to allege
in his last Letter of the 30th. of June passed, where he says, That it is the
usual custom in all Treaties, for all things to continue in the state they are
in, till the Peace be absolutely consummated by Exchange of Ratifications, and
the Publication of them; and that consequently it were directly contrary to
that usage, for his Majesty to pretend to detain the places, after the
Ratifications duly Exchanged, and the Publication made. Their Lordships may
dispense with the Discourse of the Conduct of his Majesty's Army in the Spanish
Netherlands, after the return of Monsieur de Lanoy, who brought back his
Majesty's Answer of the 30th. of June, made to theirs of the 22d. of the same
month; but in the mean time they afflict themselves, not without reason,
because that by all these difficulties, so ill grounded, the Conclusion and
Signature of the Treaties has been retarded, and even refused; when as their
Ambassadors did duly present themselves to those of his most Christian Majesty,
according to their promise, because that their Lordships could by no means
endure, that the King of Spain, no more than they themselves to their extreme
prejudice, should be disappointed in the principal effect of Peace; namely, of
the Evacuation of the said Places, and consequently of the Boundary, which his
Majesty had so frequently and solemnly assured them.

Their High and Mighty Lordships sincerely declare, that they desire nothing
more cordially, than to see the Peace established between his Majesty, the King
of Spain, and their own State jointly together, with all the Confederates that
will subscribe it; and that they are willing, and ready also to cause the
Treaties to be Concluded and Signed: But we cannot justly desire of them, that
the said Evacuation should depend upon the success of Affairs, and a
Restitution and Satisfaction, which according to all humane apprehension, will
not be regulated, but by the success of the War, the Accidents and Chances
whereof are always exposed to incertainty.

It Is further to be taken into consideration, that the King of Sweden has not to
this hour given any order for the satisfaction of their High and Mighty
Lordships, in regard of the just complaints, and excessive damages of their
Subjects; nay, not so much as to renew and re-establish their ancient Amity
with them; but contrarily, daily add new prejudices to their Negotiation, by
Acts of Hostility, directly contrary to the Treaties provisionally established.

And as his Majesty ought rationally to expect, from the Lords the States
General, that they should ever look upon his Royal Word as firm and inviolable,
they cannot be persuaded, that he would by any means whatsoever alter the
Conditions which he has proposed by so remarkable a Change; and are so much
the more assured thereof, in that their Ambassadors at London, having
represented to his Majesty of Great Britain the scruple of this new upstart
Difficulty, his Majesty did answer them with assurance, that there should be no
stop upon it; and thereby they have been strongly persuaded, that this delay
was to be imputed, not to his Majesty's Sentiments, but to the persuasion of
those who desire not a Peace: but that however they hope his Majesty, according
to the greatness of his Generosity, will take off that Delay.

As to the Proposition the French Ambassadors made in their Memorial, the Lords
the States General do consider it two very different ways; either as an
Expedient to accommodate the Affairs of the Northern Powers, by amicable means;
or else to employ their Forces to oblige their Allies to return the King of
Sweden their Conquests, obtained during this War. As to the first, they doubt
not that the French Ambassadors are sufficiently persuaded, with what servor
they desired to see the accomplishment of a General Peace; and they shall never
be better satisfied in any thing, than in seeing it concluded, and that they
will always continue to interpose, and use their utmost endeavors to obtain a
Benefit so much desired; entreating his Majesty, that he will please to furnish
them with means in order thereunto, their Ambassadors being fully informed of
their good intentions, without being obliged to the Evacuation of Places: But
if it be his Majesty's inclination to engage them, in pursuance of that
proposition to violence, and constraint, they find themselves obliged to say,
That they understand no manner of ^^^ity therein, and that it is diametrically
opposite to, what his Majesty did himself judge reasonable, and that they can
by no means subscribe it, not being able at all to prevail with themselves but
by force; they must engage their Allies, with whom they have been concerned in
the same Obligations, to restore what they have taken from the Swedish King,
and so consequently must be necessitated to take up Arms against their Friends
and Confederates; a thing altogether unheard of, and which cannot justly be
required of them; his Majesty having several times declared, that as for
himself and his Allies, and in confideration of their Mighty Lordships and
theirs, he only demanded the Neutrality beforementioned.

And thus the Lords the States General do assure themselves, that the French
Ambassadors, as well as all those that are not prepossessed, will be convinced,
that their Lordships are no way in fault, if the Peace be not immediately
Concluded, and that the obligation to the Retention of the Towns cannot be
imputed to them, it being so prejudicial to the Interest of their Affairs, that
they can never be able to consent to it.

They farther declare, that they will jointly use their utmost endeavors, for
the accommodation of the Northern Powers, who are now at War, and who in effect,
Conform themselves to the Expedient, which the French Ambassadors have
proposed: but if their Reflection be applied by way of Force and Constraint, it
cannot be in their opinion and expedient, but a thing never heard of, that by
the Treaty of Peace, instead of disengaging themselves from the War, they
should be constrained to turn it against their Allies. They do not at all
doubt, that his Majesty has a Design to procure the Quiet of Europe, and they
will voluntarily Contribute on their part, all they can possibly, but they
cannot by any means expect from his Majesty's Justice, that he would oblige
them to it, after so prejudicial a manner as the Retention of the Places will
prove, and upon so vexatious a Condition, as that of waging War against their
Allies, their Mighty Lordships, as they are wholly bent upon the Contribution
of all friendly Offices, for the accommodation of the said Affairs in the
North. So also, they promise themselves farther, that his Majesty will be
willing to issue out necessary Orders for the Conclusion and Signing of the
Peace upon the Conditions profer'd, and that he will furnish them with
Expedients, to Contribute also on their part, to the Repose of Christendom.

This is that which the Lords the States General of the United Provinces have
thought good to give in answer to the Memorial of the French Ambassadors, at
the same time Ordering their own Ambassadors, to appear forward in the
Concluding and Signing the Peace, and most carnestly beseech the said French
Ambassadors to Concur with them in that Business.

But if the Completing of so beneficial a Work, and so universally desired, be
delayed upon the account of retaining the Places, the said Ambassadors of the
Lords the States General, are obliged to protest in the name and behalf of the
Lords their Masters, that their High and Mighty Lordships do no ways obstruct
the Peace from being brought to a happy Issue.

A Memorial delivered to the Plenipotentiaries of France, by the
Plenipotentiaries of Sweden; July, the 27th. 1678.

THe Declaration of his Most Christian Majesty, that the Places should not be
Surrendered to Spain and the States General, before the Swedes should receive
satisfaction, is so Just and Generous, that his Most Christian Majesty cannot
but thereby come off with Honor, and the King our Master with great
Satisfaction. We could wish that that Declaration might have reduced our Common
Enemies to Reason; but since it has met with great opposition, as appears by
the Memorial of the Holland Ambassadors, his Most Christian Majesty will
without doubt Examine, if to arrive at the end proposed thereby; in
consideration of the Reestablishment of Sweden, it will be more proper to defer
the Restitution of the Places with the prospect of making a general Peace, of
else agree to it as the States General desire, to the end there may be procured
a Complete particular Peace with Spain and States General, as well for France
as Sweden.

On our part, we are not sufficiently informed what thoughts the King our
Master may have upon this Affair; but as our Orders in general are, that we
ought to Conform our selves to the pleasure of France in the like Case, that we
have good proof of the Intentions and Care of his Most Christian Majesty, and
that we have not the Liberty to Correspond with the King our Master, to
understand his Orders, We can assure you, that the King our Master will remain
satisfied with what his Most Christian Majesty shall judge sit to Resolve, upon
the account of the said Restitution of Places, as we do also put our whole
confidence in his Majesty's Royal prudence, who one way or other will furnish
him with such means as may tend to his own Glory; together with the absolute
Reestablishment of his Ally.

This is all we have Order to say; but if besides this, we must explain our
mind more particularly, we are apt to believe, that in this present juncture of
Affairs, the Completing a particular Peace, by the French and Swede, with the
Spaniard and Hollander, would prove advantageous to the common Interest, and
withal Glorious to his Most Christian Majesty. For it is for the advancement
of the common Interest.

1. To disengage themselves from 2 Enemies, that are so much the more
Considerable, because they support others by their Aids.

2. To avoid the new Rupture wherewith we are threatened, which being over, we
cannot see how the Swedes will be able to make opposition, if you consider only
their Commerce.

3. To divert the Engagements that are made against France and Sweden.

4. To frustrate their Design, who endeavor strictly to League together all
the States of the Empire.

5. To be able to reduce to Peace the other Allies, who continue still in War,
and so procure a General one, for which there is some probability, since that
upon the Rumor of Accommodation between France and Holland, we see they were
troubled, and begin to yield.

6. To be able to act Victoriously by force of Arms, against the said
Confederates, in case that they refuse an Accommodation; the War being to be
carried on against them with greater ease, when they are separated from those
that have assorded them the greatest Supplies.

Besides it will be very Honorable for his Most Christian Majesty.

1. To be able once more to restore Peace to Christendom.

2. To break all the Intreagues of his Enemies.

3. To Establish his Interests in what we have said before.

4. To show that he has other ways for the Reestablishment of the Swedes,
besides that now in Question.

5. To take occasion to make them sensible of the effects of his just
Resentments toward them, who in these present Intreagues, have stood in
opposition both to his good Designs and to his Glory.

6. To disabuse them who by the Inductions of those that are evil inclined,
have questioned the sincerity of his Majesty's Intentions, in this Negotiation.

7. To let the World know that the intentions of others have been in effect to
oppose the general Peace, since without that Impediment it might have been
obtained.

These are the Reasons of our particular Sentiments, which we beseech your
Excellencies to take into your Consideration; but for the remainder to testify
to his Most Christian Majesty, that we have no other Order from the King our
Master, but to depend upon his Care for our Security, as has been before
Specified.

The second Memorial of the Ambassadors of France, given into the Ambassadors
of the States General, the 29th. of July, 1678.
THe Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries of France, not thinking
fit to give an answer at present to the Memorial of the Ambassadors of the
States General of the 26th. of this month, when they ought rather to consider
how to remove the impediment that is risen to obstruct the conclusion of the
Peace, than to enter into such particulars of actions and reasonings as may
exasperate, will say thus much only, that since the States General declare
themselves to be fully satisfied as to the sincerity of the intentions of the
King their Master, and his Majesty is no less persuaded of their disposition
toward a perfect reconciliation with himself, all that remains to be done, is
to find the most ready means to perfect this great Work. To which end, the
Ambassadors of France do now again assure the Ambassadors of the States
General, that his Majesty will readily join with them in such expedients as
shall be most proper to remove the difficulties that hinder the Signing of the
Peace. The said Ambassadors of the States General may easily have observed that
no other interest withholds his Majesty, than that of the King his Ally, whose
satisfaction is the only end that he proposes to himself in this Affair. His
Majesty is also willing to admit of any proposals to accommodate it, and
questions not but that some expedient may be found, with which both himself and
the States General may be satisfied. But to give a public Instance of his real
intentions for Peace, and of his unfeigned affection to the States General; his
Majesty desires to hear himself what they can propose, to remove the
impediments that stand in their way, and to join with them in. such expedients
as may equally answer the security, that both himself wishes and they desire.
To this purpose his Majesty thinks fit to advance as far as St. Quentin,
whither such Deputies that they shall resolve to send to him, may resort; and
if they shall accept, as his Majesty believes they will, so beneficial an
offer, his Majesty will be in that Town six days, after he shall have
understood by his Ambassadors, that the States have agreed to send their
Ministers thither: so that he and they may come thither at one and the same
time. And as his Majesty does not question but they will bring with them such
sentiments as shall be just and reasonable, they will find his Majesty so
fairly disposed, that they will have no cause left to question the Sincerity
with which his Majesty has begun and continued his endeavors for Peace.

But because the Ambassadors of the States General have remonstrated to those
of France, at a conference held the 17th. of this month, that since his
Majesty's promise not to attaque any Place in the Low Countries is expired, it
will be necessary to take some measures to procure a Cessation of all Acts of
hostility, whilst this Negotiation is on foot; the said Ambassadors have
already received instructions from his Majesty, to assure their Excellencies,
that his Majesty will willingly agree with the Deputies of the States General,
upon using all means that may prevent it is being interrupted by Arms.

The said Ambassadors of France, cannot but think that it will be for the
advantage of the States General, to discuss this affair with his Majesty, and
to agree upon the Peace with him. But if they had rather treat of it nearer
their own Fronteers, his Majesty gives them liberty to send their Deputies to
Gand, where such persons as shall be there on his Majesty's behalf, shall have
power to Treat with them upon the difficulties than are risen concerning the
time for evacuating the Places, and to conclude upon such expedients as may
both satisfy his Majesty, and content the States General, and also to agree
forthwith upon a Cessation of Hostility; so as no molestation may be given to
such dispositions for Peace, as this Negotiation may produce.

A Memorial given in by the Ambassadors of the States General, to the
Ambassadors of France, the 4th. of August, 1678.
THe Ambassador and Envoy Extraordinary of their Lordships the States General
of the United Provinces, having sent to their Hi. and Mi. the Memorial of the
Lords Ambassadors of France, of the 29th. of July, have received express order
from their Masters to answer their Excellencies, that they were transported to
understand thereby the continuance of his most Christian Majesty's real
intentions for Peace; and that themselves will not be wanting on their part to
do whatever may further the concluding it, and that they are extremely sorry to
see it stick solely upon giving the King of Sweden satisfaction, and that that
should be of such consideration to his Majesty, as to be capable of giving a
stop to the finishing a work that is so much desired.

The States General think, that they have done all that could possibly be
expected from a State, that is a Lover of Peace; having declared their
acceptance of the Conditions which the King himself had proposed, as far as
they concern themselves; and having labored to the utmost of their power to
bring their Allies to a compliance; in which endeavors they have been so
successful with the King of Spain, that he likewise accepts the Conditions that
concern himself. And yet after all this, to their great sorrow, they find
themselves deprived of the benefit of those Conditions, not upon the account of
any thing that might or ought to have been done by them, but because the King
of Sweden must first be satisfied, though neither his Catholic Majesty nor
themselves possessed any thing that must make part of his satisfaction; and
though the said King continue daily to exercise all manner of Hostilities
against their Inhabitants, directly contrary to Treaties solemnly ratified.

Yet their Hi. and Mi. notwithstanding their Inhabitants meet with such bad
usage from the said King, and though they have evidently had just cause to fall
upon him, and make War upon him, as he does upon them, have chosen rather to
endeavor a Peace in the North, and have offered to do all good offices in
order to it; if his most Christian Majesty will be pleased to furnish them with
some Expedients; and they do yet persist in the same mind, and should be ready
to propose Expedients themselves, if they knew of any: But they cannot in any
wise expect from his Majesty's generous disposition, that after having
testified so much good will to them, he should oblige them to act forcibly
against their Allies; and that, not to procure his Majesty better satisfaction,
but merely for the benefit of his Ally.

Their Hi. and Mi. will ever profess a great reverence for his Majesty, and
will bear him as much deference as he can possibly desire; but they do not see
of what use it will be to put his Majesty to trouble, by sending their Deputies
to St. Quintin, not having any themselves to propose to him; for the Places
must be Evacuated when the Treaty is concluded, in discharge of that solemn
promise which his Majesty made to them; and as to that, there remains no
difficulty. And concerning the King of Sweden, as his Majesty's Ally, they
offer to do all friendly offices for his Accommodation; and certainly such
endeavors cannot be made with greater likelihood of success any where else,
than at Nimeguen, where all the Ministers of the Confederates are: There we may
labor to dispose them, with hopes of success; there we may be informed of
whatever may be necessary to promote the common good, and may use all manner
of endeavors, which cannot be so successful, either at St. Quintin or at Ghent.

The States General conceive the less hopes from such a Deputation, because the
Ambassadors of France did not instance, as to what Expedients in particular
their Deputies should come instructed: and they think his Majesty may propose
what he would have, and do whatever is to be done sooner, and more readily at
Nimeguen, than either at St: Quintin or any other Place. They desire with all
their hearts, that his Majesty would propose some Expedients to further the
Peace; and themselves will at the same time make appear, how affectionately
they desire to help forward, as much as in them lies, the perfecting this great
work: and they earnestly desire, that the time may be well husbanded, for that
as yet they find themselves in a condition able to conclude a Peace upon the
terms that have been proposed, though they have been involved in a great deal
of trouble, and been put upon a necessity of entering into new Engagements, by
their manner of acting, whose expectations are not answered by the Peace, and
who represented the Evacuation of the Places to their Hi. and Mi. as a thing to
be despaired of; though they made those Engagements with such caution and
regard to his Majesty, that they can be of no effect, unless the matter should
fall out so unfortunately, as that his Most Christian Majesty should set such a
value upon the King of Sweden's Satisfaction, and not to resolve to Evacuate
the Places but upon those terms, though the Exchange of the Ratifications
ensued upon it.

The States General do instantly desire his Majesty to conclude the Treaties,
and not to suffer the finishing them to stick at the King of Sweden's
Satisfaction; and to make them so happy, as to give them some assurance, as
soon as may be, by taking up a favorable resolution, which is the thing they
so greatly desire.

The third Memorial of the Ambassadors of France, given in to the Ambassadors
of the States General of the United Provinces, the 6th. of August, 1678.
THe Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries of France, to make appear
more and more his Majesty's sincere desire to give quiet to all Christendom, by
the care that his Majesty continues to take for the removing such obstacles as
hinder the accomplishing so great a work, declare to the Ambassadors of the
States General, that as his Majesty designed to retain those Places, till the
King of Sweden were entirely satisfied; only because the Ambassadors of that
Crown thought it necessary for the King their Master; so he is now willing to
desist, if those Ambassadors will consent, that he forbear to stand upon it.

It is evident, that his Majesty does not incline to any Party, but out of his
desire to finish the affair of the Peace as soon as may be; and out of the
confidence that he reposeth in the word of the States General, he has always
desired, that they would send their Deputies, either to himself, or to Ghent,
both to concert what will be necessary for the warranting to his Majesty the
Engagement that Spain is to enter into, of not assisting his Enemies, nor those
of his Allies, and to agree upon such means as his Majesty should propose to
them, for the more easy restoring of Sweden, without obliging them to enter
into a War in order to it: And one of the first effects that would ensue upon
these Conferences, would be that of taking measures to supersede all Acts of
Hostility, and of providing for the subsisting of Mons, while the Conferences
should last.

The said Ambassadors cannot doubt, but that such an overture will remove those
difficulties that have hindered the States General, and that as the signing
their Treaty, and that of Spain, was delayed, only by his Majesty's pretending
to retain all the Places; so his desisting from that, will enable them to sign
the Peace. They conceive likewise, that the said States General will be
sensible of his Majesty's offers to surcease all acts of War, and assure the
subsistence of Mons, which would perfectly be restored, if the Peace were
concluded with their Deputies, so as there is ground of assurance that it will.

A Memorial given by the Ambassadors of Sweden, to the Ambassadors of France,
this 9th. of August, 1678.
THe Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Sweden, being informed
that the Ambassadors of the States General, at a conference with the
Ambassadors of his Most Christian Majesty, held the 28th of July, would have
imputed to Sweden the delay that was happened to the conclusion of the Peace,
that is making up betwixt the King their Master, and the States General,
conceive it is their duty to acquaint the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of
his Most Christian Majesty, how they have acted throughout this affair, by
which it will appear not to be long of them, that the Treaty is not at present
ready to be perfected and Signed.

In the first place, as the regulation of Commerce makes the principal point of
the Treaty on the part of the States General, the said Ambassadors of Sweden
have offered all the facilities that could be desired of them in order to it.
It was upon the 20th. of June, that the Count of Oxenstierne presented an
Article for referring this affair to Commissioners, which not being agreed to,
and the Ambassadors of the States General, declaring that their Principals and
Masters desired to see the regulation finished before the Peace were concluded,
the said Count of Oxenstierne consented to enter into the particulars of the
States Project of Commerce, and thereupon, on the 27th. of June, acquainted
Monsieur de Beverning, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the
States General, that he had drawn a Counter-Project upon some Articles not yet
agreed; which Counter-Project having been read to the Sieur de Beverning, was
immediately by his advice delivered to Sieur Silvercroon, Commissary of Sweden,
with orders to go quickly to the Hague, and help to inform the States General
more fully by Word of mouth, of the reasons upon which the Counter-Project was
grounded, the said Sieur de Beverning affirming likewise that he had writ to
his Principals and Masters, to appoint Commissioners to confer all matters with
him as soon as might be. Which though the said Sieur Silvercroon immediately
did, and the States General received the Counter-Project, yet now in seven
weeks time they have not returned their answer to it, and remitted the affair
hither to be adjusted and finished, by the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of
both parties: in order whereunto the Ambassadors of Sweden have not failed all
this time to make frequent instances, both here at Nimeguen, where they have
been assisted by the Ambassadors of France, and at the Hague by the Sieur
Silvercroon. Besides this point of Commerce, as there have been some complaints
made that certain Vessels laden with Corn, and belonging to the Subjects of
this State, have been taken and carried to Straelsond, and that Count
Conningsmark had taken out their lading to serve for food for his Army, the
Ambassadors of Sweden having been informed of the said complaints by the
Ambassadors of the States General, gave in a Declaration the 18th of July, that
the said action of the Mareshal of Connigsmark could not be reputed any other
than a mere act of necessity, which he then was reduced to, through want of
Victuals and Correspondence; that the parties concerned should be satisfied to
the full, and that he would pass any such Act to that end as should be thought
fit, knowing that such was the King his Masters intention. The same has
likewise bin assured by the Commissary Silvercroon at the Hague, and an extract
has since been delivered of a Letter from the Mareshal de Coningsmark,
containing the like assurances, together with a relation how he had acted, and
that he had paid the Masters of the Ships their Freight. Which things being so,
the Ambassadors of Sweden believed that the States General would have received
all the satisfaction they could possibly desire, and that nothing was wanting
to conclude a Peace betwixt the King their Master, and them, but to prepare
such Articles as are usual almost in all Treaties of Peace, which would be no
hard work for the Ambassadors of both parties to do. But in stead of that, they
are surprised to understand, that there have been very bitter complaints
against Sweden, in the answers that the Ambassadors of the States General gave
on the 26th. of July, and the 7th. of August, to the Memorials of the
Ambassadors of France, and though the Ambassadors of Sweden have heretofore
explained and declared themselves, as is before mentioned, yet they would not
omit giving some proper answer to them, but that having agreed with the
Ambassadors of France, that for the avoiding all sharpness, neither of them
will meddle in things of that nature, they are willing to pass them all over
with silence, and to endeavor something of reality; to which end they repeat
their instances here at Nimeguen, as Monsieur Boreel cannot but know, as well
as at the Hague by the Sieur Silvercroon, that the States General would advance
the Negotiation with Sweden, that the Peace may be concluded at the same time
that it shall be with France, since one cannot be without the other.

And the Ambassadors of Sweden apprehended, that the reiterating their
instances had produced a good effect, since the Sieur Silvercroon sent word
from the Hague, by the last Courrier, That he had been conferred with, and that
the Answer to the Counter-project was ready to be sent to Nimeguen.

But whilst they were in this expectation, the Ambassadors of France inform
them, That but yesterday the Ambassadors of the States General renewed their
complaints against Sweden, for raising difficulties, and that Count Coningsmark
exercised acts of Hostility, Confiscating Ships and Cargo's belonging to the
Subjects of this State; insomuch that the States had more reason to continue
the War, than to think of a Peace with Sweden.

By which the said Ambassadors perceiving with sorrow, that but little
reflection is made upon what they have heretofore advanced, and being also very
certain, that Monsieur Coningsmark has not confiscated any thing belonging to
the Subjects of this State, nor done any acts of Hostility against them, since
they agree to make amends for all; and seeing how lightly the good Offices are
thought on, which the Ambassadors of Sweden have done since they came to
Nimeguen, to further a Peace for the benefit of this State; and even the
endeavors which they have but lately used with his most Christian Majesty, to
facilitate the Evacuation of the Places; do entreat the Ambassadors of his Most
Christian Majesty, to answer and represent to the Ambassadors of the States
General, that they do ill to complain of Sweden, after it has offered so many
facilities, and made so many advances; and consequently to induce them, instead
of exasperating matters, rather to express such readiness and facility on
behalf of the States General, as may reasonably be expected from them, that so
both Parties may receive that satisfaction which they wish for, in the
conclusion of a good Peace. The said Ambassadors of Sweden hope, that the
States General have no intentions of protracting the Negotiation of the Peace
with Sweden, to the end that themselves may be able to make a Separate Peace
with his most Christian Majesty, excluding Sweden; but they think
notwithstanding, that to prevent all obstacles, it were well, if all hopes of
such a Separation were taken away. And therefore they do again desire the
Ambassadors of his most Christian Majesty to renew this Declaration to the
Ambassadors of the States General, since it was upon this prospect, that the
Ambassadors of Sweden advised the Restitution of the Places.

The Treaty made, and passed between the commissioners deputed on behalf of the
King, and those deputed likewise on behalf of the Catholic King, and of the
States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, about the demenour
of the Troops, and Garrisons of both sides, in the said Low Countries, till the
Ratifications of the Treaty of Peace are Exchanged. The 19th. of August, 1678.
IT being necessary to regulate after what manner the Forces shall carry
themselves in the Low Countries, till the Ratification of the Peace, for the
avoiding all Acts of Hostility that may disturb it, and for the ease of the
People on both sides, it is agreed by those underwritten, in pursuance of their
respective Authorities, as follows;

That the day after the Ratification of this present Treaty, all Acts of
Hostility shall cease betwixt the Armies, and that in consequence thereof from
the morrow of the said Ratification, the two Armies shall retire from the
Neighborhood of Mons.

That the Army of the Most Christian King shall march toward Gevries or
Merbepoterie; and that Commanded by the Prince of Orange beyond Havre toward
Nivelle.

That notwithstanding such Troops as formed the Blockade of Mon's, under the
Command of Monsieur du Montal and Monsieur de Quincy, shall not retire on that
same day, but two days after the Ratification of the present Treaty, which will
be the day after the two Armies shall have marched; and till such time as the
said Blockade is raised, the Army Commanded by the Prince of Orange may
continue encamped as aforesaid.

That the Town of Mons shall remain after that in full and perfect Liberty,
that all sorts of Persons, Provisions, and Merchandises may go in and out, as
they do in other Towns under the obedience of Spain.

That as for the Garrisons, six days after the Ratification of this present
Treaty, or sooner, if possible, that is to say as soon as the Convoys can
arrive at each Place, no parties nor detatchments shall make incursions into
the Grounds and Countries of one another, but the Troops and Armies of each
Crown shall abide within the extent of such Lands and Countries as are under
the obedience of each Crown.

That all such Prisoners as shall be taken on either side after the day of the
Ratifying of this present Treaty, shall be restored without ransom; even Horses
also, Cattle, Equipages, and Merchandises, and generally all other things
whatsoever.

That as at the time when the Treaty of Peace shall be executed, or betwixt
this and then, it may be necessary for the Troops of one Crown or it is Allies
to pass into such Lands and Countries as now belong to the other: either side
shall be at Liberty so to do, only for maintaining communication betwixt the
several Places in the Low Countries, and to go thence, without taking any thing
in such Lands and Countries but Forage only, or Sojourning there any longer
than is usual in ordinary marches.

That from the day of the Ratification of this present Treaty, as well the
Subjects of each Crown as those of the States General, shall be at Liberty to
go and come without Pass-Ports within such Lands and Countries as do at present
belong to the Crown or State, of which they are Subjects; and that there shall
be no other need of Pass-Ports than for going from Lands now belonging to one
Crown or State, to such as do at present belong to the other.

That from six days after the Ratification of the present Treaty, the Troops
and Armies of each Crown shall live upon the Lands and Countries of which each
is now in possession, without forraging in one another's Country: it being
understood that the word possession is not meant to comprehend or pass as in
right of possession, such passages and posts as the Armies and Parties have
made or do now make in the places where they are or have been.

That from the day of the Ratification of this Treaty, all extraordinary
demands of Contributions, Cows, Prisoners, and Carriages shall cease on both
sides in one another Country, so as neither party shall be at Liberty to make
such demands upon emergent necessities, but within such Countries as each is in
possession of.

That the Arrears of Contributions for the year that will expire the 16th. of
October next, from those Countries that are actually brought under such
Contributions, shall continue to be exacted on both sides, but in such manner
only as shall be agreed by the Lords Plenipotentiaries at Nimeguen.

That if, contrary to all appearance, any difficulty shall happen as to the
performance of this present agreement, in all or in part, the same shall be
adjusted in a friendly manner, by the Generals, or such as shall be thereto
authorized, without altering this agreement upon any such occasion, or
suffering any recourse to force.

All this the Deputies underwritten have respectively agreed, and have promised
to produce to morrow the Ratifications of the same by Monsieur, the Duke of
Luxemburg, Peer and Marshal of France, Captain of the Garde-du-corps to the
Most Christian King, Commander in chief of his Majesty's Army in Flanders, and
by the Duke de Villa Hermosa Gentleman of the Bedchamber to his Catholic
Majesty, Governor, and Captain General of the Catholic Low Countries.

At the Camp near Mons, the 19th. day of August, 1678. Robert Fagel de
Contamougear.
We approve and Ratify all the Contents of the foregoing Treaty. Montmorgency
Luxemburg. Duke de Villa Hermosa, Conde de Luna.

The Deputy of the United Provinces to the Army underwritten, authorized by his
Highness the Prince of Orange, approves the foregoing Treaty, having been made
in his presence, and with his participation, for so much as it concerns his
said Highness, and the Army and Troops of the Lords the States General under
his Command. De Weed.
His Highness having seen the Convention foregoing, made by virtue of the
authority which he granted, does approve and Ratify the same by these
presents. At the Camp at Roeulx, the 20th. of August, 1678. William Prince of
Orange.

Treaties of Peace and Commerce, Navigation and Marine, betwixt France, and the
States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, concluded at
Nimeguen the 10th. of August, 1678.
LEWIS by the Grace of God, King of France and Navar, to all that shall see
these presents, Greeting. Since our most dear and well-beloved Cousin, the
Sieur Comte D' Estrades, Marshal of France, and Knight of our Orders; our
faithful and well-beloved, the Sieur Colbert, Marquis of Croissi, Counselor in
Ordinary in our Council of State; and our faithful and well-beloved, the Sieur
De Mesmes Comte d' Avaux, Counselor also in our Councils; Our Ambassadors
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries, by virtue of the Plenary Powers which We
had given them, have Concluded, Agreed, and Signed the 10th, of this month at
Nimeguen, with the Here Hierosm van Beverningh, Baron of Teylingenham, Curator
of the University of Leyden, late Counselor and Treasurer General of the
United Provinces of the Low Countries; the Here Wilhem van Nassau Here van
Odyke, Cortgene and first Noble, and Representative of the Nobility in the
States and Council of Zeland, and the Here Wilhem van Haren Griedtman van
Bildt; Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries of our most Dear and
Great Friends the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries,
instructed likewise with full Power, the Treaty of Peace according to the
Tenor ensuing.

In the name of God the Creator: To all present and to come, be it known; that
as during the course of the War that has been stirred for some years betwixt
the Most High, Most Excellent, and Most Mighty Prince Lewis the 14th, by the
grace of God Most Christian King of France and Navar, and the Lords the States
General of the United Provinces, His Majesty always maintained a sincere desire
to give back to the said States his principal friendship, and they all the
sentiments of respect for his Majesty, and of acknowledgment for the
obligations and considerable advantages which they have received from his
Majesty, and the Kings his Predecessors, it is at last come to pass that these
good dispositions, seconded by the powerful Offices of the Most High, Most
Excellent, and Most Mighty Prince, the King of Great Britain, who during these
troublesome times, wherein almost all Christendom has been in War, has not
ceased by his Counsels and good Advertisements to contribute to the public
weal and repose, induced as well his Most Christian Majesty and the said States
General, as also all other the Princes and Potents, that are concerned in the
interest of this present War, to consent that the Town of Nimeguen should be
made choice of for the Treaty of Peace, to which end his Most Christian Majesty
named for his Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries, the Sieur Comte
D' Estrades Marshal of France, and Knight of his Orders, the Sieur Colbert
Knight, Marquess of Croissi Councellor in ordinary in his Counsel of State, and
the Sieur Mesmes Knight, Comte D'Avaux, Councellor also in his Counsels, and
the said States General, the Here Hierosme Van Beverning Baron of Teylingen,
Curator of the University of Leyden, late Councellor and Treasurer General of
the United Provinces, the Here Wilhem van Nassau, Here van Odyke, Cortgene and
first noble, and representative of the nobility in the States and Council of
Zeland, and the Here Wilhem van Haren, Grietman van Bildt, Deputies in their
Assemblies, on the behalf of the States of Holland, Zeland, etc. Which
Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries, duly instructed with the good
intentions of their Masters, were to repair to the said Town of Nimeguen, where
after a mutual communication of their plenary powers, the copies whereof are
inserted word for word at the end of this Treaty, it was agreed upon Conditions
of Peace and Friendship, according to this ensuing Tenor; viz.

I.
There shall be for the future betwixt his Most Christian Majesty and his
Successors Kings of France and Navar, and his Kingdoms on the one part; and the
Lords the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, on the
other part, a good, firm, faithful, and inviolable Peace, and all Acts of
Hostility of what kind soever shall hereafter cease, and be forborne betwixt the
said King, and the said Lords the States General, as well by Sea and other
waters, as by Land, in all their Kingdoms, Countries, Lands, Provinces, and
Seignories, and for all their Subjects and Inhabitans of what Quality or
Condition soever, without exception of Places or Persons.

II.
And if any Prizes are taken on either side, in the Baltcik Sea, or the North
Sea, from Terneuse to the channel's mouth, within the space of four weeks, or
from the said mouth of the channel to the Cape of St. Vincent within the space
of six weeks, and further in the Mediterranian Sea, and as far as the
Aequinoctial, within the space of ten weeks and beyond the Line, and in all
parts of the World within the space of eight months, to be computed from the
day on which the Peace shall be published at Paris and at the Hague, the said
Prizes and the damages that shall happen on either side after the Terms
prefixed, shall be brought to account, and whatever shall have bin taken, shall
be restored, with recompense for the damages that shall have happned thereby.

III.
There shall be moreover betwixt the said King, and the said Lords the States
General, and their Subjects and Inhabitants, mutually, a sincere, firm, and
perpetual friendship, and good correspondence by Sea and Land, in all things
and in all places, within Europe and without, and no resenting of the offenses
or damages that have been received either in time past, or by reason of the
said Wars.

IV.
And in virtue of this Friendship and Correspondence, as well his Majesty as
the said Lords the States General, shall faithfully procure and further the
good and prosperity of one another, by all Support, Aid, Counsel and real
Assistances, upon all occasions, and at all times, and shall not consent for
the future to any Treaties or Negotiations that may be to one another damage:
but shall break them off, and give notice of them to one another with care and
sincerity, as soon as ever they come to their knowledge.

V.
They that have had any of their goods seized and confiscated by reason of the
said War, their Heirs or Assigns of what Condition or Religion soever, shall
enjoy such goods and take them into possession of their own private authority,
and by virtue of this present Treaty, without standing in need to have recourse
to Law, and that notwithstanding any appropriations to the Exchequer,
engagements, gifts in writing, sentences preparatory or definitive given by
default and contumacy in the parties absence, or without their being heard,
Treaties, Accords, and Transactions, and any Renunciations that may have been
made at such transactions, to exclude the right owners from any part of such
goods, and all and every the goods and rights, which according to this present
Treaty shall or ought to be restored on either side to the first Proprietors,
their Heirs and Assigns, may be sold by the said Proprietors, without obtaining
any particular License so to do: and likewise the Proprietors of such Rents as
shall be settled by the Exchequers in lieu of goods sold, as also of such Rents
and Actions as stand on charge in the Exchequers, may respectively dispose of
the Propriety thereof by sale or otherwise, as of their other proper goods.

VI.
And since the Marquisate of Bergenopzome, with all the Rights and Revenues
thereunto appertaining, and generally all the Lands and Goods of Monsieur le
Comte D'Auvergne, Colonel General of the Light Horse of France, that were under
the power of the said States General of the United Provinces, have been seized
and confiscated by reason of the War, to which the present Treaty ought to put
a happy end, it is agreed that the said Sieur Compte D'Auvergene shall be
restored to the possession of the said Marquisate of Bergenopzome, it is
appurtenances and dependances; and also to all the rights, actions, privileges,
usages, and prerogatives that he enjoyed at the time when the War was declared.

VII.
Each shall continue seized of, and shall actually enjoy the Countries, Towns,
Places, Lands, Islands, and Seignories, within Europe and without, which they
now hold and possess, without being disturbed or molested, directly or
indirectly, in any manner whatsoever.

VIII.
But his Most Christian Majesty, willing to give back to the Lords the States
General his Principal Friendship, and to give them a singular proof thereof upon
this occasion, will immediately after the exchange of the Ratifications put
them into possession of the Town of Maestricht, with the Comte of Uronof, and
the Comtez and Countries of Fauquemond, Aalhem, and Rolleduc beyond the Maes,
together with the Villages of Redemption, Banc d' St. Servais, and whatever is
belonging to the said Town.

IX.
The said Lords the States General promise that what ever concerns the exercise
of the Roman Catholic Religion, and such as profess it enjoying their Goods,
shall be re-established and maintained in the said Town of Maestricht and it is
dependances, in the same state and in such manner as was regulated by the
Capitulation made in the year 1632: and that such as shall have been endowed
with any Ecclesiastical goods, Canons Places, Parsonages, Provostships, and
other Benefices, shall continue settled in them and enjoy them without any
contradiction.

X.
His Majesty restoring to the said Lords the States General, the Town of
Maestricht and Countries thereunto belonging, may yet take and carry away all
the Artillery, Powder, Bullets, Provisions, and other Warlike Ammunition, that
shall be found there at the time of it is Restitution; and they that his Majesty
shall have appointed for this purpose, may if they please, make use of the
Boats and Carriages of the Country for two months time: and shall have free
passage by Water and Land for the carrying away the said Ammunition: And the
Governors, Commanders, Officers, and Magistrates of the said Town, shall give
them all the facilities they can for the carriage and conduct of the said
Artillery and Ammunition. Also the Officers, Soldiers, Men of War, and others
that shall leave the said Place, may take thence and carry away all their
moveable Goods; but it shall not be lawful for them to exact any thing from the
inhabitants of the Town of Maestricht or it is neighborhood, nor to do any hurt
to their houses, or carry away any thing belonging to the said inhabitants.

XI.
All Prisoners of War on both sides shall be delivered, without distinction or
exception, and without paying any ransom.

XII.
The raising of contributions demanded by the Governor of the Town of
Maestricht, of the Countries subjected, shall continue for all that shall
become due till the Ratification of the present Treaty, and such Arrears as
shall remain, shall be paid within three months after that, at convenient
times; for which a valuable caution shall be given in some Town within his
Majesty's Dominion.

XIII.
The said Lords the States General have and do promise not only to maintain a
perfect Neutrality, without being at Liberty to assist directly or indirectly
the enemies of France or it is Allies; but also to garrant all such engagements
as Spain shall enter into, by the Treaty that is to be betwixt Their Most
Christian and Catholic Majesty's, and especially that whereby the Catholic
King shall be held to the same Neutrality.

XIV.
If through inadvertence or otherwise there happen any want of due observance
of this present Treaty, or other inconvenience relating thereunto, on the part
of his said Majesty, or of the Lords the States General, and their Successors,
this Peace and Alliance shall remain in full force notwithstanding, so as no
breach of friendship or of good correspondence shall ensue thereupon, but such
contraventions shall be speedily repaired; if they shall be occasioned by any
particular Subjects faults, those Subjects only shall be punished.

XV.
And for the better securing Commerce and Friendship hereafter between the
Subjects of the said King, and those of the States General of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries, it is agreed and accorded, that in case there
shall be in time to come any interruption of friendship, or that a breach shall
happen between the Crown of France, and the said Lords the States General of
the said United Provinces (which God forbid) then six months after such breach
shall always be allowed to the Subjects of both parties, to retire with their
effects, and transport them whithersoever they think fit, which also they shall
be permitted to do: as likewise to sell or transport their goods and movables
with all freedom, so as no hindrance shall be given to them, nor any
proceedings be to seize their effects, much less to secure their Persons.

XVI.
As for the pretenses and interests that concern the Prince of Orange, upon
which there has been a separate Treaty and Agreement by an Act this day Signed,
the said writing and all the Contents of it shall be effectual, and shall be
confirmed, fulfilled and executed according to the Form and Tenor thereof;
neither more nor less than if all it is points in general, and every one of them
in particular, were word for word inserted into this present Treaty.

XVII.
And as his Majesty, and the Lords the States General acknowledge the powerful
Offices that the King of Great Britain has incessantly employed by his
Counsels and good Advertisements for the public Weal and Repose; so it is
agreed on both sides, that his said Majesty of Great Britain, and his
Kingdoms, be comprehended by name within this present Treaty, according to the
best form that may be.

XVIII.
Within this present Treaty of Peace and Alliance, shall be comprehended on the
part of the said Most Christian King, the King of Sweden, the Duke of Holstein,
the Bishop of Strasburg, and Prince William of Furstemburg, as interessed in
the present War: And there shall likewise be comprehended, if they will
themselves, the Prince and Crown of Portugal, the Duke and Seignorie of Venice,
the Duke of Savoy, the Thirteen Cantons of the Ligue-Switzers and their Allies,
the Elector of Bavaria, Duke John Frederick of Brunswick Hanover, and all
Kings, Potentats, Princes, and States, Towns, and particular Persons, to whom
his Most Christian Majesty shall grant at their request, to be comprehended
within this Treaty on his part.

XIX.
And on the part of the Lords the States General, the King of Spain, and all
other their Allies, that within six weeks, to be computed from the exchange of
the Ratifications, shall declare their acceptance of the Peace, as also the
Thirteen laudable Cantons of the Ligue-Switzers and their Allies and
Confederates, the Town of Embden, and moreover all Kings, Princes, and States,
Towns, and particular Persons, to whom they shall grant at their request, to be
comprehended on their part.

XX.
The said King, and the said Lords the States General do consent, that the King
of Great Britain, as Mediator, and all other Potentats and Princes, that shall
be willing to enter into the like engagement, may give his Majesty and the said
States General their promise, and tie themselves to garrant the performance of
all that is contained in this present Treaty.

XXI.
This present Treaty shall be Ratified and Approved by the said King, and the
said Lords the States General, and each parties Letters of Ratification shall
be delivered in proper due form within the Term of six weeks, or sooner if it
may be, reckoning from the day of Signing.

In witness whereof, We the aforesaid Ambassadors of his Majesty, and of the
Lords the States General, by virtue of our respective powers, have on their
behalfs Signed these presents with our ordinary Seals, and have set our Coats
of Arms to the same:

At Nimeguen, the 10th. of August, in the year of our Lord, 1678. Le Ma' D'
Estrades. H. Beverning. Colbert. W. van Nassaw. De Mesmes. W. Haren.

WE liking well the aforesaid Treaty of Peace in all and every the points and
Articles therein contained and declared, have for our Selves, our Heirs,
Successors, Kingdoms, Countries, Lands, Lordships, and Subjects, accepted,
approved, ratified, and confirmed; and do Accept, Approve, Ratify, and Confirm
the same, and do promise upon the Word and Faith of a King, to keep and observe
the whole inviolably, without ever acting to the contrary directly or
indirectly, in any sort or kind whatsoever, and thereto we oblige and morgage
all and every our goods that are or shall be. In witness whereof, we have
Signed these presents with our own hand, and have made our Seal to be set
thereto. Given at St. Germain en Lay, the 18th. day of August, in the year of
Grace, one thousand six hundred seventy and eight, and of our Reign the thirty
sixth. Signed Lewis, By the King.
And underneath, Arnauld.

The Ratification of the Treaty of Peace, by the States General.
THe States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries. To all that
shall see these presents, Greeting. Having seen and examined the Treaty of
Peace and Friendship, made and concluded at Nimeguen, the 10th. day of August,
1678. By the Sieur Comte D' Estrades, Marshal of France, and Knight of the
Orders of the Most Christian King, the Sieur Colbert, Marquess of Croissy,
Counselor in ordinary in his Council of State, and the Sieur de Mesmes, Comte
d'Avaux, Counselor likewise in his Councels, Ambassadors Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiaries of his Most Christian Majesty at the meeting at Nimeguen, in
the name and on the behalf of his said Majesty; and by the Here Hierosme de
Beverning, Baron of Teylingham, Curator of the University at Leyden, late
Counselor and Treasurer General of the United Provinces, the Here Wilhem van
Nassaw, Here van Odyke, Cortgene, etc. first noble and representative of the
Order of the Nobility in the States and at the Council of Zeland, and the Here
Wilhem van Haren, Grietman du Bildt, Deputies in our Assembly on behalf of the
States of Holland, Zeland and Friesland, our Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries
at the said Assembly at Nimeguen, in our Name and on our behalf, by virtue of
their full respective powers; Having likewise seen and examined the Letter
which our said Ambassadors and Plenipotenries wrote to the said Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries of his Most Christian Majesty, the sixteenth day of the said
month of August; and the answer that the said Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries
of his said Majesty returned thereunto, concerning the explanation of the
thirteenth Article of the said Treaty; as also the Act of the 15th. of
September this present year, by which his said Majesty declared his good liking
of the explanation which his said Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries made upon
the thirteenth Article of the said Treaty of Peace, of which Treaties, Letters,
Acts and Powers, the Tenor is as follows:

In the Name of God the Creator. To all, etc. page. And forasmuch as the
Contents of the said Treaty import that the Letters of Ratification shall be
delivered on both sides in due and proper form within six weeks, or sooner if
it may be, from the day of Signing; We willing to give proofs of our sincerity,
and to discharge the promise which our Ambassadors made for us, have agreed,
approved, and Ratified the said Treaty, and every Article thereof above
transcribed, and do Agree to, Approve, Ratify, and Confirm the same by these
presents, promising Faithfully and Sincerely to keep, maintain, and inviolably
to observe the same in every point, according to the Form and Tenor thereof;
without ever acting contrary thereunto directly or indirectly, in any manner or
kind whatsoever. In Witness whereof, we have made these presents to be Signed
by the President of our Assembly, and Countersigned by our Principal Register;
and our great Seal to be put thereto.

Given at the Hague, the 19th. day of Sept. in the year, 1678. D. van Wyngaerd.
By order of the said Lords the States General. H. Fagel.

Here follows the Tenor of the Power of his Majesty's said Ambassadors.
LEWIS by the grace of God King of France and Navar; To all that shall see
these presents, Greeting. As we wish for nothing with greater ardency, then to
see the War that at present afflicts Christendom, end in a good Peace; and that
by the Care and Mediation of our most dear and most beloved Brother, the King
of Great Britain, the Town of Nimeguen has been agreed upon by all the parties
for the place of Conference: We out of this same desire, to put a stop as far
as in us lies, to the desolation of so many Provinces, and the shedding of so
much Christian blood, Declare that confiding entirely in the Experience,
Ability, and Faithfulness of our most dear and well beloved Cosen, the Sieur
Comte d' Estrades, Marshal of France and Knight of our Orders, of our faithful
and well beloved, the Sieur Colbert Marquess de Croissy, Counselor in ordinary
in our Council of State; and of our faithful and well beloved, the Sieur de
Mesmes Comte d' Avaux, Counselor also in our Councels, by reason of the
advantageous trial that we have made of them in diverse Embassies and
considerable Employments, wherein we have entrusted them, both within our
Kingdom and without; For these reasons and other good considerations us
thereunto moving, We have Appointed, Ordained, and Deputed, and by these
presents Signed with our hand, do Appoint, Ordain, and Depute the said Sieurs,
Marshal d' Estrades, Marquess de Croissy, and Comte d' Avaux, and have given
unto them, and do hereby give full Power, Commission, and special Order to
repair to the Town of Nimeguen, in quality of our Ambassadors Extraordinary and
our Plenipotentiaries for the Peace, and to Confer there, either directly or by
the interposition of Ambassadors Mediators, respectively received and agreed
to; with all Ambassadors and Ministers of our most Dear and great Friends, the
States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, and of their
Allies; being all qualified with sufficient Powers, and there to Treat upon
means for the determining and appeasing the differences that cause the War at
this day; And our said Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries all three together, or
two of them in absence of the third, through sickness or other impediment, or
one of them in absence of the other two, in like case of sickness or other
impediment, may agree and conclude thereon, and Sign a good and sure Peace, and
generally may do, Negociate, Promise and Agree whatever they shall think
necessary for the said Peace, with the same authority that we should do or
might do, if we were there present in Person; although some things should
happen that might require more particular instructions than are contained in
these presents. Promising on the Faith and Word of a King, to hold firm and
fulfill whatever by the said Sieurs, Marshal de' Estrades, Marquess de Croissy,
and Comte d' Avauz, or by two of them in the absence of the third, through
sickness or other impediment, or by one only in absence of the other two, in
like case of sickness or other impediment, shall have been stipulated, promised
and agreed, and to cause our Letters of Ratification to be dispatched within
such time as they shall have promised in our Name to exhibit them. For such is
our pleasure; In witness whereof we have caused our Seal to be set to these
presents.

Given at St. Germain in Lay, the Twenty third day of December, in the year of
Grace, one thousand six hundred seventy and five, and of Our Reign the Three
and thirtieth. Signed Lewis, and upon the fould, by the King, Arnauld; and
sealed with the great Seal in yellow Wax.

The Tenor of the Power of the said Ambassadors of the States General of the
United Provinces.
THe States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, to all that
shall see these presents, Greeting. As we desire nothing with greater ardency
than to see the War that at this present oppresses Christendom, end in a good
Peace, and since by the care and mediation of the Most Illustrious King of
Great Britain, the Town of Nimeguen has been agreed to by all parties for a
place of Conference, We desiring as far as in us lies, to put a stop to the
desolation of so many Provinces, and the shedding so much Christian blood, have
been willing to contribute thereto whatever lies in our power, and to that end
have deputed to that Assembly some Persons of our own body, who have given
manifold proof as well of their knowledge and experience in public Affairs, as
of their affection for the good of our State, and since the Heeren Hierosme van
Beverning, Baron of Teylingham, Curator of the University of Leyden, late
United Provinces, Wilhem van Nassaw, Here van Odyke, Cortgene, etc. first noble
and representative of the Order of the Nobility in the States Council of
Zeland, and Wilhem van Haren, Grietman van Bildt, Deputed to our Assembly on
the behalf of the States of Holland, Zeland and Friezland, have Signalized
themselves in many important employments, in our service, wherein they have
given instances of their fidelity, presence of mind, and readiness in the
managment of Affairs. For these causes and other good considerations us
thereunto moving, we have appointed, ordained, and deputed, the said Heeren Van
Beverning, Van Odyke, and Van Haren, and do appoint, ordain, and depute them by
these presents; and have given them, and do hereby give them, full Power,
Commission, and special Order to repair to the Town of Nimeguen, in quality of
our Ambassadors Extraordinary and our Plenipotentiaries for the Peace, and
there to Confer, either directly or by the interposition of Ambassadors
Mediators, received and agreed to respectively, with the Ambassadors
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries of his Most Christian Majesty and his
Allies, being qualified with sufficient powers; and there to Treat upon means
for the determining and appeasing the differences that occasion the War at this
day; and our aforesaid Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries all three together, or
two of them in absence of the third by reason of sickness or other impediment,
or one only in absence of the other two, in like case of sickness or other
impediment, may agree and conclude thereupon, and Sign a good and sure Peace,
and generally may act, negotiate, promise and agree what ever they shall think
necessary in order to the said Peace, and generally may do whatever we our
selves might do, if we were there present, even in such things as might require
more particular power and instructions than are contained in these presents:
And we do promise truly and faithfully to like well and hold for firm and
stable whatever, by the said Heeren our Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, or
by two of them in case of sickness, absence, or other impediment of the third,
or by one only in absence of the other two, on the like occasion of sickness
or other impediment, shall have been stipulated, promised and agreed, and to
cause to be dispatched our Letters of Ratification within such time as they
shall have promised in our name to exhibit them.

Given at the Hague in our Assembly, under our great Seal, Signed by the
President, and with the sign of our Principal Register, this fourth day of
January, in the year one thousand six hundred seventy and six, Signed, J.
Bootsma. And on the fould, By Order of the said Lords the States General.
Signed, H. Fagel. And sealed with the great Seal with red Wax.

A separate Article concerning the Prince of Orange.
LEWIS by the grace of God, King of France and Navar, to all that shall see
these presents, greeting. Since our most dear and wel-beloved Cosen, the Sieur
Comte d' Estrades, Marshal of France and Knight of our Orders, our faithful and
wel-beloved, the Sieur Colbert, Marquess of Croissy, Counselor in ordinary in
our Council of State, and our faithful and wel-beloved, the Sieur de Mesmes
Comte d' Avaux, Counselor also in our Councels, our Ambassadors Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiaries, by virtue of the plenary powers which we had given them,
have Concluded, Agreed, and Signed, on the tenth day of this month at Nimeguen,
with the Sieur Hierosene van Beverning, Baron of Teylingham, Curator of the
University at Leyden, heretofore Counselor and Treasurer General of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries, the Sieur Wilhem van Nassaw, Here van Odyke,
Cortgene and first noble and representative of the Nobility in the States and
at the Council of Leyden, and the Sieur Wilhem van Haren Grietman van Bildt,
Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries of our most Dear and great
Friends, the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries,
qualified likewise with plenary powers, this Article in Tenor as follows;
viz.

As in pursuance of the War which for some years has happened betwixt the Most
Christian King, and the States General of the United Provinces of the
Low Countries, his Majesty caused to be seized all things belonging to the
Prince of Orange, as well the Principality of Orange as other his Lands and
Seignories lying in France, and granted the Revenues thereof to Monsieur the
Comte d' Auvengne, who enjoys the same at present, and since by the grace of
God a Peace is settled by the Treaty this day concluded, and so all the angry
effects of War ought to cease, his Majesty has promised to the said Prince,
and does promise by this separate Act, that immediately after the Ratifications
exchanged, his Majesty will take off the said Seizure, and cause the said
Prince to be restored to the possession of the said Principality, and of the
Lands which belong to him in France, Franche Comte, Charleroy, Flanders, and
other Countries depending upon his Majesty's Rule, and to all his rights,
actions, privilege, usages, and prerogatives, in such estate and manner as he
enjoyed the same, till he was dispossessed by reason of the present War.

Nimeguen, the 10th. day of the month of August, in the year, 1678. Marshal D'
Estrades. H. Beverning. Colbert. W. de Nassaw. De Mesmes. W. Haren.

WE well liking the separate Article aforesaid in all and every point thereof,
have by these presents Signed with our hand, allowed, approved, and ratified,
and do allow, approve, and Ratify the same, promising upon the Faith and Word
of a King, to fulfill, observe, and cause to be observed, the same, truly and
faithfully, without ever suffering any thing to be acted directly or indirectly
to the contrary thereof, for any cause or upon any occasion whatsoever. In
witness whereof we have Signed these presents with our hand, and have caused
our Seal to be put thereto. Given at St. Germain in Lay, the 18th. day of
August, in the year of Grace, One thousand six hundred seventy eight, and of
our Reign the Thirty sixth. Signed, Lewis, and underneath was Signed, By the
King, Arnauld.

The Ratification of the separate Article concerning the Prince of Orange, by
the States General.
THe States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries. To all that
shall see these presents, Greeting. Since besides the Treaty of Peace made and
concluded at Nimeguen on the 10th. day of the month of August, 1678. There was
likewise made a separate Article by the Sieur Comte d' Estrades, Marshal of
France and Knight of the Orders of the Most Christian King, the Sieur Colbert,
Marquess of Croissy, Counselor in ordinary in his Council of State, and the
Sieur de Mesmes Comte d' Avaux, Counselor likewise in his Councels,
Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries of his Most Christian Majesty
at the Assembly at Nimeguen, in the name and on the behalf of his said Majesty,
and by the Sieur Hierosme de Beverning, Baron of Teylingham, Curator of the
University of Leyden, heretofore Counselor and Treasurer General of the United
Provinces, the Sieur Wilhem van Nassaw, Here van Odyke, Cortgene and first
Noble, and representative of the Order of the Nobility in the States and at the
Council of Zeland, and the Sieur Wilhem van Haren, Grietman van Bildt, deputies
in our Assembly on the behalf of the States of Holland, Zeland, and Friezland,
our Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries at the said Assembly at Nimeguen, in our
name and on our behalf by virtue of their respective plenary powers, of which
separate Article, the Tenor is as follows; viz.

A separate Article concerning the Prince of Orange, since in pursuance of the
War, etc. page.
We have Agreed, Approved, and Ratified, and do by these presents Agree,
Approve, and Ratify the said separate Article, and that it be inserted into
the aforesaid Treaty of Peace and Friendship, promising to keep, maintain, and
inviolably to observe all that is therein contained, without ever acting
directly or indirectly to the contrary, under any pretense whatsoever. In
witness whereof we have caused these presents to be Signed by the President of
our Assembly, and Countersigned by our principal Register, and our great Seal
to be set thereto.

Given at the Hague, the 19th. day of September. 1678. D. van Wyngaerd.
By Order of the said Lords the States General. H. Fagel.

A Treaty of Commerce, Navigation, and Marine, betwixt France and the States
General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries. Concluded at Nimeguen,
the 10th. of August, 1678.
LEWIS by the grace of God, King of France and Navar, To all such as shall see
these presents, greeting. Since our most dear and wel-beloved Cosen, the Sieur
Comte d' Estrades, Marshal of France, Knight of our Orders, our faithful and
wel-beloved, the Sieur Colbert, Marquess of Croissy, Counselor in ordinary in
our Council of State, and our faithful and wel-beloved the Sieur de Mesmes,
Comte d' Avaux, Counselor also in our Councels, our Ambassadors Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiaries, by virtue of the plenary powers which we had given them,
have Concluded, Agreed, and Signed, on the tenth day of this month in the Town
of Nimeguen, with the Here Hierosme van Beverning, Baron of Teylingham, Curator
of the University at Leyden, heretofore Counselor and Treasurer General of the
United Provinces of the Low Countries, the Here Wilhem van Nassaw, Here van
Odyke, Cortgene and first Noble, and representative of the Nobility in the
States and Council of Zeland, and the Here Wilhem van Haren, Grietman van
Bildt, Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries of our most Dear and
great Friends, the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries,
instructed likewise with plenary powers, a Treaty of Commerce, Navigation and
Marine, in Tenor as follows; viz.

The Treaty of Peace which has this day been concluded betwixt the most
Christian King and the Lords the States General of the United Provinces,
putting an end to all the Subjects of discontent, which for some time had
altered the affection which his Majesty, following the example of the Kings his
Predecessors, has always had for their good and prosperity; and the said Lords
the States General entering again into the same desire, which they have
heretofore testified for the greatness of France, and into sentiments of a
sincere acknowledgment for the obligations and considerable advantages which
they have heretofore received from it, there is reason to believe that this
good understanding betwixt his Majesty and the States General can never be
disturbed. But as his Majesty will not omit any thing that may strengthen it,
and the said States General being less desirous to perpetuate it, have thought
that there was no better and more certain means than to establish a free and
perfect correspondence between the Subjects on both Sides; and to this end to
regulate their particular interests in matters of Commerce, Navigation and
Marine, by the most proper Laws and Conventions for preventing all
inconveniences that might weaken the said good correspondence; his Majesty
aforesaid, to satisfy the desire of the said States, has ordained the Sieur
Comte d' Estrades, Marshal of France, and Knight of his Orders, the Sieur
Colbert, Marquess of Croissy, Counselor in ordinary in his Council of State,
and the Sieur de Mesmes, Comte d' Avaux, Counselor also in his Counsels, to be
his Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries at the Assembly of
Nimeguen; and the said Lords the States General, the Here Hierosme van
Beverning, Baron of Teylingham, Curator of the University at Leyden, late
Counselor and Treasurer General of the United Provinces, the Here Wilhem van
Nassaw, Here van Odyke, Cortgene and first Noble, and representative of the
Order of the Nobility in the States and Council of Zeland, and the Here Wilhem
van Haren, Grietman van Bildt, deputed to their Assembly on behalf of the
States of Holland, Zeland and Friezland, to confer and agree by virtue of their
powers respectively to be produced, the copy whereof is here underwritten, upon
a Treaty of Commerce and Navigation, in manner as follows; viz.

I.
His Majesty's Subjects and those of their Lordships the States General of the
United Provinces of the Low Countries, shall mutually enjoy the same freedom in
matters of Commerce and Navigation, that they ever enjoyed before this War,
throughout all Kingdoms, States and Provinces of either party.

II.
And consequently they shall not exercise for the future any manner of
Hostilities or Violence, the one against the other, neither by Sea nor Land,
nor in Rivers, Roads, nor Sweetwaters, in any name or under any pretense
whatsoever; neither may his Majesty's Subjects take any Commissions for
Privateers, or Letters of reprisal from any Princes or States at enmity with
the said Lords the States General, much less molest or endammage them in any
sort, by virtue of such Commissions or Letters of reprisal, nor so much as go
to Sea with them, on pain of being prosecuted and punished as Pirates. Which
shall reciprocally be observed by the Subjects of the United Provinces, with
relation to his Majesty's Subjects; and to this end whenever and as often as
it shall be required on either side, there shall be published and renewed
within such Lands as are under his said Majesty's obdience and within the
United Provinces, most express and most precise Prohibitions to make use in any
sort whatsoever of such Commissions, or Letters of reprisal, on the pain above
mentioned, which shall severely be put in execution against the offenders,
besides a full restitution which they shall be bound to make to such as they
shall any wise have endammaged.

III.
And the better to obviate all such inconveniences as might happen by reason
of prizes taken through inadvertence or otherwise, and especially in places
remote, it has been agreed and accorded, If any prizes shall be taken on either
side in the Baltic Sea, or the North Sea, from Terneuse in Norway, to the
channels mouth, within the space of four weeks, or from the mouth of the said
channel to the Cape of St. Vincent, within the space of fix weeks, or beyond
that within the Mediterranian Sea, and as far as the Equinoctial, within the
space of ten weeks, or beyond the Line and in all other parts of the World,
within the space of eight months, to be computed from the publication of this
present Treaty, such prizes as shall be taken and damage done on either side,
after the times prefixed, shall be brought to account, and whatever shall have
been taken shall be restored, with recompense for all the damage thereby
sustained.

IV.
All Letters of mark and reprisal that heretofore may have been granted for any
cause whatsoever, are declared void: nor may any be granted hereafter by either
of the said Allies, in prejudice of the others Subjects, but only in case of
manifest denial of Justice, which shall not be supposed to be, unless the
request of the party that demands Letters of reprisal be communicated to the
Minister of the State, against whose Subjects such Letters ought to be granted,
that shall be upon the place, to the end that in four months time or sooner, if
may be, he may either inform himself to the contrary, or procure a restitution
of what shall be due by Law.

V.
Neither shall the private Subjects of his Majesty be liable to actions, or
their Persons or Goods to arrests and seizures, for any debt that may be owing
by his Majesty, nor the private Subjects of the said Lords the States General,
for the public debts of the said States.

VI.
The Subjects and Inhabitants of the Countries under his Majesty's obedience
and of the States General, shall live, converse and frequent with one another
in all good friendship and correspondence, and shall enjoy freedom of Commerce
and Navigation throughout one another Countries in Europe, for all sorts of
Merchandises and Wares, the Traffic and Transportation whereof is not
generally prohibited to all, as well Subjects as Forreiners, by the several
Laws and Ordinances of each State.

VII.
And to this end his Majesty's Subjects and those of their said Lordships the
States General, may freely frequent with their Marchandifes and Ships, the
Countries, Lands, Towns, Ports, Places, and Rivers of each State, may bring
thither and sell there to all Persons indefinitely, may buy, traffic and
transport all sorts of Merchandises, the Importation and Exportation whereof
shall not be Prohibited, both to all his Majesty's Subjects and those of the
said Lords the States General; neither may this mutual Liberty be prohibited,
limited or restrained by any privilege, grant, or any particular concession,
neither shall either party be permitted to grant to their own Subjects any
immunities, benefits, gratuitous concessions, or any other advantages besides
those granted to the Subjects of the other party, or to their prejudice,
neither shall the Subjects on either side be bound to pay greater or other
duties, charges, payments or impositions whatsoever upon their Persons, Goods,
Wares, Ships or Freights, directly or indirectly, by any name or under any
title or pretense whatsoever, other than such as shall be paid by the proper
and natural Subjects of either party.

VIII.
Ships of War belonging to either party shall always find the Roads, Rivers,
Ports and Havens free and open for them to Sail in and out, and lay at anchor
as long as they shall have occasion, without being liable to be searched; but
with charge nevertheless to use this freedom with discretion, and not to give
any subject of jealousy by a too long and affected stay, nor otherwise, to the
Governors of the said Places and Ports, to whom the Captains of the said Ships
shall declare the cause of their arrival and of their stay there.

IX.
His Majesty's Ships of War and those of the Lords the States General and of
their Subjects, that shall be fitted out for War, may with all freedom conduct
such prizes as they shall have taken from their Enemies where they think good,
without being tied to any duties, either of the Lords Admirals, or of the
Admiralty, or any other; and so likewise that the said Ships, or the said,
Prizes coming within his Majesty's Havens or Ports, or those of the said Lords
the States General, shall not be liable to be stopped or seized, nor the
Officers of the several Places have power to enquire into the validity of the
said prizes, but that they may go out, and be freely conducted, and with all
freedom conveyed to the Places where the Captains of such Ships of War by
virtue of their Commissions shall be obliged to have them forthcoming. And on
the other hand there shall be no refuge nor retreat allowed within their Ports
and Havens, to such as shall have taken any prizes from his Majesty's Subjects,
or those of the said Lords the States General; but if any such shall be driven
in there by stress of weather or dangers of the Sea, they shall be sent out
again with all possible haste.

X.
The Subjects of the said Lords the States General shall not be accounted
Aubains in France, and consequently shall be exempted from the Aubain Law, and
may dispose of their goods by will, gift or otherwise: and their Heirs,
Subjects of the said States, as well living in France as elsewhere, may possess
themselves of their Estates, even though they died intestate, and that without
purchasing Letters of naturalization; and so as the effect of this grant shall
not be liable to be drawn in question or impeded upon pretense of any right or
prerogative of Provinces, Cities, or private Persons, likewise the Subjects of
the said Lords the States may without such Letters of naturalization, settle
themselves in the Towns of his Majesty's Kingdom, for Commerce and Traffic,
but so as not to be capable of acquiring the freedom of such Towns, without
having obtained his Majesty's Letters of naturalization in due form: and the
inhabitants of the United Provinces shall be treated generally in all things
and in all places as favorably as his Majesty's true and natural born
Subjects: and particularly they shall not be liable to such taxes as may be
laid upon strangers. And all contained in this present Article shall be
observed within the Countries that are subject to the said Lords the States,
with relation to his Majesty's Subjects.

XI.
Vessels laden belonging to either of the said Allies, sailing by the coasts of
the other, if they shall be driven into any Road or Port by storm or otherwise,
shall not be constrained to unlade, or to utter their Merchandise or any part
thereof, nor bound to pay any duties, but only when they shall unlade
voluntarily and of their own accord.

XII.
Masters of Ships, their Pilots, Officers, Soldiers, Mariners and other
Seamen, the Vessels themselves, nor the Wares and Merchandises wherewith they
are Laden, shall be liable to be seized or arrested, by virtue of any general
or particular order of any whosoever, nor for any cause or upon any occasion
whatsoever, no not under pretense for the preservation and defense of the
State: and generally it shall not be lawful to take any thing from the Subjects
of either party without the owners consent, and without payment of what shall
be required. Wherein nevertheless it is not understood that such seisures or
arrests shall be comprised as shall be made by order and authority of Law, and
in the ordinary methods, for lawful debts, contracts or other legal causes, for
which there shall be any proceeding by due course of Law.

XIII.
All the Subjects and Inhabitants of France, and of the United Provinces, may
with all safety and freedom sail with their Vessels and traffic with their
Merchandises, without any distinction to be made who are the proprietors, from
their own Ports, Kingdoms and Provinces, and also from the Ports and Kingdoms
of other States or Princes, to their Countries who are already, or hereafter
may be declared enemies as well to France as to the United Provinces, or either
of them. As also the said Subjects and Inhabitants may with the same safety and
freedom sail with their Vessels, and traffic with their Merchandises, without
any distinction to be made who are the proprietors, from the Places Ports and
Roads of such as are enemies to both or one of the said parties, without
contradiction or disturbance from any whosoever, not only directly from such
places at enmity to a place neuter, but also from one enemies Country to
another, whether under the jurisdiction of one and the same Sovereign, or of
several.

XIV.
This Transportation and Traffic shall extend to all sorts of Merchandises,
except contrabann'd Goods.

XV.
Within this kind of contraband Merchandises are only understood to be
comprised all sorts of Firearms, and their accoutrements, as Cannons, Muskets,
Mortarpieces, Petars, Fireballs, Grenades, Sausages, Barrels of Pitch,
Carriages, Pitch-Forks, Bandaliers, Powder, Match, Saltpeter, Bullets, Pikes,
Swords, Head-pieces, Casques, Cuirasses, Halberts, Javelins, Horses, Saddles,
Cases for Pistols, Belts, and other accoutrements for War.

XVI.
Within this kind of Contrabann'd Merchandises shall not be comprised Wheat,
corn, and other grain, Beans, Oil, Wine, Salt, nor generally whatever serves
for nourishment and sustenance of life; but they shall remain free as other
Merchandises and Wares, uncomprised within the foregoing Article, and it shall
be lawful to transport them, even to places at enmity with their said Lordships
the States, except to Towns and Places besieged, blocked up or invested.

XVII.
For the putting whereof in execution, it is agreed to be in manner following,
viz. That the Ships and Barks with Merchandise belonging to his Majestics
Subjects, having entered into any Haven of the said Lords the States, and
intending to pass thence to those of the enemies aforesaid, shall be obliged
only to show to the Officers of the Havens of the said Lords the States, from
whence they shall depart, their Pass-ports, containing the particulars of their
Ships burden, attested and marked under the ordinary and known Seal and Sign
of the Officers of the Admiralty of the places from whence they first loosed,
and declare to what place they are bound, all in the ordinary and customary
form. After which exhibition of their Pass-ports, in manner aforesaid, they
shall not be liable to be molested, searched, detained, nor retarded in their
Voyages, upon any pretense whatsoever.

XVIII.
The same shall be observed with relation to such French Ships and Barks, as
shall come within any roads of Lands under the obedience of the said Lords the
States, without intending to enter into any Haven, or entering in, without
intending to unlade or break their bulk; which Vessels shall not be bound to
give account of their cargoes, unless there shall be some suspicion, of their
carrying to the enemies of the said Lords the States, any Contrabann'd goods,
as aforesaid.

XIX.
And in case of manifest suspicion, the said Subjects shall be obliged to show
within the Ports, their Pass-ports, in manner aforesaid.

XX.
If they shall have entered into any Roads, or shall be met upon the High-Sea,
by any Ships of the said Lords the States, or of Privateers their Subjects,
such Ships of the United Provinces, for avoiding all disorder, shall not
approach within Cannon-shot of the French, but may send their small Boat or
Shallop on board the said French Ships or Barks, with two or three men only, to
whom the Masters of the French Ships shall show the Passports, and Letters of
Sea, in manner aforesaid, according to the formulary for the said Letters of
Sea, that shall be inserted at the end of this Treaty; by which Pass-ports and
Letters of Sea, may appear not only the Ships burden, but also the place of
abode and residence, as well of the Master or owner, as of the Ship it self; to
the end that by these two means it may be known whether they carry any
Contrabann'd Merchandises, and the quality as well of the said Ship as of it is
Master and owner, may sufficiently appear; to which Pass-ports and Letters of
Sea, full credit and belief shall be given. And that the validity of them may
the better appear, and that they may not in any sort be falsified or
counterfeited, certain marks and counter-scriptions shall be given both by his
Majesty, and by the said Lords the States General.

XXI.
And in case any such Merchandises and Wares, as are above declared to be
Contrabann'd and Prohibited, shall, by the means aforesaid, be found within the
said French Vessels and Barks bound for Havens, belonging to enemies of the
said Lords the States, they shall be taken out, condemned and confiscated by
the Judges of the Admiralty in the United Provinces, or other competent Judges;
but so as the Ship and Bark, or other Goods, Merchandises and Wares found
therein, being free and permitted, may not therefore be seized in any manner,
nor confiscated.

XXII.
It is moreover accorded and agreed, that whatever shall be found laden by his
Majesty's Subjects, in any Ship belonging to the enemies of the said Lords the
States, though not being Contrabann'd goods, shall be confiscated, together
with all that shall be found in such Ship, without exception or reserve; but on
the other hand also, whatever shall be, and be found in Ships belonging to the
Subjects of the Most Christian King, shall be free and affranchised, though the
lading, or part thereof, belong to the enemies of the said Lords the States,
except Contraband goods, concerning which, such regulation shall be observed,
as has been ordered in the foregoing Articles. And for the more particular
clearing of this Article, it is moreover accorded and agreed, in case it shall
happen, that both the said parties, or but one of them, shall be engaged in
War, that the goods belonging to the Subjects of the other, and laden on board
their Vessels that are enemies to both, or either, shall not in any wise be
confiscated, by reason, or under pretense of being embarked in an enemy's
Vessel; and this same shall be observed not only when such Wares shall have
been shipped, before the Declaration of the War, but even after such Declaration;
provided that it be within the times and spaces following, viz. If they shall
have been shipped within the Baltic Sea, or the North Sea, from Terneuse in
Norway, to the mouth of the channel, within the space of four weeks, or from
the channels mouth to the Cape of St. Vincent, within the space of six weeks,
and from thence in the Mediterranian Sea, and as far as the Aequinoctial,
within the space of ten weeks, and beyond the Line, and in all parts of the
World, within the space of eight months, to be computed from the publication of
this present Treaty. So that the Merchandises and goods of Subjects and
Inhabitants, shipped in such Vessels, belonging to enemies, during the said
Terms, and within the extents aforesaid, may not in any wise be confiscated, by
reason of their being on board such enemies Vessel, but shall be restored to
the proprietors without delay, unless they shall have been put on board after
the expiration of the said Terms. And yet it shall in no wise be permitted to
transport to enemies Ports such Contrabann'd goods, as shall be found on board
such enemies Vessels; though they be restored for the reason aforesaid. And as
it has been ruled in what has gone before, that a free Ship shall affranchise
the Wares that are on board it, it is moreover accorded and agreed, that this
freedom shall extend to such Persons likewise, as shall be in free Ships; in so
much that though they be enemies to both parties, or to one of them, yet being
found in a free Ship, they may not be taken thence, unless they be Soldiers,
and actually in the Enemies service.

XXIII.
All the Subjects and Inhabitants of the said United Provinces, shall
reciprocally enjoy the same rights, liberties, and exemptions, in their
Traffic and Commerce within his Majesty's Ports, Roads, Seas, and Estates,
which it has but now been said, that his Majesty's Subjects shall enjoy in
those of the said Lords the States, and on the High Sea, it being to be
understood, that the equality shall be mutual in all respects on both sides,
even though hereafter the said Lords the States should be in Peace, Friendship
and Neutrality, with any Kings, Princes, or States, that should become enemies
to his said Majesty, yet each party shall reciprocally adhere to the Conditions
and Restrictions, expressed in the Articles of this present Treaty, which
concern Traffic and Commerce.

XXIV.
And the better to assure the Subjects of the said Lords the States, that no
violence shall be offered to them by the said Ships of War, all Captains of the
Kings Ships, and other his Majesty's Subjects, shall be forbidden to molest or
endamage them in any thing whatsoever, on pain of being liable in their Persons
and Estates; for such damages sustained, and to be sustained, till due
Restitution and Reparation made.

XXV.
And for this reason, each Captain and Privateer shall be obliged for the
future, before their departure, to enter good and solvent bail, before
competent Judges, in the sum of Fifteen thousand Livres tournois, to answer
each for all such misdemeanors, as they shall commit in their Voyages, and for
the contraventions of their Captains and Officers to this present Treaty, and
to his Majesty's Ordinances and Edicts, which shall be published by virtue, and
in pursuance of what is hereby regulated; on pain that their Commissions and
Licenses shall become null and void; which thing the Subjects of the said Lords
the States General shall do in like manner.

XXVI.
If it should happen, any French Captain to take a Vessel laden with such
Contrabann'd goods, as a foresaid, such Captains may not open or break the
Coffers, Mails, Bundles, Bags, Tuns, and other Cases, or Transport, Sell, or
Exchange, or otherwise alienate them, unless they shall have been landed in
presence of the Judges of the Admiralty, and after an Inventory made by them of
the said Merchandises found in such Vessels: unless the said Contrabann'd goods
making but part of the Lading, the Master of the Ship, think good and agree to
deliver the said Contrabann'd goods to the said Captain, and to pursue his
Voyage, in which case such Master or owner may not in any sort be hindered from
pursuing his course, and the design of his Voyago.

XXVII.
His Majesty willing that the Subjects of the said Lords the States General be
treated in all Countries, under his obedience, as favorable as his own
Subjects, will give all necessary orders to have such Judgments and Decrees, as
shall be given and made upon prizes taken at Sea, passed with all justice and
equity, by unsuspected Persons, and such as are not concerned in interest in
the things in question; and his Majesty will give precise and effectual Orders,
that all Decrees, Judgments, and Orders of Courts of Justice, heretofore given,
and hereafter to be given, be speedily and duly executed, according to their
Forms.

XXVIII.
And whenever the Ambassadors of the said Lords the States General, or other
their Public Ministers, which shall be in his Majesty's Court, shall complain
of such Judgments, as shall have been given; His Majesty will cause the said
Judgments to be reviewed by his Council, that inquiry may be made, whether the
Orders and Cautions contained in this present Treaty, have been pursued and
observed, and that such provision may be made, as shall be reasonable: which
thing shall be done within the space of three months at most: and yet neither
before the first Judgment, nor after the same, hanging the review may the goods
and effects which shall be reclaimed, be sold nor discharged, but with the
consent of the parties concerned, to prevent their perishing.

XXIX.
If process issue at the first and second instance, against any that shall have
taken prizes at Sea, and the parties interested in the same, and the said
parties interested come to obtain a favorable Judgment or Decree, such
Judgment and Decree shall be executed upon giving security, notwithstanding the
appeal of him that shall have taken the Prize, but not contrariwise: and what
has been said in this and the foregoing Articles, for the doing of right and
speedy justice to the Subjects of the United Provinces, concerning Prizes taken
by his Majesty's Subjects, shall be understood, that it is likewise to be
performed by the Lords the States General, with relation to Prizes taken by
their Subjects, from those of his Majesty.

XXX.
His Majesty and the Lords the States General may at any time cause to be built
or freighted in one another Country, such number of Ships, either for War or
Trade, as they shall think good, and may buy such quantities of Ammunition as
they shall have use for, and may use their authority for having such bargains
for Ships and Ammunition, driven honestly and at reasonable prices; and yet
neither may his Majesty, nor the Lords the States General, grant the like
permission to one another enemies, in case such enemies shall be the
aggressours.

XXXI.
If it shall happen that Ships of War or of Trade be driven by storm or other
accident, on the coasts of either Ally, the said Ships, their furniture, goods,
and Merchandise, and whatever shall be saved, or the proceed thereof, if the
goods being perishable shall have been sold, the whole, if reclaimed by the
proprietors or others, having charge of the same, within a year and a day,
shall be restored without any formal process, paying only reasonable freight,
and what shall be regulated betwixt the said Allies to be due for saving: and
in case any thing be done contrary to this present Article, His Majesty and the
said Lords the States General, promise to use their authority effectually, for
the punishing such of their Subjects, as shall be found guilty of those
inhumanities, that have sometimes, to their great grief, been committed upon
such like occasions, with all possible severity.

XXXII.
Neither his Majesty, nor the said Lords the States General, shall receive, nor
suffer their Subjects to receive, in any Country of their obedience, any
Pirates or exiles whatsoever, but shall cause them to be pursued and punished,
and driven out of their Ports, and as well the Ships, as goods taken by such
Pirates or exiles, which shall be found in being, shall forthwith, without
forms of process, be freely restored to the Proprietors reclaiming them.

XXXIII.
The Inhabitants and Subjects on both sides, may throughout the Countries,
under the obedience of his Majesty, and of the said Lords the States General,
make use of such Advocates, Proctours, Notaries, and Sollicitors, as they shall
think good: who likewise shall be appointed to them by the ordinary Judges;
when there shall be occasion, and such Judges be thereto requested. And the
said Subjects and Inhabitants shall be permitted on both sides, to keep their
Books of Trade, and Correspondence in their several places of residence, in
what Language they please, without being liable for that matter to be molested
or searched.

XXXIV.
The said King, as also the said Lords the States General, for the convenience
of their trading Subjects, may settle Consuls, of their said Subjects Nation,
in one another Kingdom and Estates, which Consuls shall enjoy such Rights,
Liberties, and Franchises, as belong to them, by reason of their function and
employment: and they shall be settled in such places, as by common consent
shall be Judged necessary.

XXXV.
His Majesty, and the said Lords the States General, shall not suffer any
Vessel of War, or other set forth by Commission, or for the service of any
Prince, Commonwealth, or Town whatsoever, to come and make prize within the
Ports, Havens, or any Rivers belonging to them, upon one another Subjects; and
in case any such thing shall happen, his said Majesty, and the said Lords the
States General, will use their authority and power, to cause restitution or
reasonable reparation to be made.

XXXVI.
If through inadvertence, or otherwise, there should be any want of due
observance of this present Treaty, or contraventions to the same on his
Majesty's part, or of the said Lords the States General, and their Successors,
it shall remain in force notwithstanding, without coming for such cause to a
breach of Confederation, Friendship, or good Correspondence; but such
contraventions shall be speedily repaired; and if they shall be occasioned
through the fault of any private Subjects, they only shall be punished and
chastised.

XXXVII.
And for the better assurance for the time to come, of Commerce and Friendship
between the Subjects of the said King, and those of the said Lords the States
General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, it is accorded and
agreed; That if hereafter any interruption of friendship or breach shall happen
between the Crown of France, and the said Lords the States General of the said
United Provinces (which God forbid) nine months time shall always be allowed to
the Subjects of both parties, after such rupture, to retire and withdraw their
effects, and transport them whither they please; which likewise they shall be
permitted to do: as also to sell and transport their goods and movables with
all freedom; nor shall any hindrance be given them, nor any proceedings be,
during such time of nine months, to seize their effects, much less to arrest
their Persons.

XXXVIII.
The present Treaty of Commerce, Navigation, and Marine, shall be in force Five
and twenty years, to begin from the day of Signing; and the Ratifications shall
be made in due form, and be exchanged on both sides, within the space of six
weeks, to be computed from the day of Signing.

A Formulary for Pass-Ports, and Letters to be granted by the Admiralty of
France, to Ships outward bound, in pursuance of an Article of this present
Treaty.
LEWIS, Comte de Vermandois, Admiral of France, To all that shall see these
presents, Greeting. We do you to know, that we have given leave and prmission
to Master and Governor of the Ship called of the Town of of the burden of
Tuns, or thereabout, lying at present in the Port and Haven of to sail to laden
with after his Ship shall have been searched, who before he depart, shall make
oath before such Officers, as have the jurisdiction of Marine causes, that the
said Vessel belongs to one or more of his Majesty's Subjects, the Certificate
of which oath shall be annexed to these presents, as also to keep and cause to
be kept by his Ships crew, the ordinances and regulations for maritime affairs,
and shall enter in the office a Catalogue, signed and certified of the names
and surnames, and the places of birth and abode of his Ships crew, and of all
such as he shall have on board, whom he may not take in, without the knowledge
and leave of the Officers for Maritime affairs; and in every Port or Haven,
where he shall enter with his Ship, he shall show to the Officers and Judges of
Maritime causes, this present License, and shall give them a faithful account
of what shall have happened in his Voyage, and shall carry the Kings Flags,
Arms, and Ensigns, and ours, during his Voyage. In witness whereof, we have
caused our Sign and Seal of Arms to be set to these presents; and have caused
them to be underwritten by our Secretary for Maritime affairs, at the day of
one thousand six hundred Signed Lewis, Comte de Vermandois. And underneath
Signed, by A form of the certificate containing the oath. We of the Admiralty
certify that Master of the Ship named in the foregoing Passport, has taken
the Oath therein mentioned, Given at the day of one thousand, six hundred

Another form of Letters, to be granted by the Sea-Port-Towns of the United
Provinces, to Ships and Barks outward bound, in pursuance of the aforesaid
Article.
TO the most Serene, most Illustrious, most Mighty, Honorable, and prudent
Lords, Emperors, Kings, Commonwealths, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Lords,
Burgermasters, Sherifs, Counselors, Judges, Officers, Justitiars, and
Governors of all good Towns and Places, as well Ecclesiastical as Secular,
which shall see or read these presents, We the Burgermasters and Governors of
the Town of do to know that Master of the Ship appearing before us, has
solemnly deposed upon Oath, that the Ship called of the burden of about Lastes,
of which at present he is Master, belongs to the Inhabitants of the United
Provinces, as God should help him, and as we should be willing to see the said
Master assisted in his lawful Affairs, so we require you all in general, and
those in particular, where the said Master with his Ship and Wares, shall
arrive, that they will be pleased to receive him courteously, and duly to treat
him, if he shall be a sufferer, with relation to the accustomed duties of
Customs and Freights, within, through, and at your Ports, Rivers, and Demesnes,
suffering him to Sail, Pass, Frequent, and Negotiate where he shall think fit,
which we shall willingly acknowledge. In witness whereof, we have caused the
Seal of our Town to be set hereto.

Here follows the Tenor of his Majesty's said Ambassadors Power.
LEWIS, by the grace of God King of France and Navar, To all that shall see
these presents, Greeting. As we desire nothing with greater ardency, then to
see the War, with which Christendom is at present afflicted, end in a good
Peace; and since by the Care and Mediation of our most dear and most beloved
Brother, the King of Great Britain, the Town of Nimeguen has been agreed upon
by all parties, for the Place of Conference; We out of the same desire, to put
a stop as much as in us lies, to the desolation of so many Provinces, and the
effusion of so much Christian Blood, give to understand that we confiding
entirely in the experience, ability, and fidelity, of our most dear and
well-beloved Cosen, the Sieur Comte d' Estrades, Marshal of France, and Knight
of our Orders, of our faithful and well-beloved the Sieur Colbert, Marquess of
Croissy, Counselor in ordinary in our Council of State, and of our faithful
and well-beloved the Sieur de Mesmes, Comte d' Avaux, Counselor also in our
Councels, by reason of the advantageous trials that we have made of them in
diverse Embassies, and considerable employments, wherein we have entrusted
them, both within our Kingdom, and without, for these causes and other good
considerations, us thereunto moving, we have appointed, ordained and deputed,
and by these presents Signed with our hand, do appoint, ordain, and depute the
said Sieurs, the Marshal d' Estrades, the Marquess of Croissy, and the Comte d'
Avaux, and have given them, and do hereby give them full Power, Commission, and
special Order, to repair to the Town of Nimeguen, in quality of our Ambassadors
Extraordinary, and our Plenipotentiaries for the Peace, and there to confer,
either immediately, or by the Mediation of the Ambassadors Mediators,
respectively received and agreed to, with all Ambassadors and Ministers of our
most dear and great friends, the States general of the United Provinces of the
Low Countries, and their Allies, being all armed with sufficient Powers, and to
Treat there of means, for the determining and appeasing the differences that
cause the War at this day; and our said Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries may
all three together, or two of them in absence of the third, through sickness or
other impediment, or one only in absence of the other two, in like case of
sickness, or other impediment, agree thereupon, and conclude and sign a good
and sure Peace, and may generally act, negotiate, promise, and agree, whatever
they shall think necessary in order to the said Peace, with the same authority
that we should or might do, if we were present there in Person, even though
there should be some things that might require more particular instructions
then are contained in these presents: Promising on the Faith and Word of a
King, to hold firm and fulfill whatever by the said Sieurs, Marshal d' Estrades,
Marquess de Croissy, and Comte d' Avaux, or by two of them, in absence of the
third, through sickness or other impediment, or by one only, in ansence of the
other two, in like case of sickness, or other impediment, shall have been
stipulated, promised and agreed, and cause to be dispatched our Letters of
Ratification, within such time as they shall have promised in our name to
furnish them: For such is our pleasure. In witness whereof we have caused our
Seal to be put to these presents.

Given at St. Germain in Lay, the Three and twentieth day of December, in the
year of Grace, One thousand six hundred seventy five, and of Our Reign the
Three and thirtieth. Signed Lewis, and upon the fould, By the King, Arnauld.
And sealed with the great Seal, in yellow Wax.

Here follows the Tenor of the Power of the said Lords, the Ambassadors
Extraordinary of the Lords the States of the United Provinces.
THe States General of the United Previnces of the Low Countries, To all that
shall see these presents, Greeting. As we desire nothing more ardently, then to
see the War, with which Christendom is at present afflicted, end in a good
Peace, and that by the Care and the Mediation of the most Serene King of Great
Britain, the Town of Nimeguen has been agreed upon by all parties for the
place of Con, ference; We out of the same desire to put a stopas much as in us
lies, to the desolation of so many Provinces, and the effusion of so much
Christian blood, have been willing to contribute thereto all that is in our
power, and to this end, have deputed to that Assembly, some persons of our own
body, who have given many instances both of their knowledge and experience in
public Affairs, and of their affection for the good of our State; and as the
Heeren Hierosme van Beverning, Baron of Teylingham, Curator of the University
at Leyden, late Counselor and Treasurer-General of the United Provinces,
Wilhem van Nassaw, Here van Odyke, Cortgene, etc. and first noble and
representative of the Nobility, in the States and Council of the Province of
Zeland, and Wilhem van Haren, Grietman van Blidt, deputed to our Assembly, on
the behalf of the States of Holland, Zeland, and Friezland, have signalized
themselves, in many important employments in our service, wherein they have
given instances of their fidelity, their presence of mind and readiness in the
management of Affairs; so for these causes and other considerations us
thereunto moving, we have appointed, ordained, and deputed, and do by these
presents appoint, ordain, and depute, the said Heeren van Beverning, van Odyke,
and van Haren, and have given them, and do hereby give them full Power,
Commission, and special Order, to repair to the Town of Nimeguen, in quality of
our Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries for the Peace, and to
confer there, either immediately, or by the interposition of the Ambassadors
Mediators, respectively received and agreed to, with the Ambassadors
Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries of his most Christian Majesty, and his
Allies, armed with sufficient Powers, and there to treat upon means for
determining and appeasing the Differences that occasion the War at this day:
And our aforesaid Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries all three together, or two
of them, in absence of the third, through sickness or other impediment, or one
only, in absence of the other two, in like case of sickness or other
impediment, may agree thereupon, and conclude and sign a good and firm Peace,
and generally may act, negotiate, promise and accord, whatever they shall
think necessary in order to the said Peace, and generally may do whatever we
might do, if we were there present; though to that end, there should be need of
more particular Power and Order, than is contained in these presents: Promising
sincerely and faithfully well to like, and firm and stable to hold, whatever
by the said Heeren, our Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, or by two of them,
in case of sickness, absence, or other impediment of the third, or by one only,
in absence of the other two, in like case of sickness, or other impediment,
shall have been stipulated, promised and accorded, and to cause to be
dispatched our Letters of Ratification, within such time as they shall have
promised in our Name to furnish them.

Given at the Hague, in our Assembly, under our Great Seal: Signed by our
President, and with the Sign of our Principal Register, the fourth of January;
in the Year, One thousand six hundred seventy six. Signed, J. Bootsma. Upon the
Fould, By Order of the said Lords, the States General. Signed, H. Fagel. And
Sealed with the Great Seal, in Red Wax.
In token whereof, we the Ambassadors aforesaid of his Majesty, and of the
Lords, the States General, by virtue of our respective Powers, have, in their
Names, signed these presents with our ordinary Signs, and have caused our Seals
of Arms to be put thereto. Nimeguen, the 10th of August, in the Year, One
thousand six hundred seventy eight. The Mal. d' Estrades. H. Beverningh.
Colbert. W. Van. Nassaw. De Mesmes. W. Haren.

We liking well the foregoing Treaty of Peace, in all and every the Points and
Articles therein contained and declared, have, for us, our Heirs, Successors,
Kingdoms, Countries, Lands, Seignories and Subjects, accepted, approved,
ratified and confirmed, and do accept, approve, ratify and confirm the same,
and do promise upon the Faith and Word of a King, and bind and morgage all and
every our Goods that are and shall be, to keep and observe the same inviolably,
without ever acting contrary thereto, directly or indirectly, in any sort or
manner whatsoever. In witness whereof, we have signed these presents with our
own Hand, and have caused our Seal to be set thereto. Given at St. Germain in
Lay, the 18th day of August, in the Year of Grace, One thousand six hundred
seventy eight, and of our Reign, the thirty sixth. Signed, Lewis, and
underneath, By the King, Arnauld.

A separate Article concerning the Imposition of Fifty Sols per Tun, upon
Stranger's Ships, sailing out of Ports in France.
LEWIS by the Grace of God, King of France, and of Navarre: To all that shall
see these presents, greeting. Since our most dear and wellbeloved Cousin, the
Sieur Comte d' Estrades, Marshal of France, and Knight of our Orders, our
faithful and well-beloved the Sieur Colbert, Marquess of Croissy, Councellor in
Ordinary in our Council of State, and our faithful and well-beloved the Sieur
de Mesmes, Comte d' Avaux, Councellor also in our Councels, our Ambassadors
Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries, by virtue of the plenary Powers which we
had given them, have concluded, agreed and signed, on the tenth day of this
Month, in the Town of Nimeguen, with the Here Hierosme, Van Beverningh, Baron
of Teylingham, Curator of the University at Leyden, late Counselor and
Treasurer, General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, the Here
Wilhem Van Nassaw, Here Van Odyke, Cortgene, and first Noble, and
representative of the Nobility, in the States and Council of Zeland, and the
Here Wilhem Van Haren, Grietman Van Blidt, Ambassadors Extraordinary, and
Plenipotentiaries of our most dear and great Friends the States General of the
United Provinces of the Low Countries, armed likewise with full Powers, this
separate Article, in tenor as follows, viz.

It has been stipulated on the behalf of the Most Christian King, and
consented to by the Lords, the States General of the United Provinces of the
Low Countries, That the Equality which is precisely to be observed, with
relation to the Subjects of each and the Natives, as to Duties, Charges and
Impositions, according to the seventh Article of the Treaty of Commerce this
day concluded, shall not derogate from the Imposition of fifty Sols per Tun,
imposed in France upon Stranger's Ships, and that the Subjects of the Lords,
the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, shall be bound
to pay the same, as other Strangers, unless his Majesty, upon such
Remonstrances as may hereafter be made to him, on the behalf of the said Lords,
the States General, considering the same with that great affection, with which
his Majesty is pleased to honor them, shall order otherwise. But necessary
Orders shall from this present be given by his said Majesty, That the said
Imposition of fifty Sols be exacted from Ships belonging to the Subjects of the
said United Provinces but once in each Voyage, at their going out of the Ports
of His Kingdom, and not at their coming in; and that the said Ships, if laden
with Salt, pay but a Moiety of the said fifty Sols, upon condition, that if the
said Lords, the States, shall think fit to lay the like Imposition upon
Stranger's Ships with them (which they shall be free to do) they shall not
exceed, with relation to his said Majesty's Subjects, the proportion of what
their own Subjects pay in France, the said seventh Article remaining, in
relation to all other Duties, Charges and Impositions, present and future, in
full force and virtue, without being liable to be limited or exceeded by any
other exception or restriction whatsoever, other than as above is expressed.

Which separate Article shall be of like force and virtue, as if it were
inserted into the body of the aforesaid general Treaty, this day concluded.

Nimeguen, the 10th day of August, 1678. Le Mal. d' Estrades. H. Beverningh.
Colbert. W. Van Nassaw. De Mesmes. W. Haren.

We liking well the said separate Article, in all and every the Points thereof,
have by these presents, signed with our own Hand, allowed, approved and
ratified, and do allow, approve and ratify the same, promising upon the Faith
and Word of a King, to fulfill, observe and cause to be observed, the same
sincerely and faithfully, without ever suffering any thing to the contrary,
directly or indirectly, for any cause, or upon any occasion whatsoever. In
witness whereof, we have signed these presents with our own Hand, and have
caused our Seal to be put to the same. Given at St. Germain en Lay, the 18th
day of August, in the year of Grace, 1678. and of our Reign, the six and
thirtieth. Signed, Lewis, and underneath, By the King, Arnauld.

The States General's Ratification of the Treaty of Commerce.
THE States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries. To all that
shall see these presents, greeting. Since on the 10th day of this Month of
August, in the year 1678. there has been made and concluded at Nimeguen, a
Treaty of Commerce, Navigation and Marine, by the Sieur Comte d' Estrades,
Marshal of France, and Knight of the Orders of the Most Christian King, the
Sieur Golbert, Marquess of Croissy, Councellor in Ordinary in his Council of
State, and the Sieur de Mesmes, Comte d' Avaux, Councellor also in his
Councels, Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries of his Most
Christian Majesty, at the Assembly at Nimeguen, in the Name and on the behalf
of his said Majesty; and by the Here Hierosme, Van Beverningh, Baron of
Teylingham, Curator of the University at Leyden, late Councellor and
Treasurer-General of the United Provinces, the Here Wilhem Van Nassaw, Here Van
Odyke, Cortgene, and first Noble, and representing the Order of the Nobility,
in the States and Council of Zeland, and the Here Wilhem Van Haren, Grietman
Van Blidt, deputed to our Assembly, on behalf of the States of Holland, Zeland
and Friesland, our Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries at the said Assembly at
Nimeguen, in our Name, and on our behalf, by virtue of their respective plenary
Powers, of which Treaty and Powers, the tenor is as follows, viz.

The Treaty of Peace which has been concluded, etc. page
AND inasmuch as the Contents of the said Treaty import, That the Ratifications
of the same shall be delivered in due form, and exchanged on both sides, within
the space of six Weeks, reckoning from the day of Signing: We willing to give
proofs of our sincerity, and to discharge our selves of the Promise, which our
said Ambassadors have made for us, have agreed, approved and ratified the said
Treaty, and every Article thereof above-written, and do by these presents
agree, approve and ratify the same: Promising faithfully and sincerely to
keep, maintain, and inviolably to observe the same in all points, according to
the form and tenor thereof, without ever acting any thing to the contrary,
directly or indirectly, in any sort or manner whatsoever. In token whereof, we
have caused these presents to be signed by the President of our Assembly, and
underwritten by our Principal Register, and our Great Seal to be set thereto.

Given at the Hague, the 19th day of September, 1678. Signed, D. Van Wyngaerd.
By Order of the said Lords the States General. H. Fagel.

By the King's Order.
WE do all to know, That a good, firm, stable and solid Peace, together with an
entire and sincere Friendship and Reconciliation, has been made and accorded
between the Most High, Most Excellent, and Most Mighty Prince Lewis, by the
Grace of God, King of France and of Navarr, our Sovereign Lord, and the Lords,
the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, their Vassals,
Subjects and Servants, in all their Kingdoms, Countries, Lands and Seignories,
under their obedience. That the said Peace is general, betwixt them and their
said Vassals and Subjects; and that by means thereof, it is permitted to them
to go, come, return, and sojourn in all places of the said Kingdoms, Estates
and Countries, to negotiate and trade, hold correspondence, and have
communication with one another, and that with all liberty, freedom and safety,
both by Land and Sea, and in Rivers, and other Waters, and in all respects, as
it has been and ought to be, in times of good, sincere, and loving Peace, such
as the Divine Goodness has been pleased to bestow upon our said Lord the King,
and the said Lords, the States General of the United Provinces, their Peoples
and Subjects. And to continue them therein, all Persons, of what quality or
condition soever, are most expressly prohibited to take in hand, attempt, or
innovate any thing to the contrary, or in prejudice thereof, on pain of being
severely punished, as breakers of the Peace, and disturbers of the public
Quiet.

Given at Fountain-bleau, the 26th day of September, 1678. Signed, Lewis, and
underneath was Signed, Arnauld.

By the King' s Order.
The Provost of Paris, Or Lieutenant Civil.
BY virtue of his Majesty's Order directed to us, given at Fountain-bleau, the
28th of this Month, Signed Lewis, and underneath Colbert. We require, the
King's Proctor being heard to it, That his Majesty's Ordinance, that has this
day been published, be posted up at all cross ways, and usual places in the
City of Paris; and that the Substitutes of the King's Proctor, take care to
have it read and published, in all the King's Courts of Justice, from which
there lie Appeals to us, sitting the Courts, all which shall certify the same
to us within fifteen days. And we forbid his Majesty's Subjects to oppose the
same, on pain of being proceeded against as breakers of the Peace, and
disturbers of the public Quiet.

Done and given by Messire John le Camus, Counselor of the King in his
Councels, Ordinary Master of Requests of the Household, Lieutenant Civil of the
City, Provostship and County of Paris, the 29th of September, 1678, De Riantz.
Le Camus.
Vaillant Principal Register.

A Memorial of the Deputies Extraordinary, of the States General of the United
Provinces, to the Duke de Villa Hermosa, of the 8th of May.
THE Lords, the States General of the United Provinces, having Affairs of great
importance to impart to your Excellence, have Commissionated us underwritten
their Deputies Extraordinary, and to this end their Hi. and Mi. have provided
us of this Letter of Credit, to present to your Excellence.

The Assistances which his Catholic Majesty gave to the State of the United
Provinces in the beginning of this War, were so useful and advantageous to this
Commonwealth, that their Hi. and Mi. shall ever be mindful of it: And to
testify, as soon as was possible, their resentment thereof to his Catholic
Majesty, they failed not to come with all their Forces to his Majesty's
succor, when his Provinces were attacked by the Arms of the King of France;
and they assure themselves that your Excellence is persuaded of it, since your
Excellence sees how much their Hi. and Mi. do to this day contribute to the
preservation of his Majesty's Country. And notwithstanding this War has been
continued many years, and at an infinite expense, yet the effects have been so
unfortunate, that the King of France, being puffed up with his Victories and
Conquests, will not come out of it, but upon the Conditions that have been
delivered at Nimeguen to the Mediators, which your Excellence knows what they
are.

Which Conditions, considered in themselves, are indeed too hard, and of such a
nature as they ought to be rejected, which also their Hi. and Mi. would do in
regard of their Allies, and chiefly in regard of his Catholic Majesty, as
concerning the Low Countries, in the preservation whereof they find themselves
so deeply interessed.

But when their Hi. and Mi. reflect upon the Power of the King of France, which
hitherto and during this War has been such, that he has not only made Head
against the Armies of his Catholic Majesty, and those of the United Provinces,
and their Allies, but has made great Conquests in diverse Parts, they conceive a
just apprehension, that these Conditions, how hard soever, ought yet to be
preferred, considering the present state of Affairs, to a continuance of the
War, which in all probability would prove very fatal.

Which makes our Masters the States General of the Low Countries, incline to
look upon these Conditions, as receivable, if they should have the happiness to
find their Allies, and especially his Catholic Majesty in the same Sentiments.

And should very much wish, That your Excellence, on the behalf of his
Catholic Majesty, would concur with them, to make them as agreeable, as may
be, to the other Allies.

And in the mean time give Order to labor for a prolongation of the Term,
which the King of France has given by his Proposition at Nimeguen.

We expect your Excellencie's Answer as soon as may be, upon the premises, as
being the only Subject of this Commission.

Brussels, the 8th of May, 1678: Jacob Boreel.
De Weed.

Answer of the Duke de Villa Hermosa, of the 9th of May, to the Memorial of the
Deputies Extraordinary, of the States General of the United Provinces, of the
8th of May.
HIS Excellence having considered this Memorial, and that the loss of Flanders,
by the hardness of the Conditions of France, will be greater and more
dishonorable, than by the ill success of Arms, must hope that the States
General will not further it, since his Majesty, wholly for its preservation,
has exposed himself to the manifest hazards of War, which he has suffered so
much by. Also the punctual and religious observance of such strict Treaties,
with his said Majesty, to which the public Faith obliges them, will not
permit him to make a doubt of it, especially since his Majesty has and always
will have a firm desire and intention, to contribute as much as possibly he can
to their preservation; and that in regard of the Expedient proposed, of making
new Alliances, for the making sure the said impracticable Conditions of France,
it is to be considered, that the time in which precisely they must be
concluded, can be no other than that of the Campaign, from which, by means of
our so late Alliance with his Majesty of Great Britain, we ought to expect, by
a more prosperous success, some redress of Affairs; and it would be a breach of
Faith, to abandon his Forces in this Conjuncture, by admitting Conditions so
forlorn, and at the same time failing in our Fidelity to his Imperial Majesty,
and the other High Allies, especially since the Emperor is resolved to run to
the defense of Flanders, rather than to the reparation of his own losses, and
the other High Allies are upon a Treaty, of joining and employing all their
Forces against France: His Excellence being able likewise to assure them, That
the King, his Master, since the reduction of Sicily, is resolved to employ all
his Power, as his Excellence likewise all his Cares, for the defense and
re-establishing of this Country; to which, his Excellence hopes, the States
General will concur on their part, in an Occurrence, which as it is urgent, so
it concerns the greatest good of the common Cause, as being the only mean to
obtain a just and lasting Peace.

Given at Brussels, the 9th of May, 1678.
A Memorial of the Deputies Extraordinary, of the States General, etc. to the
Duke de Villa Hermosa, etc. of the 14th of May.
THE Lords, the States General of the United Provinces, having seen and perused
your Excellencie's Answer to the Memorial, that we, their underwritten
Deputies Extraordinary, presented the 8th of this Month, could have wished,
That your Excellence had not only considered the Conditions offered by the King
of France, as they are in themselves, but had also made reflection upon the
present state of Affairs, and considered, that the King of France, being become
Master of all the Frontier Towns of his Catholic Majesty's Netherlands, was
entered into the heart of them, and had made himself Master even of the Town of
Gand, being very strong in the Field, and at the Head of a very formidable
Army, ready for any enterprise, and in the greatest appearance in the world of
succeeding and conquering where he will: Whereas the Troops of the Allies, not
being yet come together, much less in a condition to make Head against him, and
oppose his designs. Hence it is, that their Hi. and Mi. apprehend with great
reason, that what remains to the King of Spain in the Low Countries, will
infallibly be lost, if it be not saved, by accepting the Conditions of Peace
that are offered; and it would be a thing very sensible to their Hi. and Mi. if
what his Catholic Majesty has yet left in the Low Countries, should be so
lost, after such infinite expenses, and so much blood spilt, for their
preservation. Your Excellence knows but too well, by what has lately happened,
what Account one has to make of the Troops of the Confederates, upon occasion.
The Assistance which is expected from his Majesty of Great Britain, is very
considerable, and will be of great support to our Party; but it deserves your
Excellencie's consideration, that those Troops are but newly raised, and that
it will require some time to enure them to the War, that as yet there are but
few of them in these Parts, and we are uncertain when the rest will come;
whereas on the other side, every moment is precious, and great misfortunes may
happen in a short space. And moreover, the States, as they have made it to be
declared to your Excellence, are not in a condition to carry on the War, in
such manner, and with so much vigor, as they have done hitherto, seeing their
Treasures are exhausted, and their People not able to contribute so much any
longer.

As the Lords, the States General, will always acknowledge to have received, in
the beginning of this War, very important and useful Succors from his
Catholic Majesty, so they hope, your Excellence will do them the justice to
confess, that they have not been wanting in the sequel of it, to testify their
acknowledgment, by using their endeavors, and being at extraordinary charges
to assist this Country; and at least that it is not to be imputed to them, that
the King of France has made so great a progress, and that he will not make
Peace, but upon such disadvantagious Conditions, as whereby the Country will
indeed be much weakened, and hardly able to maintain necessary Troops for its
defense; but on the other hand, the Places will not be so dis-joyn'd, nor the
Country so divided, as it was before the War, which will make it easier to be
kept and preserved. These Defects may likewise be supplied by Alliances, and a
little time may do much toward a redress of Affairs, and making the King's
Subjects, and particularly those of the United Provinces, capable of assisting
one another; who at present are in so lamentable a condition, and so utterly
unable, that they cannot be obliged to a continuance of the extraordinary
charges, without great hazard, and without exposing them to the utmost
extremity, and finding our selves reduced to a necessity, either of
accommodating with the Enemy, whether we will or no, or of lying down under the
burden. To which they do not think your Excellence will be of opinion, That
they stand obliged by those Treaties, that had no other end, than the good of
the Allies, and the safety of their People. The said Lords, the States General,
have also thought fit, to have it represented to your Excellence, That being
informed, That the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of the King of France,
would be authorized to conclude upon a Truce, to the very last Day of December
next; they have Ordered their Plenipotentiaries at Nimeguen to discourse it
with them, and see whether they would make one for six Weeks, or three Months
at most: Hoping, that if it can be obtained, your Excellence will not be
displeased with it, but agree to it, for such Reasons as have been alleged to
your Excellence, by word of mouth, and as your Excellence may consider with
your self.

Delivered this 14th of May, 1678. Jacob Boreel.
De Weed.

The Answer of the Duke de Villa Hermosa, of the 16th of May, to the Memorial
of the Deputies Extraordinary, of the States General, etc.
HIS Excellence having seen the Memorial of the Heeren Boreel and de Weed,
Deputies Extraordinary of the Lords, the States General of the United
Provinces, of the 14th of this Month, and desiring on his part to contribute to
the greater satisfaction of their Hi. and Mi. will agree to a suspension of
Arms for six Weeks, upon Conditions that shall be judged such, as whereby the
suspension of Arms may not produce worse effects, than a continuation of
Hostility, and of the War, well understood, that regard ought to be had to the
King of Great Britain's Answer, to the Representation made to his Majesty by
their Hi. and Mi. according to that made to his Excellence by the said Deputies
on the 8th of this Month, and also that the Ministers of his Imperial Majesty,
and those of the High Allies, be acquainted with it. And to the end that this
resolution may be the more easy, his Excellence is of opinion, that the matter
may be adjusted at Nimeguen, or the Hague; whereupon the Lords, the States
General, will have reason to acknowledge, what consideration his Majesty and
his Excellence make of Representations from their Hi. and Mi. and in the mean
time it is not doubted, but they will use their utmost endeavors, to run to
the defense of the Low Countries with all their Forces, that in this interval
of time they may not suffer greater shocks.

Given at Brussels, the 16th of May, 1678.
A Declaration of the Emperor's Ambassadors, at a Conference Extraordinary of
the Allies at Nimeguen, the 20th of June, 1678.
WE have heard the Proposition that your Excellencies made to us two days
since, containing in substance, That the Lords, the States General, could not
carry on the War any longer, and found themselves obliged to make Peace, for
such Reasons as were then more particularly deduced. Your Excellencies would
then have known our Sentiments thereupon, and you desire the same thing again
at this present. Not to fail therein, we hope above all things, that your
Excellencies and all the World will do his Imperial Majesty the justice to
believe, that he has always behaved himself like a good and faithful Ally
toward all, both in Peace and War. We will not enlarge upon that. His Army has
always been seen in the Field, in great numbers, in good order; it is evident,
that he has employed it for the good of the common Cause, and that he has made
it act in such places as were thought most surable; 'twere needless to
particularize the Campagnes, where all was acted for the public good.
Moreover, his Imperial Majesty has assisted his Allies with all the Forces he
could, if not with all he would: The Rebellion that has been raised against him
in Hungary, is also publicly known, and how both his own Subjects, and the
Turk and the Tartar have been stirred up against him; and yet so evident and so
near a danger, has not been able to divert or decrease his Forces for the
common Interests. Besides, that it is known, he has sent his Army into the
Low Countries, to support the acting there, whereby the Enemy had an
opportunity to take Friburg from him, which makes so much difficulty now. As
his Majesty has been intent upon the Affairs of the War, so he has been no less
upon those of Peace: And, as your Excellencies can bear us witness, we his
Ambassadors have neglected nothing that might promote it; and because we
believed, that the most effectual mean to obtain a reasonable Peace, was to act
vigorously, we have done all we could, as has been already said.

For the present, it cannot be doubted, but the Emperor will understand with
sorrow, That your Excellencies think Affairs reduced to such extremities, that
there is a necessity of making a Peace, to prevent greater: Your Excellencies
have told us your Sentiments thereupon, and the Spaniards theirs. As for our
own, we find, in the first place, That this manner of acting from France, to
prescribe Conditions of Peace, and admit no Treaties upon them, is against the
style and the custom always practiced among Sovereign Powers; and we are far
from being able to discover by that, any such desire of Peace, as the French
make so great ostentation of. For the Peace it self, his Imperial Majesty
desires it as much as any, and desires it may be general, that the public
repose may be obtained, which is his only aim, and the common safety also,
which is the chief thing that ought to be procured by the said Peace. Your
Excellencies confess your selves, that the Conditions contained in the
Declaration of France, are too hard and violent; you have told us likewise,
that your meaning is not, that we ought to pass all the Contents of them. You
have desired to know our Sentiments upon this Subject, tendering the Offices of
the States General, for reducing them to terms of Equity; and we, for our
parts, told you then the Reasons, why we cannot explain our selves fully
thereupon.

Howsoever, we declared our selves here in the Assembly, to the Here Ambassador
Haren, that we could not admit of the Alternative, that concerns the Emperor
and the Empire, barely as it is expressed. We have often deduced the Reasons,
as well why we cannot restore Philipsburg, as why we cannot leave Friburg in
the hands of the French. We hope all the World will think them well grounded,
and with all this we have not failed to acquaint the Emperor by a Courier
Express, whose return we expect. In the mean time, being willing to leave
nothing undone on our side, that may further the Peace, we again pray your
Excellencies, to interpose those good Offices which you offered us, to dispose
the Ambassadors of France.

1. To admit of more equitable Conditions of Peace.

2. To treat with us upon them, since we are ready on our side, and desirous to
do it with all kind of moderation.

3. To take the same care for the Interests of our Allies, as for our selves,
particularly for his Highness the Duke of Lorrain, who has been used worst of
all, and that the Estates of the Empire may also have due satisfaction.

My Lords, This is all that we are in a condition of saying to you at present.
A Declaration of the Ambassadors of Spain, at an Extraordinary Conference of
the Allies, the 20th of June, 1678.
ALL that we can say upon the present Subject, is but to confirm and approve,
as we do absolutely, what Mons. the Duke de Villa Hermosa, has said and
expressed in his Writing, dated at Brussels, the 3d of June, 1678. declaring
only, that we will not separate our selves from the Interests of our Allies,
either in Peace or War, in whatsoever may depend upon the King our Master.

A Declaration of the Ambassadors of Denmark, at an Extraordinary Conference of
the Allies at Nimeguen, the 20th of June, 1678.
WHosoever shall compare the time that is elapsed, since the return of his
Excellence the Here Ambassador van Beverningh, from the Journey which he took
to his Most Christian Majesty, and since he communicated his Report only to the
Ministers of the High Allies at the Hague, with that within which they require
of us a final Declaration, on behalf of his Majesty the King our Master, upon
so nice a matter, as concerns no less than an absolute decision betwixt
accepting a Peace, and continuing the War, may easily observe, that it has not
been sufficient for us to receive necessary Orders from our Master thereupon,
and apprehend, that it is not in the power of Ministers, to determine of their
own heads so important a resolution.

Fearing lest this might happen, we required a convenient delay, by a Memorial
delivered above eight days ago, into the hands of their Excellencies, the
Lords, Ambassadors Extraordinary of the Lords the States General; but to this
present no Answer thereunto has ensued, and instead thereof, the necessity of
Affairs, the lamentable condition of the Spanish Low Countries, the United
Provinces not being able to raise supplies, for defraying the excessive
expenses of the War, whatever hope we might have formed to our selves of
assistance from England, being utterly vanished, and the formidable Power of
the Enemy, are now laid for a foundation, to the measures that are to be taken
to prevent that by Peace, which it is believed cannot be hindered by continuing
the War. The King our Master could not understand these extremities, but with
the utmost compassion and perplexity of mind; and if he be thought capable of
bringing any remedy on his side, we can give assurance on his behalf, that he
will apply himself to it with the same generosity, care and concern, out of
which he has hitherto made appear by the effects, that his only content and
repose consists in the welfare of his Allies.

In the mean time, it is a very difficult thing to give any counsel and advice,
in a matter that seems to be already determined, and which sticks at nothing
but the formality of its execution.

On Saturday last, their Excellencies, the Ambassadors of the Lords the States
General, declared to us, That their Masters saw no other mean to save
themselves from the ruin, which was like to drag them, through that of the
Spanish Low Countries, into the utter subversion of their Commonwealth, than
that of a sudden Peace. They told us, That the Lords Ambassadors of France
expressed themselves disposed, to conclude one separately with them, and all
those that should desire to come into it, they invited us to join with them in
it, and at the same time assured us, that since of necessity they must avoid
the confusion, that the Answer they should have to make to the Most Christian
King, concerning the accepting a cessation of Arms, would bring them into, they
found themselves obliged to make a Peace alone, to their own best advantage,
before the end of this present Month, though we should not be able in that time
to concur with them in it; this cessation of Arms not being necessary to them,
for their own particular interests.

What room is left then for any counsel or advice in the Case? We see no other
measures to take, for what concerns the King our Master, than to put their
Excellencies, the Ambassadors of the Lords the States General, in mind of their
own Assertion, to wit, That this Peace, even though they should see themselves
obliged to make it with France, should keep the Lords, the States General,
their Masters, no less under the power of their engagements, at the bottom of
the mutual Treaties betwixt them and their Allies, and to pray them, as we do
most instantly, to proceed in it with such caution and wisdom, as that it may
not at the same time involve any prejudicial consequence to that of the North.

The 18th Article of the Treaty betwixt his Majesty, and the Lords the States
General, upon the occasion of the present War, shows plainly, how far his
Majesty and they stand mutually engaged to one another. We are bound in duty to
insist upon it, till we have received Orders from our Master to dispense with
it, which of our own heads we cannot do; and we conjure the Lords the States
General, by whatever is most sacred in the public Faith, and in such solemn
stipulations, not to do or take in hand any thing that may derogate from its
force.

We wish for the Peace, as much as it can be wished for, and envy it not our
Allies; if they will show us a way to obtain a sure and honorable Peace, we
embrace it from this day forward; and if France will make a Peace with his
Majesty, we believe he is altogether ready to accept it, so it be founded upon
Reason, and the good union, which will always keep him inseparable from the
fortune of his Allies.

Finally, We pray God to inspire always the Lords the States General with
Counsels worthy their moderation, and the consideration which they ought to
have, for those whom themselves have drawn into the perils of the present War,
and to bless their Designs and Advances, for the security of the general Quiet
of all Christendom.

A Declaration of the Ambassador of the Elector of Brandenburg, on Monday the
20th of June, 1678.
THE Ambassador of Brandenburg says, That it was evident, that his Electoral
Serenity his Master, before the Most Christian King took up Arms against their
Hi. and Mi. the States General, failed not to do all he could to divert him,
and that likewise since the fire of this War has been kindled, he has desired
nothing more earnestly, than to see it quenched as soon as might be, and the
public repose every where established; and that it was upon the sole
consideration of promoting the Peace, that his Electoral Serenity entered into
such strict Bonds with his Allies, and especially with their Hi. and Mi. that
he has exposed and sacrificed his Person and Estates for that, and has
enjoined his Plenipotentiaries at this Congress, and renews his Orders time
after time, to labor for a Peace with their utmost endeavors, according to
the Alliances betwixt the Confederates, which prescribe a method to be observed
for obtaining a general Peace, that was agreed on jointly by them all. That
their Excellencies, the Ambassadors of their Hi. and Mi. alleged two days
since, that their Lordships, the States, both in respect of the condition of
their own Provinces, and that of others, find themselves at present reduced to
a necessity of making a Peace with France, whether they will or no. That at the
same time, to observe their Alliances, they express a desire to have their
Allies join with them in it; but that withal they think themselves
necessitated, for the saving their Commonwealth from the shipwreck that
threatens it, to make a Peace alone, or without the Confederates, in case they
cannot accept the Conditions that France has prescribed; that thereupon they
required the resolution of their Allies with all speed, that they might take
their Measures thereby, at the Consultation that is to be held this Week at the
Hague.

The Plenipotentiary Ambassador of his Electoral Serenity says to it, That he
knows not what resolution his Master will take, for that he could not receive
Instructions from him in so short a time, upon the Declaration which the Most
Christian King delivered on the first of this Month of June, to the Here
Ambassador Van Beverning. That in the mean time he partly explained himself, as
to his own private Sentiment, in the Memorial of the 10th of June, which he
presented to the Ambassadors of their Hi. and Mi. and that he doubted not, but
they made all due and fitting Reflections thereupon. That for the rest, he was
fully persuaded, though some unconquerable necessity might dispense with the
States General, or should oblige them to depart from any point of their
Alliance with his Electoral Serenity, that yet they will always proceed in it
with such caution and sincerity, as the foundation may subsist notwithstanding,
and his Electoral Serenity be at no prejudice, nor the band of their friendship
and good understanding to be weakened.

The said Ambassador added two Points, requiring the said Lords the States to
consider them, when they should take this matter into consideration. The one,
That France, in the Project of Peace, which its Ambassadors proposed here, does
not mention any Conditions, upon which it is willing to make a Peace with his
Electoral Serenity; whereas, on his behalf, there have been Proposals made to
that end, both with relation to France and Sweden, insomuch that he knows not
yet whether France will make any Peace with himself or no. The other, That the
Conditions proposed in that Project, with relation to Sweden, were so abject,
and even so contrary to what their Hi. and Mi. have engaged themselves to
procure his Electoral Serenity, that it must be believed, that France is not
willing that a Peace should be made with Sweden, inasmuch as their Hi. and Mi.
that see there is no room left for his Electoral Serenity to enter into the
Peace, in conjunction with themselves.

Finally, The said Ambassador promises to communicate the resolution of his
Most Serene Master, upon the said Declaration of France, as soon as he shall
receive it, referring himself for other matters to his said Memorial.

A Declaration of the Ambassador of Prince Charles of Lorrain, at a Conference
Extraordinary of the Allies at Nimeguen, the 20th of June, 1678.
THis Declaration could not be opened at large, because the President Canon had
only formed the Idea of it in his mind, and returned but the night before from
the Hague; he alleged that Journey, as an excuse for his not having been
present at the last Conference, saying, that he went to deliver the Lords the
States General a Letter from his Master. Then he enlarged upon the injustice of
the Alternatives, that were proposed by France, as Conditions of Peace: The
first, demanding a Country 35 miles in length, and 16 or 18 in breadth, with 26
Cities upon it, and 600 Buroughs and Villages: The other, depriving him of his
Capital City, and the convenience of communication with his own Country, by
pretending to pass through some of the best of his Highways. That both these
Conditions were equally hard, he demonstrated by the Election that was left his
Master to choose either. For the avoiding such Imperious Laws, he referred
himself to the Alliances made between their Imperial and Catholic Majesty's,
their Lordships the States General, and his late Uncle, and renewed since with
his own person with all possible extension, and withal recommended himself to
the friendship and protection of all his Allies, concluding with a formal
protestation, that he would resolve rather to live banished from his Country,
and entirely to maintain the Justice of his Title, and have his Allies that had
contracted with him, continue under their absolute Engagements, than ever to
return upon such hard Conditions, and so scandalous to his Birth, and his
undoubted Right of Succession, never having deserved so ill of France, as to be
used so cruelly.

A Letter from the Lords the States General, to Mons. the Duke of Luxemburg,
the 22. of June, 1678.
SIR,
WE have seen, with an equal mixture of joy and reverence, by the King's Answer
of the first of this Month, from his Camp at Wetteren, which the Here Van
Beverning delivered us from his Majesty, his sincere intentions, to put an end
to the present War by a Peace. In pursuance whereof, to show the like sincerity
on our part, for his Majesty's greater satisfaction, we have ordered our
Ambassadors at Nimeguen, to conclude and sign the Treaty of Peace with his
Majesty's Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, before the end of this Month,
with such of the Allies as shall be disposed to come into it. In the mean time
being assured, that his Catholic Majesty will join with us in accepting the
Peace, we entreated his Majesty, that he would be pleased from hence-forward,
to give necessary Orders to surcease all acts of Hostility by Land, and to
cause such of his Forces as are in his Country, to retire about the end of this
Month. Sir, This is what we thought we ought to acquaint you with, his Majesty
having in a Letter to us, expressed his desire to have it so.

The Hague, 22 of June, 1678.
A Memorial presented to his Majesty of Great Britain at London, by M. de
Borgomanero, etc. the 5th of June, 1678.
SIR,
THE state of Affairs being now so urgent, and the welfare or misery of all
Christendom depending upon the safety of the Low Countries, I conceive it is my
duty to represent to your Majesty, how necessary it is for your Majesty, who
alone can put a stop to the King of France' s progress in these Parts, to
maintain Forces by Sea and Land, and cause them to draw as near Flanders as may
be, that they may serve as a Bridle to the common Enemy, and your Majesty be in
a condition to protect and defend Christendom, from the utter ruin and
oppression, that the Most Christian King threatens it with. In like manner I
represent to your Majesty for the same Reasons, that it is altogether
necessary, that your Majesty make an Alliance Offensive and Defensive with the
King my Master, and the Emperor, who will be constant Allies, and ready to run
whatever fortune your Majesty shall hazard for the common Cause; not
questioning, but those other Princes, that are now in league with the King my
Master, will immediately enter into such Alliance, as your Majesty shall make;
and by this means, Christendom will be secured against the oppression of France.

London, the 5th. of June, 1678.
A Remonstrance of the Ambassadors of the Elector of Brandenburg, to the
Ambassadors of the Lords the States General, concerning the present Affairs of
the Treaties of Peace. Given at Nimeguen, this 31. of July, 1678.
THE Ambassador of his Electoral Serenity of Brandenburg, for the Treaties of
Peace at Nimeguen, having seen the Memorial of the Lords Ambassadors of France,
of the 17th. of July, wherein they endeavor to take away the Jealousies that
might arise, of the sincerity of his Most Christian Majesty's Intentions, and
of his faithfulness to his Word, concerning the evacuation of the Places, which
he promised to restore to Spain, and to their Hi. and Mi. the Lords the States
General of the United Provinces, thinks it fit, and according to his duty, to
represent to the Lords the Ambassadors of the States General, who communicated
to him the said Memorial: That as it is full of almost nothing else, in every
passage, but great Designs, of the Most Christian King, against his Electoral
Serenity, his Master, and other Princes, that have made some Conquests upon
Sweden; so his Electoral Serenity promises himself, as well from the
friendship of the Lords the States, and their fidelity of Word, as from their
justice and exactness, in performing the terms of the Alliance, that they will
not help forward such perniclous Designs, nor suffer them to be put in
execution, against one of their ancientest and most faithful Friend, Neighbor
and Ally, and that has been no less concerned, for the preservation and
re-establishment of their Commonwealth, than of his own Inheritances, and has
not stuck at exposing, whatever is most dear and precious to him in the whole
World, for their sakes.

It is evident, with what care his Electoral Serenity has governed all his
Actions, so as not to give the least ground of discontent to Sweden; and the
sincerity, with which he has renewed former Alliances with that Crown, is no
less apparent, by his applying them even to the present Conjunctures, for the
avoiding all manner of misunderstanding and rupture, which yet happened, by
the violent Invasion, made by the Army of Sweden, toward the end of the year,
1674. upon Marchia and Pomerania, directly against those, for whom such solemn
Stipulations had been, and contrary to the liberty, which each Party had
reserved to themselves, in the said Alliance: Which Invasion was the more
unjust, inasmuch as it was made at a time, when his Electoral Serenity, relying
on the public Faith, had sent his Forces so far off, that he was busy with
them in Alsatia. The Lords the States condemned and disliked this Proceeding no
less, than all other Christian Potentates throughout Europe did; and God has
made appear to all the World, by what has ensued, and by our mavelous
success, that his powerful Hand is able to protect the innocent, and punish
those that make so slight of Religion, Alliances, and Promises, that have had
the sanction of the public Faith. Their Hi. and Mi. and all others, without
doubt, will agree, that it were an unheard of piece of cruelty, to deal with
his Electoral Serenity, as he is threatened in that Memorial, for having made so
vigorous and glorious an opposition, to so unjust and forcible an Invasion. The
said Ambassador does not intend to lay open the weakness of the reasonings, in
the said Memorial of the Ambassadors of France, assuring himself, that their
Hi. and Mi. will not fail to expose it to the World, for the refutation of
those, that for want of solid Reasons, have been forced to betake themselves,
to such weak and groundless Arguments; since it appears, that therein they
contradict, and directly thwart, what the Most Christian King has avowed, and
positively promised, by the Letters and Resolutions, which his Majesty has
caused to be dispatched, and delivered to their Hi. and Mi. and to their
Ministers. He will only represent, what wrong would be done to his Electoral
Serenity, his Master, if their Hi. and Mi. should give ear to such Conditions,
as conduce to no other end, but that of serving the Interest of a declared
Enemy, by deserting a faithful Friend and Ally, and, at the same time, exposing
their own Commonwealth, to the most dangerous hazard in the World, which they
have endeavored, out of their great prudence, and with so much care, to secure
and shelter, by means of a Bar in Flanders, which the Most Christian King
himself thought necessary for maintaining their repose, but which will stand
them in no stead, if such another Bar be not likewise settled upon the Rhine.
Certainly, there needs more then an ordinary assurance, to undertake the
persuading a whole Commonwealth, consisting of so many wise, and illustrious
Members, to renounce whatever the Faith of their Alliances, and the true
Interest of their own Commonwealth, requires of them, and submit to such
prejudicial Councels; and to further the suffering an Ally, and Neighbor, to
be oppressed, that has given such extraordinary proofs of his Friendship to
their State; and that in favor of a party, with whom at present they are
engaged in open War, and that expresses by his excessive demands, so little of
an inclination to come to such a reconciliation, as may be fair, and at all
proportionable to the mischiefs, and inconveniences, that this fatal War has
brought, and continues to bring upon Christendom. I shall leave the rest to the
wise discussion of their Hi. and Mi. by reason of whose fidelity, affection,
and Justice, his Electoral Serenity is well assured, that they will testify in
this occurrence, as great a passion for the security, and defense, of his
Provinces of Cleve, which have always served for a Bar; and whose preservation,
has always been so very dear to them, as his Electoral Serenity has an
affection to their Commonwealth upon so many occasions, and of which he has
given such remarkable instances, especially, since the public Faith, and the
Welfare, and security of their own Estate, are equally concerned in the
Interest of it.

The Protestation of the Ambassadors, and Plenipotentiaries, of the King of
Denmark, the Elector of Brandenburg, etc. against the separate Peace of the
States General, of the United Provinces. Made the 10th. of Aug. 1678. at
Nimeguen.
THe Ambassadors, Plenipotentiaries, and Ministers underwritten, understanding,
with the utmost astonishment, that there was a likelihood of the Lords
Ambassadors, of the States General, of the United Provinces; resolving to Sign
this day, a separate Treaty of Peace, betwixt the Most Christian King, and
their Hi. and Mi. which has been likewise confirmed to them, by some of the
said Ambassadors themselves, though hitherto, they have not made any
communication of the Contents of their Project, nor held any particular
Conference, upon a matter of so great consequence, in conformity to Treaties,
by which their Hi. and Mi. are obliged so to do.

The said Ambassadors, and Plenipotentiary Ministers, have thought it their
duty, to represent to the Lords Ambassadors, of their Hi. and Mi. the
disagreement of this proceeding, with the Tenor of the Alliances, so solemnly
struck with their Lords and Masters; wherein the Lords the States, promise upon
their Word, and upon the credit of the public Faith, never to think of making
separate Treaties with their common Enemy, that was upon the point of
overturning their Commonwealth, and from whose oppression, they were saved
only by such assistances, and diversions, as were given from time to time in
diverse parts of the Empire, for their sakes.

Then they required with all the instances imaginable, and conjured the said
Lords Ambassadors, by what ever is held most sacred, and inviolable, not to
precipitate the Signing this separate Peace, being directly opposite to the
said Alliances, and to allow them a little time, to give their Lords and
Masters necessary information: since that delay could not be at all prejudicial
to them, and that request being but what every one might expect, from the
public Faith, and the sincerity of the Lords, the States General. They promise
themselves the more assuredly, that both will be granted without any
difficulty, especially, because there seems not to be any apparent necessity,
why their Hi. and Mi. should take up a resolution, so contrary to all that they
have taken, and concerted heretofore, and even after they had exhorted their
Allies afresh to stedfastness, in the observance, and performance of the
Treaties, and after the said Allies, our Lords and Masters, had taken vigorous
resolutions thereupon, and in compliance with their desires, had sent such
numerous Forces into the heart of the Spanish Low Countries, to save Mons from
the extremity, to which the Arms of France had reduced it, and to second and
execute, what other designs, and exploits, Spain, and the State, under the
conduct of his Highness, the Prince of Orange, should resolve upon, for the
good of the common cause, and the safety of the Low Countries, in particular.

They have ordered moreover, some select Troops, that are now under march, to
draw toward the Muse, and to be employed for the same purpose; so that with
God's assistance, we have yet reason to hope for good success, in so just, and
good a Cause.

However, if the Lords the States, should find themselves obliged, by some
indispensable necessity, (the occasion and force whereof, is for all that
unknown to the Allies) to proceed with so much precipitation, to a separate
Peace with France; the said Ambassadors, and Ministers, declare by this
Memorial, that their Lords and Masters, are disposed, and ready to enter with
them into this Treaty, and to conclude a Peace with his Most Christian Majesty,
in conjunction with the Lords, the States General, upon such honorable, and
equitable Conditions, as shall be agreed on, in a short time, toward the
conclusion whereof, they will bring all manner of facility, and good offices,
on their parts.

We promise our selves, that the said Lords Ambassadors, will not refuse so
just and generous an offer; nor can we be persuaded, that the intention of
their Hi. and Mi. is not exactly conformable to this just desire, or that they
can so much as conceive a thought, of abandoning their good and faithful
Friends, Neighbors, and Allies, that have employed what ever was most dear,
and precious to them in the world, to save them from the ruin that threatened
them, and to re-establish them in their former Liberty, and Splendor. At
least, we promise our selves, from their Justice, and sincerity, that they will
not conclude upon any thing, that shall not comprehend the Interests of their
Allies, which in effect are their own, nor join in the oppression, and ruin,
of those that have so faithfully assisted them, against so powerful an Enemy;
who on the one hand, makes so much show of the sincerity of his desire, to
restore Peace to Christendom, and on the other, refuses to admit of such means,
as are capable of procuring it; besides that, this abandoning their Allies, and
the Neutrality, that they pretend to settle, was not so much as required by the
Most Christian King, in the platform of Conditions of Peace, which he
Projected; the States, having always declared, against accepting the Cessation
for six weeks, which the Most Christian-King afterward offered; because the
Neutrality, was made a Condition of it, which would have put them out of a
possibility of assisting their Allies.

But if the worst came to the worst, and that notwithstanding, all these just
and equitable Remonstrances, they will proceed to Sign a Treaty of this nature;
the said Ambassadors, Plenipotentiaries, and Ministers of the High-Allies, can
do no other, then solemnly, and most formally, to protest against this separate
Treaty, as being directly contrary to the Alliances, and the solemn assurances,
that have been given from time to time, of the stedfastness, and exactness, of
their Hi. and Mi. in observing, and fulfilling their Treaties.

They challenge them likewise for all the misfortunes, inconveniences, losses,
and damages, that all Christendom in general, and their Lords and Masters,
each in particular, may suffer by this separation, and the non-observance of
Alliances, so solemnly, and sacredly contracted, saving to themselves all their
right, by virtue of those Alliances, by the Law of Nations, and that of God and
Man, submitting to the sound, and disinteressed judgment of all the World, the
wrong done to their Lords and Masters, contrary to all promises, engagements,
Treaties, and that without any necessity, by a procedure equally rash, and
unheard of, in a time when God gives us hopes of redress, in a more decent, and
reasonable way; they challenge them, as those, that out of blind passions, and
prepossessed sentiments, even against their opinion, who are animated with a
more generous sense of honor, and the consideration of their own engagements,
to a rational stedfastness, sacrifice the honor, and glory of their party, to
proceedings unworthy a State that is governed by reason, and Justice; by which
manner of acting, they contract such a stain, as will never wear out of the
memory of mankind.

Nimeguen, the 10th. of August, 1678. Signed, Hoegh, Blaespyl.
St. Petkum, Zurmuhlen.

A second Protestation of the Ambassadors, and Plenipotentiaries, of the King
of Denmark, of his Electoral Highness of Brandenburgh, etc. Made, the 18th. of
August, 1678. at the Hague, etc.
THe Counselor, and Envoy Extraordinary, of his Majesty, the King of Denmark,
and Norway, etc. The Deputy Extraordinary, of his Electoral Highness of
Brandenburg, and the Minister of their Highnesses, the Dukes of Zell, and
Wolsfembutel, underwritten, understanding by common fame, as if your Hi. and
Mi. (after your Ambassadors having Signed a separate Peace with those of
France, at Nimeguen, concerning which, they refer themselves to the
protestations, there made by the Ministers, of all the High-Allies, and to the
Memorials which they have presented here, to the Lords, your Hi. and Mi.
Deputies for Foraign affairs) had also been prevailed with, to agree upon your
own particular, upon a Cessation of Arms, with Sweden, for a certain time,
could hardly give credit to a thing, so directly opposite, to the express words
of Treaties.

But, because they find with great sorrow, that many things are Negociated, and
Treated, betwixt your Hi. and Mi. and the common Enemy of the Allies, of which
the High-Allies, have no timely notice beforehand; the parties underwritten,
have thought themselves bound, to remonstrate to your Hi. and Mi. how contrary
such proceedings are, to the very words of the Alliances, and not knowing for
want of due communication, the truth of the news, which the Enemies give out,
of this engagement, pretended to be entered into, by your Hi. and Mi. to Sweden,
for a Cessation of Arms; they have thought fit, in discharge of their own duty,
to put your Hi. and Mi. in mind of the very words of the Treaties, which in the
18th. Article run thus; viz.

That the Allies, shall from time to time, communicate to one another, what
advances, or proposals soever, shall be made at the Negociations of Peace, or
Truce. And a little before,

That the States General, shall not make any Truce with the Enemy, otherwise
then in conjunction, and by common consent. And they conjure them, by all that
is sacred in solemn Treaties, and public Faith, not to admit of so notorious a
contravention, on their part, to the said Treaties, in this point of a Truce,
without a justifiable reason, or urgent necessity.

The parties underwritten, being moreover obliged, to enter solemn protests, in
the names, and on the behalf of their Masters, in case, contrary to all
expectation, this Cessation of Arms shall fall out, to be separately agreed
upon with Sweden already, and in like manner, with relation to all other
negotiations, and engagements, against the Tenor of the Treaties, that say,
and require expressly,

That not any of the Parties, shall come to any conclusion of a Peace, without
comprehending their Allies. We promise our selves, that your Hi. and Mi.
according to your great knowledge, and the exactness, with which you have used
inviolably, to observe the tenor of your Treaties, will be pleased to make
reflection, upon what the parties underwritten have now alleged, so as not to
ratify what has been concluded at Nimeguen, with the Ambassadors of France, as
being inconsistent with the said Engagements, which, without doubt, will
confirm all the Potentates of Europe, in the confidence which they have
hitherto placed in your Hi. and Mi. concerning the fulfilling your promises
made upon the public Faith. However, the Ministers underwritten, find
themselves obliged to reserve to their Lords and Masters their Right, as well
by the Law of Nations, as in pursuance of the forementioned Treaties, clearing
them at the same time, from whatever inconveniences and misfortunes, this
manner of proceeding may produce, both to the prejudice of the common Cause,
and each of their particular Interests.

Given at the Hague, the 18th of August, 1678.
A Memorial of the Ambassadors of Denmark, and of the Elector of Brandenburg,
given in to those of the King of Spain, of the 22. of August.
THE Glory which the Crown of Spain has always acquired, and maintained
hitherto, without the least imputation, by its stedfastness and constancy, by
its fidelity to its Allies, and by its religious adhering to its Faith, leaves
the underwritten Ambassadors, Plenipotentiaries, and Ministers of the High
Allies, no room to doubt, but that it will yet continue in the same generous
Sentiments, and transmit this Reputation to posterity, which all former Ages
have been obliged to publish in its honor.

But because, since the unforeseen signing of the Peace betwixt France, and the
Lords the States General, the most glorious opportunity has presented it self,
that ever could have happened, to signalize this honorable firmness, and
purchase a new splendour and luster to the said Monarchy, the said parties
underwritten would not be wanting to make use of it, to represent to their
Excellencies, the Lords Ambassadors of his Catholic Majesty, at this Congress,
that their Lords and Masters can promise themselves no less, from the justice
and equity of theirs, by their former experience, than the like behavior upon
the present occasion; to the end, that all the World may judge with them, that
Fidelity is the most precious Diadem of a well-ordered State, which no force
can invade, no adversity pervert, no necessity bereave it of; and that they
justly and undoubtedly expect to see those defects, that rather by the
unfortunate constitution of Affairs, than out of any ill will, have hitherto
intervened, in diverse Articles of the Treaties, that are betwixt his Catholic
Majesty and themselves, made up by this unshaken constancy; so as his Majesty
will not in any sort separate or loosen himself from those, that have not
feared to expose themselves on the very brink of a precipice, and to throw
themselves into the most dangerous events, wherein they yet continue, for his
sake, and to draw his Countries, in these Parts, out of the gulf that was about
to swallow them up. The said parties underwritten can assure their said
Excellencies, upon their certain knowledge, and by their express Orders, that
their Lords and Masters are entirely disposed, and ready to take part with
theirs, and with all those that shall now think it their interest, or will be
willing yet to join in the defense of so just a Cause, as the common Cause is,
and in the establishment of the public safety, in all the hazards, perils, and
dangerous events, that the Divine Providence shall be pleased to ordain,
whether the event should fall out to be that of accomplishing so just a Design,
by a general, a just, and a reasonable Peace, or whether the Enemy should be so
hard, as to make the obtaining it, stick upon impracticable conditions and
demands, and expose it to the continuance of a longer and a fiercer War.

Not any of our Lords and Masters ever refused to take such courses, as reason
and decency have established between Sovereign Princes, to arrive at the first;
they will yet joyfully embrace them, and will demonstrate by their readiness
and facility, that the Quiet of Christendom is the only object of all their
wishes: But since it is evident to all the World, that the Enemies have
hitherto refused to admit of any, but would prescribe Laws to us, rather than
suffer us to treat upon terms in order to it, it is easily discovered not to be
their fault, that at present we are all involved in the latter.

A rational stedfastness is only capable of redressing these mischiefs, and of
bringing them back to more just and decent Measures, that have been led aside
out of the way of their Duty and Engagements, by the secret Cabals of some
private Persons, and the violence and inadvertence of some Men of fickle minds,
that know not how dear and precious Faith and Truth ought to be to a free
State; when they shall take notice, that his Majesty is far from following so
pernicious an example, and will keep faithfully to the Letter of the mutual
Treaties, out of which your Excellencies will find some necessary Extracts
hereunto annexed, and let the World see, that he chooses rather to run the same
fortune with his Allies to the very last, than unmercifully to desert them,
contrary to all sacredness of promises, and only to save himself to their cost,
by a notorious breach of such solemn Alliances.

His Majesty can lose nothing by this means, but will be a gainer, by
maintaining his Glory, his Honor, and his Reputation. The Bar that is settled
for bounds to the Conquests of France, is rather a large career for it, to
drive on its Designs in, as far as it lists. All that is left the King of
Spain in the Low Countries, serves rather to exhaust his Treasures, for the
little time that he shall be permitted to enjoy it peaceably, than to give him
any assurance of a settled possession. And when they shall have loosened the
sacred Band of the Allies, and disarmed the neighboring Estates, who will
hinder the rest from falling under the dominion of a foreign Power, whenever
the Enemy shall have a mind to it? Certainly, they that for their good will,
and all their endeavors, and all the hazards to which they have exposed
themselves, shall find themselves now either evil-entreated by their Friends,
or deserted by their Allies, and so ill rewarded for their affection and good
will, will be wiser at another time, when the fire shall be greater, than to
run to quench it, and every one will content himself to provide for his own
safety, when he shall consider, how unworthily he has been recompensed, for
what he has now done for that of the Public.

But the strength of all these Arguments is so well known, to their
Excellencies aforesaid, that it would be superfluous to allege new ones. They
know very well, how necessary it is, for all that are concerned in the Interest
of the preservation of the Low Countries, not to let them utterly sink,
whatever may be pretended outwardly. The Enemy's Arms have already got too
fast hold of these Rampires, of the neighboring Estates, for us to imagine,
that they can be contented to see them entirely lost. For this cause the
Ambassadors, Plenipotentiaries, and Ministers underwritten, will not enlarge
upon the debate of these Matters. They are only bound in duty, to conjure your
Excellencies, by the sacredness of reciprocal Engagements, by the force of
mutual Alliances, by the Faith of the King your Master, and by the Glory and
the Honor of your Nation and Country, not to make any step on the present
occasion, that may be prejudicial to their Lords and Masters, or be injurious
to your own, or your selves, since we are persuaded, you never will leave this
Victory to the common Enemies, of being superior to the King your Master in
constancy, and stedfastness to their Allies, though Destiny may by the fortune
of War, have made his condition at present somewhat worse than theirs.

This is what the Parties underwritten do most instantly beseech your
Excellencies, not only to consider your selves with mature deliberation, but
duelyto report it where it is proper, that we may both know, that these things
have been represented in time, and promise our selves such resolutions and
effects, as are worthy so great a King as yours, and becoming such zealous,
clear-fighted, and wise Ministers, as every one knows your Excellencies are.

Nimeguen, the 22. of August, 1678.
A Letter of the Ambassadors of the Lords, the States General of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries, to the Lords Ambassadors Extraordinary, and
Plenipotentiaries of France, for an Explanation of the 13th. Article of the
Treaty of Peace.
My Lords,
Since the 13th. Article of the Treaty of Peace, concluded and signed the 10th.
of this Month, concerning the Neutrality promised by our Lords the States
General, with relation to the Enemies of his Most Christian Majesty, and his
Allies, and the garranting such Engagements as Spain shall enter into, with
relation to the like Neutrality, is couched in such a manner, as that an
obligation may be inferred, not only for the present, and as long as the War
shall continue, in which the Allies of our Lords the States are now engaged,
but that consequences may be drawn for the time to come, and such occasions as
may arise, after all the present Wars are ended. And since your Excellencies
know, that there never was any intention to agree upon such Neutrality, but
only for the present time, and during the continuance of this War, according to
his Most Christian Majesty's Proposals, We pray your Excellencies, to clear
this Matter to us in a word, and declare, that his Majesty's meaning, and that
of your Excellency's, is, that the said Article shall be applicable, to the
time of the present War only, and your Excellencies will infinitely oblige,

Nimeguen, the 17th. of Aug. 1678. My Lords, Your Excellencies most humble, and
most obedient Servants, H. Beverningh. W. Haren


The Answer of the Lords Ambassadors of France, to the Ambassadors of the
Lords, the States General of the United Provinces, in Explanation of the 13th.
Article of the Treaty of Peace.
My Lords,
WE have received your Excellency's Letter, of the 17th. of this Month; and
though the fidelity, wherewith the King our Master has always acted, and the
sincerity, with which his Majesty is willing to restore the Lords the States
General, to the first degree of his friendship, ought not to leave your
Excellencies under any apprehension, lest he should endeavor to surprise you,
or put a larger construction upon the 13th. Article of the Treaty, concluded
and signed betwixt us, on the 10th. of this Month, then as we explained our
selves to one another; yet We are willing to assure your Excellencies, that it
was not his Majesty's intention, nor consequently ours, to make use of the said
Article any longer, than the present War should last; nor, whenever it shall
please God to put an end to it, to oblige the Lords the States General to more,
than what their own Interest, and their good Union with his Majesty, shall
require of them. We are,

Nimeguen, the 17th. of Aug. 1678. My Lords, Your Excellencies most humble, and
most obedient Servants, Le M. D' Estrades. Colbert. D' Avaux.


The Ratification of the Explanation of the thirteenth Article, of the Treaty
of Peace, betwixt France and Holland.
THe King, being informed by his Ambassadors Extraordinary, and
Plenipotentiaries, at the Treaty of Peace at Nimeguen, of their explanation, by
their Letter of the seventeenth of August, this present year, to the
Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries of the States General, of the
United Provinces, of the Low Countries, of the thirteenth Article of the Treaty
of Peace, Concluded, and Signed at Nimeguen; the tenth day of the said month of
August; betwixt the said Lords Ambassadors, in which is mentioned, the
Neutrality promised by the said States General, as well in relation to his
Majesty, and his Allies, as the garranting such engagements, as Spain should
enter into, with relation to the like Neutrality. His Majesty having read and
examined the said Letter, by which his said Ambassadors do declare, and assure,
that his Majesty's intention, is not to benefit himself by the said Article,
any longer then the present War shall continue. His Majesty was well pleased
with the said explanation, and has allowed, approved, and ratified the same,
as fully, as if it were inserted into the said Treaty of Peace, next after the
thirteenth Article thereof, there allowed, approved, and ratified, Promising on
the Faith, and Word of a King, to fulfill, and cause to be observed, sincerely,
and faithfully, whatever is therein contained, without suffering any thing,
ever to be done to the contrary, directly or indirectly, for any cause, or upon
any occasion whatsoever. In witness whereof, his Majesty has Signed these
presents with his own hand, and has caused his Privy Seal to be put thereto.

Given at Fountainbleau, the fifth day of September, in the year one thousand
six hundred, seventy eight. Signed, Lewis. And underneath was Signed, Arnauld.

A separate Article, for a general indemnification of the Subjects, both of
France, and Holland.
THe King having received the separate Article, Signed by his Ambassadors
Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries, at the Treaty of Peace at Nimeguen, and
those of the Lords the States General, of the United Provinces, of the
Low Countries, whereof the Tenor is as follows; viz.

The Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries, of the Most Christian
King, and the Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries, of the Lords
the States General, of the United Provinces, declare by this present Act; that
though the Treaty, which they Signed on the tenth of August, import a
sufficient abolishment, of whatever has been committed on either side, by
reason of the War, to which the said Treaty has put an end; whether by such as
being Subjects born of France, and obliged to serve his Majesty, by reason of
the Offices or Estates, which they possessed within the compass of France, have
entered or continued in the service of the Lords, the States General, or by such
as being born Subjects, of the said Lords the States, or obliged to serve them,
by reason of the Offices or Estates, which they possessed within the compass of
the United Provinces, entered or continued in his Most Christian Majesty's
service; yet for their more security, and to protect them from all prosecution,
the said Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries, have agreed, that
all such Persons, of what quality or condition soever, without exception, may
enter, re-enter, and shall be actually suffered to continue, and be settled, in
the peaceable possession, and enjoyment of all their Estates, Honors,
Dignities, Privileges, Franchises, Rights, Exemptions, Settlements, and
Liberties, without being liable, all or any of them, to be prosecuted, vexed,
or molested, either in general, or in particular, for any cause, or upon any
pretense, by reason of any thing that has happened since the beginning of the
said War. In pursuance of which Declaration, and after it shall have been
Ratified, as well by his Most Christian Majesty, as by the Lords the States
General, which shall be within a month, all and every of them shall be
permitted, without any Letters of abolishment, or forgiveness, to return in
Person to their Houses, and enjoy their Lands, and all other their Goods, or to
dispose thereof, as they shall think fit.

Given at Nimeguen, the 24th. of September, 1678. The M. D' Estrades.
Calbert.
H. Beverning.
W. Haren.
His Majesty having read the said Article, has Approved, and Ratified, and
does Approve, and Ratify the same, Promising on the Faith and Word of a King,
to fulfill, and cause to be observed, sincerely, and faithfully, whatever is
therein contained, without ever suffering any thing to be acted to the
contrary, directly, or indirectly, for any cause, or upon any occasion
whatsoever. In witness whereof, his Majesty has Signed these presents with his
hand, and has caused his Privy Seal to be set thereto. Given at Fountainbleau,
the third of October, in the year, One thousand six hundred seventy eight.
Signed, Lewis. And underneath was Signed, Arnauld.
The States General, of the United Provinces, of the Low Countries: To all that
shall see these presents, Greeting. Since on the 24th. of September, 1678,
there was made and concluded at Nimeguen, by the Ambassadors Extraordinary, and
Plenipotentiaries, of the Most Christian King, and ours, an Act of oblivion, in
Tenor, as follows; viz.

The Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries, etc. We have Agreed,
Approved, and Ratified, the said Act, in all it is points, and do Agree,
Approve, and Ratify the same, by these presents, Promising faithfully, and
sincerely, to keep, maintain, and inviolably to observe the same in every
point, according to the form and purport thereof, without ever acting to the
contrary, directly or indirectly, upon any pretense whatsoever. In token
whereof, we have caused these Presents to be Signed by the President of our
Assembly, and underwritten by our Principal Register, and our Seal to be set
thereto.


Done at the Hague, the 30th. day of September, in the year, One thousand six
hundred seventy eight. Signed, Wilhem, van Nassaw.
By Order of the said Lords the States General. H. Fagel.

The Treaty of Peace, betwixt France and Spain, Concluded at Nimeguen, the
17th. day of September, 1678.
IN the Name of God the Creator, and of the most Holy Trinity; To all present,
and to come, be it known, That whereas during the course of the War, that arose
some years since betwixt the most High, most Excellent, and most Mighty, Prince
Lewis the 14th. by the grace of God, Most Christian King of France and Navar,
and his Allies, on the one part; and the most High, most Excellent, and most
Mighty Prince Charles, the second, by the grace of God, Catholic King of
Spain, and his Allies, on the other part; Their Majesty's have desired nothing
more vehemently; then to see it end in a good Peace; and whereas the same
desire to put a stop, as far as in them lay, to the ruin of so many Provinces,
the tears of so much People, and the shedding of so much Christian blood, has
induced them to comply, with the powerful Offices of the most High, most
Excellent, and most Mighty Prince, The King of Great Britain, to send their
Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries, to the Town of Nimeguen; so
it is come to pass through an effect of the Divine goodness, that has been
pleased to make use of the entire confidence, that their Majesty's have always
reposed in the mediation of the said King of Great Britain, that at length the
said Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries; to wit, on the behalf of
his Most Christian Majesty, the Sieur Count D' Estrades, Marshal of France, and
Knight of his Majesty's Orders; the Sieur Colbert Knight, Marquess of Croissy,
Counselor in ordinary, in his Council of State, and the Sieur De Mesmes
Knight, Count D' Avaux, Councellor also in his Councels, and on the behalf of
his Catholic Majesty, the Sieur Dom Pablo Spinola Doria, Marquess de les
Balbases, Duke of Sesto, Lord of Guinossa, Casalnosetta, and Ponteucrone,
Counfellor in his Council of State, and Chief Protonotary in his Council of
Italy; Dom Gaspard de Tebes, and Cordova Tello; and Guzman Count de Venazuza,
Marquess de la Fuente, Lord of Lerena, of the House of Arrucas, of the Isles of
Gundalupa, and Matalione, perpetual Master de la Victoire, perpetual Major, and
Recorder of the Town of Sevil, Gentleman of the Bedchamber to his Imperial
Majesty, one of his chief Council of War, and General of his Artillery; Dom
Pedro Ronquillo, Knight of the Order of Alcantara, Counfellor in his Councels
of Castile, and of the Indies; and Dom John Baptisse Christin, Knight,
Counselor in the high Council of Flanders, near to his said Catholic
Majesty's Person, and one of his Council of State, and of his Privy Council in
the Low Countries; by virtue of the Letters, and Commissions, which they have
communicated to one another, and the Copies whereof, are word for word inserted
at the end of this Treaty, have come to an agreement and conclusion, upon
mutual Conditions of Peace, and Friendship, in manner following, viz.

I.
It is Covenanted and agreed, that from henceforth, there shall be a good, firm
and lasting Peace, Confederation and perpetual Alliance, and Friendship,
between the Most Christian, and Catholic Kings, their Children born, and to be
born, their Heirs, Successors, and Inheriters, their Kingdoms, Estates,
Countries, and Subjects, so that they shall love one another, as good brethren,
procuring with all their might one another's good, honor, and reputation, and
faithfully preventing, as far as they shall be able, one another damage.

II.
In pursuance of this good Reunion, the Cessation of all manner of
Hostilities, agreed on, and Signed, the 19th. day of August, of this present
year, shall continue according to the Tenor thereof, betwixt the said Kings,
their Subjects, and Vassals, as well by Sea, and other Waters, as by Land, and
generally in all places where the War is carried on, by their Majesty's Arms,
as well between their Troops, and Armies, as between the Garrisons of their
several places; and if any Contravention shall have happened, to be committed
contrary to the said Gessation, by the taking of any place or places, whether
by attack or surprise, or by private intelligence, nay though Prisoners shall
have been taken, or other Acts of Hostility committed through some accident
that could not be foreseen, or by such Persons as could not foresee it,
contrary to the said Cessation of Hostilities, such Contravention shall
faithfully be repaired on both sides, without delay or difficulty, restoring to
the full, whatever shall have been taken, and delivering the Prisoners without
ransom or paying of charges, in such manner that all things be restored, in
such manner, to the same condition they were in, on the said 19th. day of
August, when the said Cessation was agreed, and Signed, the Tenor whereof
shall be observed, till the day of the exchange of the Ratifications of this
present Treaty.

III.
All causes of enmity, or misunderstanding, shall remain for ever extinct, and
abolished, and whatever has happened or been done, by reason of the present
War, or during the same, shall be put into perpetual oblivion, so as for the
future no inquiry shall be made into the same, on either side, directly or
indirectly, by Law, or otherwise, under any pretense whatsoever; nor may their
Majesty's, or their Subjects, Servants, and Adherents on either side, express
any manner of resentment, of whatever offenses may have been committed against
them, or damages received by them, during the present War.

IV.
In contemplation of the Peace, the Most Christian King, immediately after the
exchange of the Ratifications of this present Treaty, shall put into the
Catholic King's power, the Place, and Fortress of Charleroy, the Town of
Binche, the Town and Fortress of Aeth, Oudenard, and Coartray, with their
Provostships, and Castellanies; Appurtenances, and Dependancies, in the same
manner as his Catholic Majesty possessed them, before the War of the year
1667. All which Towns and Places, the Catholic King yielded to the said Most
Christian King, at the Treaty signed at Aix la Chapelle, the 2d. of May, 1668.
from which this present Treaty does expressly derogate, for so much as relates
to the said Towns and Places, their Appurtenances and Dependances. In pursuance
whereof, the said Catholic King shall take possession of the same, and enjoy
them to him and his Successors, fully and peaceably, excepting the Verge of
Menin, and the Town of Conde, which though heretofore pretended by the Most
Christian King, to be a Member of the Castellany of Aeth, shall nevertheless
remain to the Crown of France, together with all its Dependances, by virtue of
this present Treaty, as shall be said hereafter.

V.
The said most Christian King obliges himself, and promises to put likewise
into the hands of the said Catholic King, immediately upon the said Exchange
of the Ratifications, the City and Duchy of Limburg, together with all its
Dependances, the Country of Outremeuse, the City and Citadel of Ghent, with
all its Dependances; likewise the Fort of Rodenhus, and the Country of Waes,
the Town and Place of Leuve in Brabant, together with its Dependances; the Town
and Place of St. Ghilain, whose Fortifications nevertheless shall be razed; and
the Town of Puicerda in Catalonia, in the condition it now is, with their
Countries, Places, Castles, Forts, Lands, Lordships, Demesns, Bailifwicks,
Appurtenances, Dependances, and Annexation, without reserving or detaining any
thing therein, to be possessed by his Catholic Majesty and his Successors, in
the same manner he enjoyed them before the present War.

VI.
The said Places, Towns, Places of Charleroy, Binch, Aeth, Oudenard, and
Courtray, their Baylifwicks, Castellanies, Governments, Provostships,
Territories, Demesns, Lordships, Appurtenances, and Dependances, and all
thereunto annexed, by what name soever called, with all the Men, Vassals,
Subjects, Towns, Buroughs, Villages, Hamlets, Forests, Rivers,
Champain-Countreys, and all other things whatsoever thereunto belonging, shall
remain, by virtue of this present Treaty of Peace, to his Catholic Majesty,
his Heirs, Successors, and Assigns, irrecoverably, and for ever, together with
the same Rights of Sovereignty, Propriety, Regalities, Guardianship, and
Jurisdiction, Nomination, Prerogatives and Preheminencies over the Bishoprics,
Cathedral Churches, and Abbeys, Priories, Dignities, Curacies, and all other
Benefices whatsoever, situate within the said Countries, Places, and
Bayliffwicks so yielded up, to whatsoever Abbeys the said Priories do appertain
and belong, and all other Rights that heretofore belonged to the Most Christian
King, though not particularly here expressed; so as his Catholic Majesty shall
not be troubled or molested for the future, by any means whatsoever, in right
or in deed, by the said Most Christian King, his Successors, or any Princes of
his Family, or by any other, or upon any pretense or occasion that may happen,
in the said Sovereignty, Propriety, Jurisdiction, Appeal, possession and
enjoyment of all the said Countries, Towns, Places, Castles, Lands and
Lordships, Provostships, Demesnes, Castellanies, and Bayliffwicks, together
with all the Places, and other things thereon depending. And to this end, the
said Most Christian King, as well for himself, as for his Heirs, Successors and
Assigns, does renounce, quit-claim, yield and transferr, as his said
Plenipotentiaries, in his Name, by this present irrevocable Treaty of Peace,
have renounced, quit-claimed, yielded and transferred, perpetually and for
ever, in favor and to the behoof of the said Catholic King, his Heirs,
Successors and Assigns, all the Rights, Actions and Pretensions, Rights of
Regality, Patronage, Guardianship, Jurisdiction, Nomination, Prerogatives and
Preheminences over the Bishoprics, Cathedral Churches, and all other Benefices
whatsoever, situate within the said Places and Bayliffwicks so yielded up, to
whatsoever Abbeys the said Priories did appertain and belong, and generally
without any reservation or withholding, all other Rights whatsoever, that the
said Most Christian King, his Heirs and Successors, have and challenge, or may
have and challenge, for any cause, or reason whatsoever, over the said
Countries, Places, Castles, Forts, Lands, Lordships, Demesnes, Castellanies,
and Bayliffwicks, and over all Places thereon depending, as has been said,
notwithstanding any Laws, Customs and Constitutions to the contrary,
notwithstanding, though confirmed by Oath. From all which, and from the
derogating Clauses, of derogating Clauses, it is expressly derogated by this
present Treaty, in order to the said Renunciations, and Cessions, which shall
be valid, and take place, without that the particular expressing, or
specification of any one, shall derogate from the general, nor the general from
particular, and excluding for ever all exceptions, upon what Rights, Titles,
Causes, or Pretenses whatsoever grounded. And the said Most Christian King
declares, consents, wills and intends, That the Men, Vassals, and
Subjects of the said Countries, Towns and Lands, yielded to the Crown of Spain,
as aforesaid, shall be, and remain discharged and absolved, from this time
forward, and for ever, from the Faith, Homages, Services, and Oaths of
Allegiance, that they may have made to himself, or the Most Christian Kings,
his Predecessors, as also from all obedience, subjection and vassallage, which
they owe him by reason thereof; it being the intention of the said Most
Christian King, that the said Faith, Homages, and Oaths of Allegiance, shall be
void, and of no force, as fully, as if they never had been made, or taken.

VII.
The said Most Christian King shall also cause to be restored to the said
Catholic King, all the Towns, Places, Forts, Castles, and Posts, that have or
may have been seized by his Arms, in whatsoever Parts of the World, to the day
of the publication of the Peace. And in like manner, his Catholic Majesty
shall cause to be restored to his Most Christian Majesty, whatever Places,
Forts, Castles and Posts, may have been seized by his Arms, during the present
War, in any Parts of the World, unto the day of the publication of the Peace.

VIII.
The restitution of the said Places, as aforesaid, shall be made by the Most
Christian King, or his Minister, really and truly, without any delay or
difficulty, for any cause, or upon any occasion whatsoever, to him or them that
shall be deputed by the Catholic King, in time and manner aforesaid, and in
the condition they now are, without demolishing, weakening, diminishing or
endamaging the same in any sort, and without pretending to, or demanding any
re-imbursement, for fortifying the said Places, or for paying what might be due
to the Soldiers, and people of War there.

IX.
It is further agreed, That all Proceedings, Judgments and Sentences, given and
made by the Judges, and other the Officers of his Most Christian Majesty, in
such Towns and Places as his Majesty enjoyed, by virtue of the Treaty of Aix la
Chappelle, and quitted, as above, to his Catholic Majesty, or by the
Parliament of Tournay, by reason of Controversies, and Suits at Law, prosecuted
as well by the Inhabitants of the said Towns, and their Dependances, as by
others, during the time they were under the obedience of the said Most
Christian King, shall take place, and be of as full force and effect, as if the
said King continued Master, and actually possessed of the said Towns and
Countries: Nor shall the said Judgments and Sentences be called in question,
or annulled, nor the execution thereof be otherwise retarded or hindered;
nevertheless, it shall be lawful for the Parties to seek relief, by review of
the Cause, and course of Law, and Order prescribed by the Statutes, yet so as
the Judgments shall in the mean time, remain in full force and virtue, though
without prejudice to what is stipulated in that respect, in the 21. Article of
this present Treaty.

X.
Whereas his Most Christian Majesty's Ministers, after the Peace of Aix la
Chappelle, maintained at the Conference at Lille, That the Slufes, both on the
West and East Side of the Town of Niewport, and the Fort in Vierboet, at the
end of the Western Sluse, near the mouth of Newport-Heven, and one part of the
Fort of Nieuven Dame, built upon the Eastern Sluse, with the Piers of the said
Haven, being kept in repair by those of Furnes, were within the Territory and
Jurisdiction of the Castellany of Furnes, and that consequently they belonged
to his Most Christian Majesty: And his Catholic Majesty's Ministers held the
contrary, that they did not; and whether they did or did not, that it ought to
suffice, that since the said Fortifications were made, as well with respect of
the Castellany of Furnes, as to the Town of Newport, his Catholic Majesty,
being a Sovereign Prince, might incorporate, and appropriate the said parts
thereof, to the Haven and Fortifications of Newport, and by that means make
them inseparable from that Town. It is agreed, That the said Sluses, and other
parts of the Fortifications of Newport abovementioned, shall remain to his
Catholic Majesty, as well as the Town it self, without any Pretensions ever to
be made to the same, by his Most Christian Majesty, by reason of the Town and
Castellany of Furnes being his, or otherwise. And for the draining of the
Waters of the Castellany of Furnes, it shall be continued, and his Catholic
Majesty shall enjoy the same, in manner and form, as has been used till now.

XI.
The said Most Christian King shall retain, continue seized of, and actually
enjoy, the whole County of Burgundy, commonly called the Franche Comte, and the
Towns, Places, and Countries thereto belonging, together with the Town of
Bezancm, and the Liberties thereof, and the Towns of Valenciennes, and its
Dependances, Bourbain, and its Dependances, Conde, and its Dependances, though
heretofore pretended to be a Member of the Castellany of Aeth, Cambruy and
Cambresis, Air, St. Omer, and their Dependances, Ipre, and its Castellany,
Warwik, and Warneton upon the Lys, Poperinghen, Bailleul and Cassel, with their
Dependances, Bavay and Maubeage, with their Dependances.

XII.
The said County of Burgundy, the Towns, Places, and Countries thereto
belonging, together with the Town of Bezancon, and the Liberties thereof, as
also the said Towns and Places of Valenciennes, Bouchain, Conde, Cambray, Air,
St. Omer, Ipres, Warwik and Warnoton, Poperinghen, Bailleul, Cassel, Bavay and
Moubeage, their Bayliffwicks, Castellanies, Governments, Provostships and
Territories. Demesnes, Lordships, Appurtenances, Dependances, and all thereunto
annexed, by what Names soever called, with all the Men, Vassals, Subjects,
Towns, Boroughs, Villages, Hamlets, Forests, Rivers, Plain-Countries,
Salt Pits, and all other things whatsoever thereunto belonging, shall remain,
by virtue of the said present Treaty of Peace, to his Most Christian Majesty,
his Heirs, Successors and Assigns, irrevocably and for ever, with the same
Rights of Sovereignty, Propriety, Regality, Patronage, Guardranship and
Jurisdiction, Nomination, Prerogative and Pre-eminence over Bishoprics,
Cathedral Churches, and others, Abbeys, Priories, Dignities, Curacies, and all
other Benefices whatsoever, within the compass of the said Countries, Places
and Bayliffwicks so yielded up, of what Abbeys soever the said Priories hold
Lands, and have dependence upon, and all other Rights, that heretofore belonged
to the Catholic King, though not particularly here expressed: So that his Most
Christian Majesty, shall not in time to come be troubled, or molested, by any
means whatsoever, in right or in deed, by the said Catholic King, or his
Successors, or any the Princes of his Family, or by any other, or for any cause
or pretense, with relation to the said Sovereignty, Propriety, and
Jurisdiction, appeal, possession and enjoyment of all the said Countries, Towns
and Places, Castles, Lands and Lordships, Provostships, Demesnes, Castellanies
and Bayliffwicks, of all the said Places, and of all things whatsoever
thereunto belonging. And to this end, the said Catholic King, for himself, his
Horis, Successors and Assigns, does renounce, quit-claim, yield up and
transfer, as his said Plenipotentiaries, in his Name, by this present
irrevocable Treaty of Peace, have renounced, given up, and for ever
transferred, in favor, and to the behoof of the said Most Christian King, his
Heirs, Successors and Assigns, all the Rights, Actions, Pretensions, Rights of
Royalty, Patronage, Guardianship, Jurisdiction, Nomination, Prerogatives and
Preheminencies over Bishoprics, Cathedral Churches, and all other Benefices,
within the compass of the said Places, Countries and Bayliffwicks yielded up,
of what Abbeys soever the said Priories held Lands, and had dependence upon,
and in general, without any reservation or withholding, all other Rights, that
the said Catholic King, his Heirs and Successors, have and challenge, or may
have and challenge, for any cause, or upon any occasion whatsoever, over the
said Countries, Places, Castles, Forts, Lands, Lordships, Demesnes,
Castellanies and Bayliffwicks, and over all Places thereunto belonging, as
aforesaid, any Laws, Customs, or Constitutions, to the contrary,
notwithstanding, though confirmed by oath. From all which, and all derogating
Clauses of derogatories, it is expressly derogated by this present Treaty, in
order to the said Renunciations, and Sessions, which shall be valid and take
place, without any derogation from a general Clause, by a particular
specification, or from a particular, by a general one, and for ever excluding
all exceptions, on what Rights, Titles, Cause, or pretense soever grounded: And
the said Catholic King, declares, consents, wills, and intends, that
the Men, Vassals, and Subjects of the said Countries, Towns, and Lands yielded
to the Crown of France, as aforesaid, shall be and remain discharged, and
absolved from hence forward, and for ever, from the Faith, Hommage, Service,
and Oath of Allegiance, that all and every of them may have taken or made to
himself, or to the Catholic Kings his Predecessors, together with all
obedience, subjection, and vassalage, that they are owing to him by reason
thereof; it being the intention of the said Catholic King, that the said
Faith, Hommage, and Oaths of Allegiance, shall be void and of no force, as if
they never had been taken, or made.

XIII.
And whereas his Most Christian Majesty, has declared by the Conditions of
Peace, which he offered, that he was willing to restore the Town of Charlemont,
or in lieu thereof, that of Dinant, at his Catholic Majesty's choice, upon
condition that his said Catholic Majesty, would charge himself to obtain from
the Bishop of Liege, the Session of Dinant, and that the Emperor and Empire
should consent thereunto, His Catholic Majesty has chosen, to retain the Town
of Charlemont, as heretofore, and consequently does oblige himself and promise,
to obtain from the Lord Bishop and Chapter of Liege, an Authentic Session of
the said Town of Dinant, and the Emperors and Empires assent within a year, to
be computed from the day of the date of the Ratification, of the Treaty of
Peace, which shall be betwixt the Emperor, and the Most Christian King. And in
case his said Catholic Majesty, shall not be able to obtain the said Sessions
of the Bishop, and Chapter of Liege, and Emperor and Empires assent, he
obliges himself, and promises immediately, after the expiration of the said
Term, to cause the said Town of Charlemont, to be put into his Most Christian
Majesty's power, for him to enjoy the same, in like manner, as he shall enjoy
all other the Places and Countries, yielded to the said Most Christian King, by
the 11th. and 12th. Articles of this present Treaty.

XIV.
And for the preventing all such difficulties, as the borders caused in the
execution of the Treaties of Aix La Chapelle, and the re-establishing for ever,
a good intelligence between the two Crowns, it is agreed, that the Lands,
Buroughs, and Villages, reduced within the Provostships, that are yielded, or
that belonged to his Most Christian Majesty, before this present Treaty, or are
on the other side of the Sambre, shall be exchanged for others nearer to the
Places, for his Catholic Majesty's convenience, and likewise, that the
Villages of the Verge of Menin, situated too near Courtray, shall be changed
for others nearer, for his Most Christian Majesty's convenience; And likewise
that such Villages of the Provostship of Mons, as are so far up in the
Country, quitted to his Most Christian Majesty in Hanault, that they intercept
communication, shall be exchanged for others, belonging to the Countries,
quitted to his said Most Christian King, that are nearer, for the convenience
of his Catholic Majesty; and generally that all Lands, enclosed within
Countries, yielded or restored to either of the said Kings, shall be exchanged
for others of equal value, provided that such exchanges can be agreed upon.

XV.
Commissioners shall be deputed on both sides, two months after the publication
of the present Treaty, who shall assemble, where it shall be respectively
agreed, as well to proceed to make the said exchanges, as to settle the bounds
between such Estates, and Lordships, as must remain to each of the said Kings,
in the Low Countries, by virtue of this present Treaty; as also to clear the
real debts, lawfully secured by the Lands and Lordships, yielded or restored to
either of the two Crowns, and to settle how much each shall pay for the future,
and in general to make an amicable end of all differencies, that may arise in
the execution of the present Treaty.

XVI
If any such difficulties shall arise in the exchanges aforesaid, as may hinder
their taking effect, no Custom-Houses shall be appointed on either side, to
perplex one another, and to render the communication more difficult, betwixt
Places, under the same Dominion, and such as shall be settled, shall exact no
duties, but of such Merchandises, as shall be conveyed from one Dominion to
another, to be consumed there, or to be carried to places remote.

XVII.
The said King's giving back, and restoring respectively the Places
aforementioned, may cause to be taken, and carried away all manner of
Artillery, Powder, Bullets, Arms, Provision, and other Warlike Ammunitions,
that shall be found in the said Places, at the time of their restitution; and
such as they shall appoint for that purpose, may for two months make use of the
Wagons, and Boats, of the Country, shall have a free passage, by Water, and
Land, to carry away the said Ammunitions, and the Governors, and Commanders,
Officers, and Magistrates, of the several Places, and Countries, shall give
them all the facilities they can, for the carriage, and conveying away the said
Artillery, and Ammunition. Also the Officers, Soldiers, and others that shall
leave the said Places, may take thence and carry away their moveable goods, but
without exacting any thing from the Inhabitants of the said Places, and of the
plain-Countrey, or endammaging their houses, or taking away any thing
whatsoever, belonging to the said Inhabitants.

XVIII.
The Levying of Contributions demanded on both sides, in Countries now
Subjected thereunto, shall continue for all that shall become due, to the 16th.
day of October next, and the arrears that shall remain due, at the time of the
Ratification aforesaid, shall be paid within three months after the expiration
of the said Term: and no execution shall issue in the mean time against the
Communities endebted, provided they give good and solvent bail, of Persons
residing in some Town, within that King's Dominion, to whom such Contributions
shall be due.

XIX.
It is also agreed, that the Most Christian King's perception of the profits,
whereof he is in possession, within all the Countries that he gives back, and
restores to the said Catholic King, shall continue to the day of the actual
restitution of the Places, to which such Countries do belong, and what shall
remain due at the time of the said restitution, shall be truly paid to the
Farmers; and also that within such time, the Proprietors of Woods confiscated
within the dependances of the Places, that are to be restored to his Catholic
Majesty, shall return to the possession of their Estates, and of all the Wood
that shall be found upon the place, Provided that from the day of Signing this
present Treaty, all cutting of Wood shall cease on both sides.

XX.
All Papers, Letters, and Writings concerning the Countries, Lands, and
Lordships, that are yielded, and restored to the said Kings by this present
Treaty of Peace, shall be truly produced, and delivered on both sides, within
three months after the Ratifications of the present Treaty, shall have been
exchanged, in what place soever such Papers and Writings are, even those that
were taken out of the citadel of Gand, and out of the Chamber of accounts at
Lille!

XXI.
All Subjects on both sides, as well Ecclesiastical as Secular, shall be
settled in the enjoyment as well of such Honors, Dignities, and Benefices, as
they were provided of before the War, as of all and singular, their Goods,
Moveable, and Immovable, Estates for Life, and Morgages, seized, and possessed
since the said time, whether by reason of the War, or for siding with the other
Party; together with all Rights, Actions, and Inheritances fallen to them, even
since the War began, but not so as to demand, or pretend to the mean Profits,
and Revenues, accrued and grown due, since the seizure of such immovable Goods,
Rents, and Benefices, and before the day of the publication of this present
Treaty.

XXII.
Nor likewise to such debts, effects, and movables, as shall have been
confiscated before that day: so as neither the Creditors of such debts, nor
Depositaries of such effects, their Heirs, nor Assigns, may sue for, or pretend
to recover them. Which re-establishments in manner aforesaid, shall be extended
in favor of those that have taken the contrary part, so as to restore them by
means of this present Treaty, to the favor of their King, and Sovereign
Prince, and the possession of such of their Goods, as shall be found in being,
at the conclusion, and Signing of this present Treaty.

XXIII.
And such re-establishment of the Subjects on both sides, according to the
Contents of the 21th. and 22th. Articles, shall take effect, notwithstanding
any gifts, grants, declarations, confiscations, forseitures, sentences,
preparatory, or definitive, given for contumacy, in absence of the Parties, or
without hearing them; all which sentences and judgments, shall be void and of
none effect, as if they had not been given, or pronounced, and the parties at
liberty, to return to the Countries from whence they departed, personally to
enjoy their immovable Goods, Rents, and Revenues; or to settle their abodes
elsewhere, where they will themselves, at their own choice, and election,
without being under any constraint in that respect; and if they shall choose
rather to live elsewhere, they may depute, and appoint, such unsuspected
Persons as they shall think fit, for the disposition, and enjoyment of their
Goods, Rents, and Revenues: but not with relation to Benefices requiring
residence, which must be served and administered in Person.

XXIV.
Such as have been provided on either side, of Benefices, which were at the
Collation, presentation, or other disposition of the said Kings or others,
whether Ecclesiastics, or Laics, or have provisions from the Pope of any
Benefices, within the obedience of either of the said Kings, by whose consent
and allowance, they have enjoyed the same during the War, shall continue in the
possession, and enjoyment of such Benefices for their lives, as well and duly
thereof provided; but without any future prejudice, to the rights of the Lawful
Collators, who shall enjoy, and use the same as they did before the War.

XXV.
All Prelates, Abbots, Priors, and other Ecclesiastical Persons, that before or
during the War, have by the said Kings, been nominated to Benefices, or
provided thereof, which their Majesty's were in possession of a power to
provide, or nominate, before the breach between the two Crowns, shall be
maintained in the possession and enjoyment of such Benefices, without
disturbance, for any cause, or upon any pretense whatsoever. And also in the
free enjoyment of all such Goods, as shall be found to have anciently belonged
thereunto, and of the right of Collating to the Benefices thereunto belonging,
wheresoever such Goods, and Benefices are situated. Provided always, that such
Benefices be supplied with Persons able, and qualified, according to the rules
observed before the War. So that hereafter, no Administrators shall be sent on
either side to govern the said Benefices, and receive the profits thereof;
which shall not be enjoyed but by Titularies, Lawfully provided. And also all
such Places, as heretofore acknowledged the jurisdiction of the said Prelates,
Abbots, and Priors, wheresoever situated, shall acknowledge the same for the
future, if their right appear to have been anciently settled, though the said
Places should fall out to be within the extent of the other Princes Dominion,
or depend upon some Castellanies, or Bayliffwicks, belonging to the other party.

XXVI.
It is agreed, and declared, that no part of the Pyrenean Treaty is hereby
intended to be revoked, but what concerns Portugal, with which the Catholic
King is now at Peace, nor any part of the Treaty of Aix La Chappelle, but for
so much as shall be otherwise disposed, in this present Treaty, by the yielding
up of the Places aforesaid; so as the parties shall neither acquire any new
right, nor irscur any prejudice to their respective pretentions, to any thing
not expressly mentioned in this present Treaty; and consequently whatever was
stipulated by the Pyrenean Treaty, concerning the Interest of the Duke of
Savoy, and the Power of the late most Serene Infanta Catharina, shall be
observed, without any hurt or prejudice by this particular Cause, to the
general stipulation in this present Article, concerning the performance of the
said Pyrenean Treaty, and that of Aix La Chapelle.

XXVII.
Though their Most Christian, and Catholic Majesty's contribute all their
Cares, toward the settling a general Peace, and that so fair a way toward it,
as that of a general Truce, gives them hopes, that a conclusion, of whatever
may secure the Quiet of Christendom, will speedily ensue; yet since the said
Most Christian King does insist upon it, that the Catholic King shall oblige
himself, not to assist any of the Princes, that are now engaged in War against
France, and its Allies, his Catholic Majesty has promised, and does promise,
to observe a perfect Neutrality, during the course of this War, without being
at liberty to assist his Allies, directly or indirectly, against France, or its
Allies.

XXVIII.
And whereas their Most Christian and Catholic Majesty's, do acknowledge the
powerful Offices, which the King of Great Britain has contributed, without
intermission, by his Counsels and good Advertisements, toward the public
safety and repose; it is agreed on both sides, That his said Majesty of Great
Britain, and his Kingdoms, shall be expressly comprehended in this present
Treaty, after the best form that can be.

XXIX.
Within this Peace, Alliance and Friendship, on the part of his Most Christian
Majesty, besides the King of Sweden, together with the Duke of Holstein, the
Bishop of Strasburg, and Prince William of Furstemburg, as concerned in the
present War, shall be comprehended, if they please themselves, all those, that
having refused to engage or declare themselves in the present War, shall be
nominated, within six months after the exchange of the Ratifications.

XXX.
And on the part of his Catholic Majesty, shall likewise be comprehended, if
themselves please, all such, as having forborne to engage or declare themselves
in the present War, shall be nominated, within six months after the exchange of
the Ratifications, and all others, that after the said War ended, shall
likewise be nominated by his said Catholic Majesty.

XXXI.
The said Most Christian and Catholic Kings do agree, That all Potentates and
Princes, that shall be willing to enter into the like Obligation, may give
their Majesty's their Promises and Engagements of Warranty, as to execution of
whatever is contained in this present Treaty.

XXXII.
And for the greater security of this Treaty of Peace, and of all the Points
and Articles therein contained, the said present Treaty shall be published,
attested and registered, in the Court of the Parliament of Paris, and in all
other Parliaments of the Kingdom of France, and in the Chamber of Accounts at
Paris. And also the said Treaty shall be published, attested and registered, as
well in the great, and other Councels, and Chambers of Account, of the said
Catholic King, in the Low Countries, as in the other Councels of the Crowns of
Castille and Arragon, according to the form contained in the Pyrenean Treaty,
of the year 1659, of which Publications and Enrollement, Exemplifications shall
be delivered on both sides, within three months after the publication of this
present Treaty.

All which Points and Articles, above expressed, and the Contents of every of
them, have been treated, agreed, passed and stipulated, between the said
Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries of the said Most Christian and
Catholic Kings; which Plenipotentiaries, by virtue of their Powers, the Copies
whereof are inserted at the bottom of this present Treaty, have promised, and
do promise, under the Obligation of all and every the Goods and Estates,
present and to come, of the Kings their Masters, that they shall inviolably be
observed and fulfilled, and that they will cause them to be ratified firmly and
simply, without addition of any thing thereunto, and produce the Ratifications
thereof, by Letters authentic and sealed, wherein all this present Treaty
shall be inserted verbatim, within six weeks, to be accounted from the day of
the date of this present Treaty, or sooner, if possible. And the said
Plenipotentiaries have promised, and do promise, in their said Kings Names,
that after producing the said Letters of Ratification, the said Most Christian
King, as soon as possibly he can, shall, in the presence of such person or
persons, as the Catholic King shall be pleased to depute, swear solemnly upon
the Cross, the Gospels, and Canons of the Mass, and upon his Honor, fully,
really and truly, to observe and fulfill all the Articles contained in this
present Treaty: And the like shall be done, as soon as is possible, by the said
Catholic King, in the presence of such person or persons, as the said Most
Christian King shall be pleased to depute. In witness of all which, the said
Plenipotentiaries have subscribed this present Treaty with their own Names, and
have caused their Seals of Arms to be set thereto.

Nimeguen, the 17th. day of September, 1678. Le M. D'Estrades. Colbert. De
Mesmes D'Avaux. Pablo Spinola Doria. Conde de Benazuza. Marquess de la Fuente.
Jean Baptiste Christin.


The Power of the Lords Ambassadors, of his Most Christian Majesty.
LEwis, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr: To all that shall see
these presents, Greeting. As we desire nothing more earnestly, than to see the
War that now afflicts Christendom, end in a good Peace; and whereas, by the
cares and mediation, of our most dear and our most beloved Brother, the King of
Great Britain, the Town of Nimeguen has been agreed upon, on all hands, for the
place of Conference; We, out of the same desire, to put a stop, as far as in us
lies, to the ruin of so many Provinces, and the effusion of so much Christian
Blood, do make known, That We, reposing entire confidence in the experience,
sufficiency and fidelity, of our most dear and well-beloved Cousin, the Sieur
Count D'Estrades, Marshal of France, and Knight of our Orders, our trusty and
well-beloved, the Sieur Colbert, Marquess of Croissy, Counselor in Ordinary in
our Councels of State, and of our trusty and well-beloved the Sieur de Mesmes,
Count D'Avaux, Counselor also in our Councels, by reason of the advantageous
trials that we have made of them, in diverse Embassies, and Employs of
importance, wherein we have entrusted them, at home and abroad. For these
Causes, and other good Considerations, us thereunto moving, We have appointed,
constituted and deputed, the said Sieur Marshal D'Estrades, Marquess de
Croissy, and Count D'Avaux, and do appoint, constitute, and depute the same by
these presents, signed with our Hand, and have given them, and do hereby give
them full Power, Commission, and special Order, to repair to the Town of
Nimeguen, in quality of our Ambassadors Extraordinary, and our
Plenipotentiaries for the Peace, and there to confer directly, or by the
interposition of the Ambassadors Mediators, respectively allowed and agreed to,
with all Ambassadors and Ministers, of our most dear and most beloved Brother
and Cousin, the Catholic King, and his Allies, having all of them sufficient
Powers, and there to treat upon the means, for determining and appeasing the
Differences, that cause the War at this day. And our said Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries, all three jointly, or two of them, in absence of the third,
through sickness, or other impediment, or one only, in absence of the other
two, in like case of sickness, or other impediment, may agree thereupon, and
conclude and sign a good and sure Peace, and generally may act, negotlate,
promise and agree, whatever they shall think necessary toward the said Peace,
with the same Authority, that we our selves should or might do, if we were
present there in person, though any thing therein should require more
particular Order, than is contained in these presents: Promising on the Faith
and Word of a King, to observe and fulfill, whatever the said Sieur Marshal
D'Estrades, Marquess de Croissy, and Count D'Avaux, or two of them, in the
absence of the third, through sickness, or other impediment, or by one only, in
absence of the other two, in like case of sickness, or other impediment, shall
stipulate, promise and agree, and to cause our Letters of Ratification, to be
dispatched within such time, as they shall promise in our Name to produce them;
for such is our pleasure. In witness whereof, we have caused our Seal to be set
to these presents.

Given at St. Germain en Lay, the 23. day of December, in the year of Grace,
One thousand six hundred seventy five, and of our Reign, the three and
thirtieth. Signed, Lewis; and upon the fold of the Letters, By the King,
Arnauld, and sealed with the Great Seal in yellow Wax.

The Powers of his Catholic Majesty's Ambassadors.
DOn Charles the second, by the Grace of God, King of Castile, Leon, Arragon,
both Sicilies, Jerusalem, Navar, Granada, Toledo, Valentia, Galicia, Majorca,
Seville, Sardinia, Cordoma, Corsica, Murcia, Jaen, Algarves, Algeriza,
Gibraltar, the Canary Islands, the East and West Indies, the Isles of Terra
Firma, and of the Occan-Sea; Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Brabant,
and Melan, Count of Auspurg, Flanders, Tiroll, and Barcelona, Lord of Bisca,
and Molina, etc. Since we desire nothing with greater vehemence, then to see
the War, that does at this present so much afflict Christendom, end in a good
Peace, and the Town of Nimeguen having been chosen, and pitched upon, by means
of the Mediation, and good Offices of the King of Great Britain, and by the
common consent of all parties concerned in the War, to be the place for
meeting, and Treating of Peace; and I desiring to contribute as much as in me
lies, toward so good a Design, I have thought fit to nominate some Persons to
assistat the Assembly, with full power, and authority, in my name, and taking
into consideration the Sufficiency, Integrity, Prudence, Experience,
Understanding, and Zeal for my Service, which are found in you, Don Paul
Spinola Doria, Marquess de Los Balbases, one of my Council of State, Don Pedro
Ronquillo, of my Councels of Castile, and of the Indies, and Don John Baptiste
Christin, of my Council of Flanders; and by reason of the satisfaction which
you have always given me, in many, and important Affairs, whereof you have had
the management, and assuring my self of the care that you will take in my
Service, I have nominated you to be my Ambassadors, and Plenipotentiaries, and
by virtue of these presents, I give to you all jointly, and to each of you in
particular, in the absence, or by reason of any other hindrance of the other,
full and absolute power to repair to the Town of Nimeguen, and there to Treat,
immediately, or by the intervention of the Ambassadors Extraordinary, and
Plenipotentiaries, the Mediators, respectively allowed, and admitted, with the
Ambassadors, and Plenipotentiaries, of my most Dear, and most beloved Brother,
and Cosen, the Most Christian King, and his Allies, especially authorized, and
appointed, and having sufficient powers, and to treat upon means for appeasing
the present War, and to this end to enter with them upon a Negotiation, to
Confer, Propose, Agree, Capitulate, Conclude, and Sign, a good, firm, and
durable Treaty of Peace, and Quiet, and generally to act with relation
thereunto, as my self might, if present there in Person, though more particular
Order should be requisite, then is contained in these presents. And I give my
Faith, and Royal Word, for ever to observe precisely, and punctually, without
failure, whatsoever shall by you, Don Paul Spinola Doria, Marquess de Les
Balbases, Don Pedro Ronquillo, and Don John Baptiste Christin, my Ambassadors,
and Plenipotentiaries, all three jointly, or by two of you, in the absence, or
in case of sickness of the other, be agreed at the said Treaty, with the
Ambassadors, and Plenipotentiaries, of my most beloved Brother and Cosen, the
Most Christian King, and his Allies; and likewise to approve, and Ratify the
same, within such time as shall be limited by both parties. In witness whereof,
I have ordered these presents to be dispatched: Signed with my hand, and Sealed
with my Privy Seal, and subscribed by my Secretary of State, underwritten.

Given at Madrid the third day of December. 1675. I the King.
Don Pedro Coloma.

DOn Charles the second, by the Grace of God, King of Castile, Leon, Arragon,
both Sicilies, Jerusalem, Navar, Granada, Toledo, Valentia, Galicia, Majorca,
Seville, Sardinia, Cordova, Corsica, Murcia, Jaen, Algarves Algeriza,
Gibraltar, the Canary Islands, the East and West Indies, the Isles of Terra
Firma, and of the Ocean Sea; Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Brabant,
and Milan, Count of Auspurg, Flanders, Tiroll, and Barcelona; Lord of Biscay,
and Molina, etc. Forasmuch as by the Mediation, and good Offices of the King of
Great Britain, the Town of Nimeguen has been chosen, and pitched on, by the
common consent of all the parties now engaged in the War, for a place of
meeting, in order to a Treaty of Peace: and I desiring to contribute on my
part, whatever lies in me, toward the appeasing and ending the present War,
that so much afflicts Christendom, through his means, have nominated to be my
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, to assist in my Name, at the said Assembly,
Don Paul Spinola Doria, Marquess de los Balbases, one of my Council of State,
Don Pedro Ronquillo, one of my Councels of Castille, and of the Indies, and Don
John Baptiste Christin, of my Council of Flanders, by virtue of the plenary
Power, which I dispatched the third of December, 1675. signed with my Hand, and
sealed with my Seal, and underwritten by Don Pedro Coloma, my Secretary of
State, as appears by the Original, to which I refer: To the end, that all three
jointly, or two of them, in case of absence, or other hindrance of the third,
or one only, in the like case of absence, or other hindrance of the other two,
might assist, treat and confer immediately, or by the interposition of the
Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries the Mediators, allowed and
admitted respectively, with the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, of my most
dear and most beloved Brother and Cousin, the Most Christian King, and his
Allies, specially authorized and appointed; which accordingly they have done,
and now actually do in my Name. And judging it to be for the interest of my
service, to add one Plenipotentiary more to the other three, to assist at the
Conferences and Affairs there, with like character and authority. And
considering the sufficiency, integrity, prudence, experience, understanding,
and zeal for my service, which are found in you, Don Gaspar de Teves, and
Gusman, Marquess de la Fuente, Count de Venazuza; and by reason of the
satisfaction which you have always given me, in many and important Affairs,
whereof I have entrusted you with the management, and that you will have regard
to the interest of my service, I nominate you to be my second Ambassador and
Plenipotentiary, to repair to the said Town of Nimeguen, and jointly with my
three Ambassadors abovenamed, or with two of them, in the absence, or in case
of other impediment of the third, or by your self alone, in case of absence, or
other hindrance of the other three, either by the mediation of the Ambassadors
Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries the Mediators, respectively allowed, or
immediately, with the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, of my most dear and
most beloved Brother and Cousin, the Most Christian King, and his Allies,
particularly appointed and authorized, confer, propose, agree, conclude and
sign a good, firm, and durable Treaty of Peace and Quiet, and generally to act,
with relation thereunto, whatever I my self might do, if I were present there
in person, though some more particular Order should be requisite thereunto,
than is herein expressed. And I give my Faith and Royal Word, that whatever
you Don Gaspar de Teves, and Guzman, Marquess de la Fuente, my second
Plenipotentiary, jointly with the said Marquess de los Balbases, Don Pedro
Ronquillo, and Don John Baptiste Christin, my Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries, or sole, in the absence, or other hindrance, of any of them,
shall agree and capitulate at the said Treaty; with the said Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries, of my most dear and most beloved Brother and Cousin, the
Most Christian King, and his Allies, I will always observe precisely and
punctually, without any failure, and will likewise approve and ratify the
same, within such time as shall be reciprocally agreed on. Declaring from this
time forward, that nothing. is hereby derogated from the Power, which I gave on
the third of December, to the said Marquess de los Balbases, Don Pedro
Ronquillo, and Don John Baptiste Christin; but that, on the contrary, it
remains in full and perfect force and virtue, notwithstanding these presents,
or any other circumstance whatsoever. In token whereof, I have ordered these
presents to be dispatched, being signed with my Hand, and sealed with my privy
Seal, and subscribed by my Secretary of State underwritten.

Given at Madrid, the 16th. of July, 1678. I the King.
Don Pierre Coloma.

Articles of Peace between the Emperor, and the French King, Concluded, and
Signed at Nimeguen, the 5th. day of February, 1678.
Translated out of Latin, according to the Copy Printed at Nimeguen, by Adrian
Moetiens.
IN the Name of the most Holy, and Undivided Trinity. Be it known to all and
every one, whom it does, or may any way concern, That whereas, from the
beginning of the War, commenced some years ago, between the most Serene, and
Mighty Prince, and Lord LEOPOLD, Elect Emperor of the Romans, always August,
King of Germany, Hungary, Bohemia, Dalmatia, Croatia, and Sclavonia, Archduke
of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Brabant, Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola, Marquess of
Moravia, Duke of Luxemberg, of the Upper and Lower Silesea, Wirtemburg, and
Tecka, Prince of Swaben, Earl of Hapsburg, Tirol, Kyburg, and Goritia, Marquess
of the sacred Roman Empire, Burgovia, and of the Upper and Lower Lusatia, Lord
of the March of Sclavonia, of the Port of Naon, and the Salt Pits, on the one
part, and the most Serene, and Mighty Prince and Lord, LEWIS the xiv. the Most
Christian King of France, and Navar, on the other part; Their Imperial, and
Most Christian Majesty's, have desired nothing more passionately, than the
prevention of the desolation of so many Countries, and the further effusion of
Blood, by restoring a Peace never to be broken. It has, by the Blessing of
Almighty God, been at length brought to pass, that by the endeavors of the
most Serene, and Mighty Prince and Lord, Charles the second, King of Great
Britain, Who being received as a General Mediator by all the Parties, has, in
these difficult Conjunctures of Christendom, to his immortal Glory, with
indefatigable care, employed his utmost Offices, and Counsels, for the Public
Tranquillity, and General Peace, Their Imperial, and Most Christian Majesty's,
have agreed, that the Congress for treating the Peace, should be held here at
Nimeguen, in Guelderland; In which place, Ambassadors Extraordinary, and
Plenipotentiaries, in due form authorized, having appeared on both sides, viz.
on the part of the Emperor, the most Reverend, Illustrious, and Excellent
Lords, John Bishop of Gurgg, Prince of the Sacred Roman Empire, and Counselor
to his Imperial Majesty; as likewise Francis Udalrick, Count of the sacred
Roman Empire, of Khinscky, Chemitz, and Tettau, Lord of Klumetz, Counselor to
his Imperial Majesty, of his Bedchamber, Lord Lieutenant, Assistant of the
Royal Provincial Court, President for Appeals, and Lord Steward of the Royal
Court, in the Kingdom of Bohemia, and Theodore Athletus, Henry Stratman, of his
Imperial Majesty's Autick Council; And on the part of the Most Christian King,
the most Illustrious, and Excellent Lords, Godfrey Count D' Estrades, Marshal
of France, Knight of his Majesty's Orders, Viceroy in America, Governor of the
City and Fort of Dunkirk, and the Places thereupon depending; Charles Colbert,
Knight. Marquess of Croissy, Counselor in ordinary to the Most Christian King, and
John Anthony de Mesmes, Knight. Count d' Avaux, one of his Most Christian Majesty's
Privy Council; after having humbly implored the assistance of Almighty God, and
in due form presented, and shown their Commissions, the Copies whereof (are
word for word, inserted in the end of this Treaty) with the Interposition, and
Pains, of the most Illustrious, and Excellent Lords, Lawrence Hyde, Esquire. Sir
William Temple, Baronet, and Sir Leoline Jenkins, Knight. Ambassadors
Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries of his Majesty of Great Britain, who from
the year 1675. until this present, have with great impartiality, Industry, and
Prudence, performed the Office of Mediators, in order to the restoring the
Public Tranquillity, to the Glory of God, and Welfare of Christendom, they have
mutually agreed on the following Conditions of Peace, and Friendship.

I.
First, That there be a Christian, Universal, true, and Sincere Peace, and
Friendship, between their Imperial, and Most Christian Majesty's, their Heirs,
and Successors, Kingdoms, and Provinces, as also between all and every the
Confederates of his said Imperial Majesty, more particularly the Electors,
Princes, and States of the Empire, comprehended in this Peace, their Heirs, and
Successors, on the one part; and all and every the Confederates of his said
Most Christian Majesty, comprehended in this Peace, their Heirs, and
Successors, on the other; Which said Peace, and Friendship, shall be so
sincerely observed, and improved, that each party shall promote the Honor,
Advantage, and Interest of the other; And there shall be so perpetual an
Oblivion, and Amnesty, of all Hostilities committed on each side, since the
beginning of the present Troubles, that neither Party shall, upon that, or any
other account, or pretense, give, nor cause, or suffer to be given hereafter,
to the other any Trouble, directly, or indirectly, under color of Law, or way
of Fact, within, or without the Empire, any former agreements to the contrary,
notwithstanding, But all and every, the injuries, Violences, Hostilities,
Damages, and Charges, sustained on each side, by Words, Writing, or Deeds,
shall without respect of Persons, or things, be so entirely abolished, that
whatsoever may upon that account, be pretended against the other, shall be
buried in perpetual Oblivion.

II.
And forasmuch as the Peace concluded the 24th. day of October 1648. at
Munster, in Westphalia, is to be the Foundation, and Basis of the present
Friendship, and Public Tranquillity; The said Peace shall from henceforth be
restored, in all and every it is Points, and remain in full force and vigor, as
if the same were, word for word, inserted herein, except in such Points as are
derogated from it, by this present Treaty.

III.
And whereas in virtue of the said Peace of Munster, his Most Christian Majesty
had Right to keep a Garrison in the Fortress of Philipsburg, for it is
Protection, and that the said Fortress has during this War been taken by the
Emperor's Arms, and the Castle, and Town of Friburg, by the Arms of France,
Their Imperial, and Most Christian Majesty's, have agreed concerning those
Places, in manner following.

IV.
His Most Christian Majesty, as well for himself, as his Heirs, and Successors,
does for ever renounce, and quit to his Imperial Majesty, his Heirs, and
Successors, all Right of Protection, maintaining a Garrison, and all other
things which belonged unto him, with relation to the Fortress of Philipsburg,
in virtue of the Treaty of Munster, Reserving nothing, under any pretense or
Title, to himself, his Heirs, and Successors, or the Kingdom of France, upon
the said Fortress, the Forts adjoining to it, and erected as well on this, as
on the other side of the Rhine, any Laws, Constitutions, and Statutes, or other
things whatsoever, to the contrary notwithstanding, all and every of which are
expressly derogated from by this present Treaty.

V.
In like manner, his Imperial Majesty does, as well for himself, as his Heirs,
and Successors, and the whole House of Austria, renounce, and for ever quit to
his Most Christian Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors, the Castle, and Town of
Friburg, together with the 3. Villages of Lehn, Mezhauzen, and Kirchzart
thereunto belonging, with their Districts, as they appertain to the Community
of the said Town of Friburg, together with all Propriety, Superiority, Right of
Patronage, Sovereignty, and other things whatsoever, which belonged unto him
with relation to Friburg, Reserving to himself, his Heirs, and Successors, or
the Empire, no Right or Claim thereunto, under any Title, or Pretense
whatsoever, any Laws, Constitutions, Statutes, or any thing to the contrary
notwithstanding, all and every of which, are expressly derogated from by this
present Treaty: Provided still, that the Privileges, and Immunities, formerly
obtained of the House of Austric, for the said City remain inviolate, as also
the Right of Episcopacy, Revenues, and other Emoluments, be reserved to the
Bishop, and Church of Constance.

VI.
His Most Christian Majesty shall, as often as he has occasion, without any
hindrance or molestation, have a free and easy passage, from Brisach to
Friburg, through the Territory of his Imperial Majesty, and the Empire, by the
Highway called Landstras, for the marching of his Soldiers, and the conveying
of Provisions, and other things necessary for the Garrison of Friburg.

VII.
Nor shall the Provisions intended, and necessary for the Garrison of Friburg,
in their way and passage from Brisach to Friburg, be molested, or detained,
through payment of any Tolls, Customs, Taxes, Duties, or Rights, new or
ancient. It is further agreed, That the Victuals requisite, as well for the
Garrison, as Inhabitants, which shall be transported from any place of Brisgow,
to Friburg, shall as hitherto, so likewise for the future, pay no Customs; and
as for other Merchandise, and things whatsoever, no other nor greater Duties,
and Customs, shall be laid upon them, than if they were carried to other
Places, under the Obedience of his Imperial Majesty, or are otherwise paid by
the Subjects of his said Imperial Majesty.

VIII.
Commissioners shall, within a year after the Ratification of the Peace, be
named, to determine, and consider, what Debts lawfully contracted, are to be
paid by the said Town of Friburg.

IX.
His Most Christian Majesty shall take effectual care, that sincerely, and
without delay, all and every the Writings, and Deeds, which at the time of the
taking of Friburg, were found in the Town and Castle, in the Chancery of the
Government, and Chamber, or in the Houses, and Custody, of the Counselors, and
other Officers thereof, or elsewhere, be restored to his Imperial Majesty; But
if the said Writings be public, and do jointly concern the said Town of
Friburg, and the 3 Villages thereunto belonging, the Commissioners
abovementioned, shall agree in what place the same shall be kept, so that
Authentic Copies of them may be obtained, as often as desired.

X.
It shall be lawful not only to the Chapter of Basle, as also to all and every
the Members of the Austrean Government, and the University of Friburg, but also
to the Citizens, and Inhabitants, of what Condition soever, who have a mind to
depart, without any hindrance, molestation, or imposition, within a year after
the Ratification of the Peace, to Transport themselves, together with their
Movables, to whatsoever place they please, and to sell, retain, or administer
by themselves, or others, their Immoveables. All others shall likewise have the
same power to retain, administer, or alienate, who have any Goods, Revenues, or
Rights, in the said City of Friburg, or the 3 Villages belonging unto it.

XI.
Nevertheless, His Most Christian Majesty does consent, that the said Castle,
and Town of Friburg, with the 3 Villages thereunto belonging, shall be restored
to his Imperial Majesty, in case they can agree of an Equivalent for it, to the
satisfaction of his Most Christian Majesty.

XII.
Whereas the Duke of Lorrain, is engaged in the War with his Imperial Majesty,
and desires to be included in this present Treaty, The said Duke shall for
himself, his Heirs, and Successors, be restored to the free and full possession
of all those States, Places, and Goods, which Duke Charles his Uncle, possessed
in the year, 1670. When the same were taken by the Forces of the Most Christian
King; Excepting only such alterations, as are made and specified in the
following Articles.

XIII.
The Town of Naney, with it is District, (commonly called Finage,) shall remain
for ever, United, and Incorporated to the Crown of France, so that his Most
Christian Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors, shall possess the same with all
Right of Superiority, Sovereignty, and Propriety, And to that end, the said
Duke of Lorrain, does as well for himself, as his Heirs, and Successors, for
ever renounce, quit and transfer unto the said Most Christian King, his Heirs,
and Successors, without any retention, or reservation, all Right of Propriety,
or Sovereignty, all Prerogatives, and Pre-eminences, which did, or of right
ought to belong to the said Duke, with reference to the abovesaid City of
Nancy, any Laws, Customs, Statutes, Constitutions, or Agreements, made to the
contrary notwithstanding, all which, as also the annulling Clauses of
Derogations, are derogated from by this present Treaty.

XIV.
And to the end, there may be a more free communication between the said Town
of Nancy, and the Dominions belonging to the Crown of France, and a more easy
passage for the French Soldiers, Ways half a league broad shall be marked out,
by Commissioners to be appointed for that purpose, by the Most Christian King,
and the said Duke of Lorrain; The first of which Ways shall be, from St. Didier
to Nancy; the second, from Nancy to Alsatia; the third, from the said City of
Nancy to Besancon, in the County of Burgundy; And the fourth, from Nancy to
Metz; yet so that the marking out of the said Ways, be done in the same manner,
as was observed in the Ways formerly consented to, by Duke Charles, in the
year, 1661.

XV.
All Places, Villages, Houses, and Lands, together with their Dependencies,
Situate, and lying within the said Ways of half a league broad, shall belong
unto his Most Christian Majesty, together with all Rights, as well of
Superiority, and Sovereignty, as Propriety, which the said Duke, or his
Ancestors had, and enjoyed before this Treaty; yet so, that if the Districts,
or Dependencies of the said Places, extend beyond the said half league,
whatsoever lies beyond that space of ground, and the boundaries settled by the
Commissioners, shall with all Superiority, Sovereignty, and Propriety, remain
as formerly, to the said Duke, his Heirs, and Successors.

XVI.
The City, and Provostship of Longwic, with it is Appurtenancies, and
Dependencies, shall for ever, with all Superiority, Sovereignty, and Propriety,
remain to the said Most Christian King, his Heirs, and Successors, and the said
Duke, his Heirs, and Successors, shall lay no claim thereunto for the future;
But in exchange for the said City and Provostship, his Most Christian Majesty
shall give unto the said Duke, another Provostship, in one of the 3
Bishoprics, of the same greatness and value, according as shall be agreed
upon, by the abovesaid Commissioners, which being so granted, and conveyed by
the Most Christian King, to the said Duke, as well the said Duke, as his Heirs,
and Successors, shall for ever enjoy it, with all Rights of Superiority,
Sovereignty, and Propriety.

XVII.
In like manner, his Most Christian Majesty, for, and in compensation of the
said Town of Nancy, does for himself, and the Crown of France, quit, and convey
to the aforesaid Duke, his Heirs, and Successors, the Superiority, Sovereignty,
and Propriety, of the City of Thoul, and the Suburbs thereof, with all Rights
thereunto belonging, especially the Prerogatives, and Pre-eminences of
Patronage, which did, or of right ought to have belonged to the Crown of
France, in, and over the said City of Thoul, it is Suburbs, and District,
(commonly called Finage) so as the said Duke, his Heirs, and Successors, may,
without any retention, or reservation, fully enjoy, and exercise the same; any
Laws, Customs, Statutes, Constitutions, or Agreements made to the contrary,
notwithstanding; from all which, as also the annulling Clauses of Derogations,
the Most Christian King, has expressly derogated by this present Treaty.

XVIII.
And in case the District of the City of Thoul, shall be found to be of less
bigness and value, than the District of the City of Nancy, the same shall be
otherwise compensated to the Duke, so that the Districts of both Cities shall
be of an equal greatness, and value.

XIX.
The Most Christian King shall, as by this present Treaty he does, for ever
renounce for himself, his Heirs, and Successors, the Right of nominating, or
presenting the Bishop of Thoul, unto the hands of the Pope, procured by him of
Pope Clement ix. so that the said Duke may make his recourse to the Apostolic
See, to obtain the same.

XX.
It is further covenanted, and agreed, That it shall in no wise be lawful for
the said Duke to make any alteration or change, in the Benefices bestowed by
his Most Christian Majesty, until the day of this present Treaty, and those who
are inducted into the said Benefices, shall continue in quiet possession of
them, so that the said Duke, shall in no wise trouble, or molest, nor
dispossess them of the same.

XXI.
It is further agreed, That all Proceedings at Law, Sentences, and Decrees,
made, and given by the Council, Judges, or other the Officers of his Most
Christian Majesty, in Suits, and Actions, that are finished, as well between
the Subjects of the said Duchy of Lorrain, and Bar, as others, during the time
the said States were under the Dominion of the Most Christian King, shall take
place, and have their full and entire effect, in as ample manner, as if the
Most Christian King had still continued Lord, and Possessor of those Countries;
nor shall it be lawful to question, annull, delay, or hinder the Execution of
the said Sentences, and Decrees. But the Parties concerned, may according to
what is prescribed, and appointed by the Laws, desire a Revision of the
Proceedings that have been thereupon had, yet so that the Sentences shall
remain in full force and vigor.

XXII.
The Charters, Deeds, and Writings, which were in the Exchequers of Nancy, and
Bar, and in the two Chambers of accounts, or elsewhere, and have been since
removed from thence, shall be forthwith restored to the Duke.

XXIII.
His Imperial Majesty does agree, that Prince Francis Egon, Bishop of
Strasburg, and his Brother, Prince William Egon, of Furstenberg, together with
their Nephew, Prince Anthony Egon, of Fustenberg, and their Officers, and
Ministers, shall be fully restored to the State, Reputation, Dignities, Rights,
Suffrages, Session, Benefices, and Offices, Goods holden in Fee-simple,
Fee-base, and in Capite, together with the Profits that have been sequestered,
and generally to all other Goods, which they did, or of right ought to have
enjoyed before their Deprivation, upon occasion of this War, any Proceedings,
Transactions, or Decrees whatsoever to the contrary, notwithstanding. The said
Prince, William Egon shall immediately after the Ratification of the Peace, be
restored to his full liberty. And whatsoever has been said, written, or done
by the Chapter of Strasburg, and others who administered the Goods, and
Benefices, belonging to the said Bishop, and Prince, shall be buried in
perpetual Oblivion, nor shall they upon that account be impeached, or under any
other pretense whatsoever, molested.

XXIV.
All the Vassals, and Subjects, Ecclesiastical, and Secular, of both Parties,
shall be restored to the Honors, Dignities, and Benefices, which they enjoyed
before the breaking out of the War, as also to all Goods, Moveable, and
Immovable, Revenues, casual, and subject to redemption, seized, and
confiscated upon occasion of the War, together with all Rights, Actions, and
Inheritances, fallen unto them, even during the same, yet so that nothing shall
be demanded for the Profits, and Rents, received for the said Goods, Movables,
Revenues, and Benefices, from the time of the Confiscation, and Seizure, till
the day of the Ratification of the Peace; and in like manner, the Debts,
Effects, Merchandise, and Movables, confiscated before the said day, so that
neither the Creditors of private Debtors, nor those in whose hands such
Effects, and Merchandise, have been deposited, nor their Heirs, or Assigns, may
prosecute, or pretend to any restitution, or satisfaction for the same, which
restitutions shall be extended to those also, who have been of the contrary
Party; and consequently, they shall in virtue of this Treaty, be restored to
the favor of their Prince, as also to their Goods, in such condition, as they
shall be found to be, at the Conclusion, and Signing of this Treaty, all which
things shall be effectually executed, any Donations, Confiscations, Orders,
Interlocutory, and Definitive, Sentences given, and made, without hearing, and
in the absence of the Parties, through contumacy; Which Sentences, and
Judgments, shall be made null, and deemed to be of no more force, than if they
had never been judged, and pronounced, full and entire liberty, remaining to
the said Parties, to return into the Country from whence they departed, and
enjoyed the Goods, Movables, Estates, and Revenues, or inhabit in what place
soever they shall please, and make choice, without any violence, or compulsion;
and in case they have a mind to transport themselves to some other place, they
may by Atturneys not suspected, administer, and enjoy their Goods, and
Revenues, such Benefices only accepted, as require residence, which they ought
Personally to perform, and execute.

XXV.
The agreement this day made, between his Imperial Majesty, and the Empire, and
the King, and Kingdom of Sweden, as well with relation to himself, as to the
Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, shall be esteemed to be comprehended in this Treaty,
in such manner, that as well this, as the aforementioned Treaty, between the
Emperor, and Sweden, shall be judged, and looked upon, as one, and the same,
and held to be of the same force, and virtue, as if it were word for word,
inserted in this Treaty.

XXVI.
And because it is highly necessary, in order to the preservation of the
public Peace, That the War, which yet continues between his Most Christian
Majesty, and the King, and Kingdom of Sweden, on the one part, and the King of
Denmark, the Elector of Brandenburg, the Bishop of Munster, and the Princes of
Lunenburg, namely the Bishop of Osnaburg, and the Dukes of Zel, and
Wolfembutel, be with all speed composed, as well his Imperial, as his Most
Christian Majesty, shall employ their utmost Offices, toward the said Princes,
and the King of Sweden, That a Peace between the aforesaid Parties, be speedily
made, and to that end, a Cessation of Arms in order to it, be forthwith agreed
to by them. But if contrary to all expectation, the said Offices should want
their desired effect, His Imperial Majesty, and the Electors, Princes, and
States of the Empire, included in this Peace, do promise, that after the Term
for the Cessation of Hostilities, is expired, they will in no wise, under any
pretense whatsoever, directly, or indirectly, assist the aforesaid Enemies of
France, and Sweden, or in any wise hinder them in the carrying on of the War,
nor suffer the Forces of the aforesaid Enemies of France, and Sweden, to take
any Winter Quarters, without their Territories in the Empire. And for the
aforesaid end only, it shall be free for his Most Christian Majesty, to keep a
Garrison, in the following Places in the Empire, yet without endammaging the
Owners of the said Places, and their Subjects, and at the charges of the Most
Christian King, viz. in the Towns, and Cities of Chasselet, Huy, Verviers, Aix
la Chapelle, Dueren, Linnick, Nuys, and Zons, in which Places, no new
Fortifications shall be made, further than shall be necessary for the safety of
the Garrisons, and without giving just cause of suspicion: Nor shall it be
lawful for the Most Christian King, to retain those Places upon account of the
charges made therein, nor under any other pretense whatsoever, but shall
evacuate, and restore the same to those, from whom he took them, so soon as a
Peace shall be concluded, and Ratified, between the aforesaid Parties, as to
the Provinces situate in the Empire, or that more fit means, shall by common
consent be found out, to restore it. In like manner, his most Christian Majesty
does promise, that he will in no wise, nor under any pretense whatsoever,
directly, or indirectly, assist the present Enemies, of the Emperor and Empire:
It shall be likewise free for the Emperor, and Empire, to employ their Offices,
Counsels, and Endeavors, jointly with the Most Christian King, for the speedy
composing the War, by common consent.

XXVII.
Pursuant to the Peace of Munster, confirmed by the second Article, in all its
Points and Clauses, Places shall be restored, and such as are to be restored,
shall be bona fide evacuated. To which end, Commissioners shall be named, at
the same time this Treaty is Ratified on both sides, that the aforesaid
Evacuation, and Restitution, be without further delay made, within one month
after the Ratification of the Peace, Those Places only excepted, which are
otherwise for a time to be disposed of, by the preceding Article.

XXVIII.
Whereas, there has been an ancient difference concerning the Castle, and
Duchy of Bovillon, between the Bishop, and Prince of Liege, and the Dukes of
that name, it is hereby agreed, That the Duke of Bovillon continuing in the
possession he has of it, the said difference, shall amicably, or by Arbiters,
to be named by the Parties, within 3 months after the Ratification of the
Peace, be composed, without proceeding to Acts of force.

XXIX.
Immediately after the Signing, and subscribing of this Treaty of Peace, by the
Extraordinary Ambassadors, and Plenipotentiaries, all Acts of Hostility shall
cease. And in case within 14 days, after the Signing of the Treaty, any thing
shall be attempted, or altered, it shall be forthwith repaired, and restored to
its first condition.

XXX.
Contributions shall continue to be demanded, and levied, by the one, and the
other Party, in those Provinces, Countries, and Places, where before the
Signing of this Treaty, they were settled, until the Ratification of the same,
and what shall then remain in Arrear, shall within 4 months after the said
Ratification be paid. Yet so that the payment of the same, shall not, after the
Ratifications are exchanged, be forcibly required of those Places, who will
give sufficient security to pay the Proportion assessed upon them.

XXXI.
Although in the second Article of this Treaty, it has been sufficiently
declared, that the Peace of Munster, shall in all, and every its Points be
confirmed, yet it has been thought fit, particularly that all things
stipulated in the said Peace of Munster, with relation to the business of
Montferrat, remain hereafter in full force and virtue, amongst which those
things shall more particularly continue firm, and valid, which are stipulated
therein, in behalf of the Duke of Savoy.

XXXII.
Their Imperial, and Most Christian Majesty's, retaining a grateful sense of
the Offices, and continual Endeavors the most Serene King of Great Britain
has used, to restore a general Peace, and the public Tranquillity, It is
mutually agreed between the Parties, that he, with his Kingdoms be included in
this Treaty, after the best, and most effectual manner that may be.

XXXIII.
In this Peace, those also shall be comprehended, who shall be named by either
Party, with common consent, before the exchange of the Ratifications, or within
6 months after.

XXXIV.
The Emperor, and the Most Christian King, do agree, That all Kings, Princes,
and States, shall, and may give their Guaranties to their Imperial, and Most
Christian Majesty's, for the execution, and performance of all and every the
Points, contained in this present Treaty.

XXXV.
The Peace being thus concluded, the Ambassadors Extraordinary, and
Plenipotentiaries of both Parties, do promise, that the same shall be Ratified,
in the manner mutually agreed on, by the Emperor, and Empire, and the Most
Christian King respectively, and take effectual care, that Authentic
Ratifications be, within the space of 8 weeks, to be computed from the day of
the Signing thereof, or sooner, if possible, reciprocally, and in due form
exchanged here.

XXXVI.
And whereas his Imperial Majesty, has been humbly desired by the Electors,
Princes, and States of the Empire, in virtue of a Resolution, dated the 31.
May, 1677. under the Seal of the Chancery of Mentz, and delivered to the French
Ambassadors, to take care by his Imperial Ambassadors, in this Congress, of the
Interests of the said Electors, Princes, and States of the Empire, as well the
Imperial, as the French Ambassadors, have, in testimony, and for the greater
validity of all, and every thing, and things, contained in this Treaty of
Peace, Signed, and Sealed the same with their Names, and Seals, and promised
interchangeably, to deliver sufficient Ratifications thereof, within the space
abovementioned, and the form therein agreed on; nor shall any Protestation, or
Contradiction, from the Directory of the Empire, against the subscription of
this Treaty, be received, or esteemed valid.

Done at Nimeguen, the 5th. day of Feb. A. D. 1679. (Ls) John Bishop, and
Prince of Gurgh. (Ls) Francis Udalrick Count Kinsky. (Ls) T. A. Hen. Stratman.
(Ls) The Marshal D'Estrades. (Ls) Colbert.


Articles of Peace between the Emperor, and the King of Sweden, Concluded, and
Signed at Nimeguen, the 5th. day of February, 1679.
Translated out of Latin, according to the Copy Printed at Nimeguen, by Adrian
Moetiens.
IN the Name of the most Holy, and Undivided Trinity. Be it known to all and
every one, whom it does, or any way may concern, That whereas, from the
beginning of the War, commenced some years ago, between the most Seiene, and
Mighty Prince, and Lord LEOPOLD, Elect Emperor of the Romans, always August,
King of Germany, Hungary, Bohemia, Dalmatia, Croatia, and Sclavonia, Archduke
of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Brabant, Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola, Marquess of
Moravia, Duke of Luxemberg, of the Upper and Lower Silesea, Wirtemburg, and
Tecka, Prince of Swaben, Earl of Hapsburg, Tirol, Ferrette, Kyburg, and
Goritia, Marquess of the sacred Roman Empire, of Burgovia, and of the Upper and
Lower Lusatia, Lord of the Marck of Sclavonia, of the Port of Naon, and the
Salt Pits, on the one part, and the most Serene, and Mighty Prince and Lord,
Charles King of Suedes, Goths and Vandals, Great Prince of Finland, Duke of
Schonen, Estotiland, Lieftland, Carelia, Bremen, Ferden, Stetin, Pomerania,
Cassubia and Vandalia, Prince of Rugen, Lord of Ingria and Wismar; and also
Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavaria, Juliers, Cleves and Berghen, on
the other part, His Imperial and his Royal Majesty of Sueden, have desired
nothing more passionately, than the preventing the further desolation of so
many Countries, and Effusion of Blood, by restoring a Lasting Peace, It has,
by the Blessing of Almighty God, been at length brought to pass, that, by the
Endeavors of the most Serene, and Mighty Prince and Lord, Charles the Second,
King of Great Britain, Who being received as General Mediator by all the
Parties, has, in these difficult Conjuncture of Affairs in Christendom, to his
Immortal Glory, with indefatigable pains, employed his utmost Offices, and
Counsels, for the Public Tranquillity, and General Peace, His Imperial and his
Royal Majesty of Sweden, have agreed, That the Congress for treating the Peace,
should be held here at Nimeguen, in Guelderland; In which Place, Ambassadors
Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries, in due form authorized, having appeared
on both sides, viz. on the part of the Emperor, the most Reverend, and the most
Illustrious, and Excellent Lords, John Bishop of Gurck, Prince of the Sacred
Roman Empire, and Counselor to his Imperial Majesty; as likewise Francis
Udalrick, Count of the Sacred Roman Empire, of Khinschy, Chinitz, and Tettau,
Lord of Klumetz, of his Imperial Majesty's Privy Council, Chamberlain, Lord
Lieutenant, one of the Judges of the Royal Provincial Court, President for
Appeals, and Lord Steward of the Royal Court, in the Kingdom of Bohemia, and
Theodore Athletus, Henry Stratman, of his Imperial Majesty's Aulick Council;
And on the part of the King of Sweden, the most Illustrious, and Excellent
Lords, Benedict Oxenstiern, Earl of Korshorlm and Wasa, free Baron in Mohrby
and Lindholm, Lord of Kapuria and Kattila, Senator to his Majesty and the
Kingdom of Sweden, and President of the Chief Court of Judicature at Wismar,
also as Chief Judge of Ingria and Kexholm, and John Paulin Olivencrans, Lord of
Ulffhol and Hofmanstorp, Counselor in Chancery to his Sacred Majesty of
Sweden, Secretary of State, and Judge of the Territory of Widloe; after having
humbly implored the Assistance of Almighty God, and in due form exchanged, and
shown their Commissions, (the Copys whereof are, word for word, inserted in the
end of this Treaty) by the Intervention and means of the most Illustrious and
Excellent Lords, Lawrence Hyde, Esquire, Sir William Temple, Baronet, and Sir
Leoline Jenkins, Knight. Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries for his
Majesty of Great Britian, who from the year 1675. until this present, have,
with great Impartiality, Diligently and Wisely performed the part of a
Mediator, in order to the restoring the Public Tranquillity, to the Glory of
God and Welfare of Christendom, they have mutually agreed on the following
Conditions of Peace, and Friendship.

I.
There shall be a Christian, Inviolable, and Perpetual Peace, and a true and
Sincere Friendship between His Imperial Majesty, the German Empire, and all and
every of their Allies comprehended in this Peace, and their respective Heirs
and Successors, on the one part; and his Majesty, and the Kingdom of Sweden,
and their Allies comprehended in this Peace, and their respective Heirs, and
Successors, on the other; and therefore all acts of Hostility shall forthwith
cease, throughout all and every the Kingdoms, States, Dominions and Countries,
of both Parties, wheresoever Situate, and between all and every their Subjects
and Inhabitants, of what Degree soever they be; so as that neither Party
hereafter, do any wrong or unkindness to the other, privately or openly,
directly or indirectly, by himself or by others; but rather promote the
Advantage, Honor, and Interests of the other, to the end that a faithful
Neighborhood and mutual Offices of Friendship and Peace, may remain and for
ever continue between them.

II.
And for greater Security hereof, it has been thought fit by both Parties,
that there be a Perpetual Oblivion and Amnesty of all Enmities, or Hostilities
committed on each side, since the beginning of the present Troubles, in what
place or manner soever, so that neither Party shall upon that, nor any other
Cause, or Pretense whatsoever, do and give, nor cause or suffer to be done, and
given to the other any Hostility, Trouble or Molestation, in their Persons,
Estates, Rights, or Security by himself, or by others, openly or privately,
directly or indirectly, under color of Right, or way of Fact, within or
without the Empire; any former Agreements to the contrary notwithstanding; But
all and every the Injuries, Violences, Hostilities, Prejudices, Losses and
Charges, sustained on each side, as well before, as during the War, by Words,
Writing or Deeds, shall without respect of Persons or things, be so entirely
abolished, that whatsoever the one part, may upon that account pretend against
the other, shall be buried in perpetual Oblivion. Likewise all and every the
Vassals, and Subjects of both Partys, shall enjoy this Amnesty, and have the
benefit and effect of it, so that none of them shall be rendered culpable,
endammaged, or prejudiced, for having taken part with the one or the other,
from being fully restored to the same Condition, as to Honors, and Goods, that
he was in, immediately before the War.

III.
According to this Foundation of an Universal and unlimited Amnesty, and to the
end a more certain Rule of Friendship and Peace, may be settled between the
Parties; it has been by mutual Consent agreed between them, That the Peace
Concluded at Osnabrug in Westphalia, on the 24th October. 1648. shall remain the
Basis and Rule of the present Pacification, in such manner, that it shall be
restored to its first Force and Vigor, and inviolably kept hereafter, and
continue, as it was before the present War; a Pragmatick Sanction, and
Fundamental Law of the Empire, whereby the Parties, shall stand bound and
obliged to each other, any Acts, Decrees, Commands, or Alterations, made upon
occasion of the War, to the contrary notwithstanding.

IV.
And for the greater strength of this Friendship, and nearer Union; Neither of
the Parties shall have any Treaties contrary to this, Nor shall hereafter give
their Consent to any Treaty or Negotiation tending to the Damage, or Prejudice
of the other, but rather shall oppose the same, Nor shall either of them afford
any succors by Soldiers, Arms, Ammunition, Ships, Mariners, or other things
appertaining to War, or Subsidies in money, to prosecute it, directly or
indirectly, either on public or private account, to the present or future
Enemies of the other, Nor supply them, or direct that they be supplied with any
Quarters, or Accommodation, within the Dominions of the Empire, and the Kingdom
of Sweden, saving the Article of Guaranty, hereafter inserted.

V.
And forasmuch as it highly imports the Public Tranquillity, That the War,
which yet continues between his Majesty and the Kingdom of Sweden, and their
Allies, and the King of Denmark, the Elector of Brandenburg, the Bishop of
Munster, and the Dukes of Brunswick-Lunenbourg, namely, the Bishop of Osnabrug,
and the Dukes of Zell, and Wolfembutel, be with all possible speed composed;
His Imperial Majesty and the Empire, as well by themselves, as jointly with
others, shall most effectually interpose their Offices to procure a Peace,
saving always to the Emperor and the Empire, the King and Kingdom of Sweden,
the reciprocal Obligation of not assisting each others Enemies, stipulated in
the preceding Article. And so long as the Peace shall not be made between the
aforesaid Partys, no hinderance or impediment shall be given to his Majesty of
Sweden, in the prosecuting the War against his said Enemies; but the Peace
being made, the same shall be deemed to be in such manner comprehended in this
Treaty, as if it were therein specifically inserted.

VI.
A free Liberty of Trade and Commerce by Sea and Land shall be restored on both
sides, and the same Freedom, Immunity, Rights, Privileges and Advantages shall
be and remain to the Subjects of his Imperial Majesty and the Empire, more
particularly to the Hanse Towns, in the Kingdom, Countries, Dominions, and Ports
of Sweden; and in like manner to the Subjects of Sweden, within the Empire,
that both Parties mutually enjoyed before the War.

VII.
His Imperial Majesty suitable to his Obligation, shall afford his Protection
as well to the Lord Christian-Albert, Duke of Sleswick and Holstein, Gottorp, as
to the other States of the Empire, pursuant to the Laws and Constitutions of
it, to the end his Dominions situate therein, and the Rights belonging unto
him, may be preserved entire, and shall interpose his Offices, that the other
Disputes depending between the King of Denmark and the said Duke, be also
composed.

VIII.
The Emperor and the King of Sweden do Consent; That the King of Great Britain,
as Mediator, as also all Kings, Princes and States, may give their Guaranties
to his said Imperial Majesty, and his Majesty of Sweden, for the due Execution
and Performance of all and every thing and things contained in this present
Treaty.

IX.
And whereas his Imperial Majesty, and his Royal Majesty of Sweden, retain a
Grateful Sense of the Offices, and continual Endeavors, the Most Serene King
of Great Britain has used, to restore a General Peace, and the Public
Tranquillity; it is mutually agreed, That he, together with his Kingdoms, be
included in this present Treaty, in the best and most effectual manner that may
be.

X.
In this Peace, those also shall be comprehended, who shall be named by either
Party with common Consent, before the Exchange of the Ratifications, or within
6. months after. Those things also which have been agreed between his Imperial
Majesty and the Empire, and the Most Christian King, shall be deemed to be in
the same manner comprehended in this Treaty, as if they were, word for word,
inserted therein.

XI.
The abovementioned Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries of the
Emperor and the Empire on the one part, and the King of Sweden on the other, do
promise, that the Peace thus concluded, shall be ratified in the manner
mutually hereby agreed on, and that they will take effectual care, that
Authentic Ratifications be within the space of 8 weeks, to be computed from
the day of the Signing thereof, or sooner if possible, reciprocally and in due
form exchanged here.

XII.
And whereas his Imperial Majesty has been humbly desired by the Electors,
Princes, and States of the Empire, in pursuance of a Resolution of the 31. May,
1677. delivered, under the Seal of the Chancery of Mentz, to the Ambassadors of
Sweden, to take care by his Imperial Ambassadors in this Congress, of the
Interests of the said Electors, Princes, and States of the Empire, as well the
Imperial, as the Swedish Ambassadors have, in testimony, and for the greater
validity of all, and every thing and things contained in this present Treaty of
Peace, Signed and Sealed the same with their Names and Seals, and promised,
interchangeably to deliver sufficient Ratifications thereof, within the space
of time abovementioned, and the former therein agreed on, nor shall any
Protestation or Contradiction from the Directory of the Empire, against the
Subscription of this Treaty, be received or esteemed valid.

Done at Nimeguen the 5th day of February. A. D. 1679. (Ls) John Bishop, and
Prince of Gurk. (Ls) Francis Udalrick Count Khinsky. (Ls) T. A. Henr. Stratman.
(Ls) Benedict Oxenstiern. (Ls) John Paulin Olivencrans.


FINIS.

