A CONTINUATION OF THE ABRIDGMENT Of all the STATUTES OF K. William and Q.
Mary, AND OF King William the Third, In Force and Use.

Begun by J. Washington of the Midd. Temple Esquire Revised and Continued after his
Death to the end of the Session of Parliament, 27 April 1696. And now further
Continued, from the beginning of the Second Session of the Third Parliament, 20
October 1696. to the end of the Third and last Session of the said Third
Parliament, 5 July School.

With Two New Tables.

LONDON,

Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Tho. Newcomb, deceased, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,

And by W. Rawlins and S. Roycroft, Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkins,
Esquires. MDCXCIX.

THE TITLES OF THE STATUTES Contained in this ABRIDGMENT, WITH THE HEADS Under
which they Stand.
Anno. 8. W. 3. Part. 3. Sess. 2.
1. AN Act for Importing and Coining Guineas and Half-Guineas. Coin. 2. An Act
for the further Remedying the ill State of the Coin of the Kingdom. Coin. 3. An
Act to Explain that part of the Act passed the last Session of Parliament, for
Laying several Duties on Low Wines, and Spirits of the first Extraction, and
for Preventing the Frauds and Abuses of Brewers, Distillers and other Persons
chargeable with the Duties of Excise, which Relates to the Payment of Tallies
and the Interest thereof. Excise. 4. An Act to Attaint Sir John Fenwick Baronet
of High Treason. Treason. 5. An Act to Attaint such of the Persons concerned in
the late Horrid Conspiracy to Assassinate his Majesty's Royal Person, who are
fled from Justice, unless they render themselves to Justice, and for continuing
several others of the said Conspirators in Custody. Treason. 6. An Act for
Granting an Aid to his Majesty, as well by a Land Tax, as by several Subsidies,
and other Duties payable for One Year. Taxes.
Anno 8 and 9 W. 3.
7. An Act for Granting to his Majesty several Duties upon Paper, Vellum and
Parchment, to Encourage the bringing of Plate and Hammered Money into the Mints
to be Coined. Taxes. 8. An Act for Encouraging the bringing in Wrought Plate to
be Coined. Coin. 9. An Act to Restore the Market at Blackwell Hall to the
Clothiers, and for Regulating the Factors there. Blackwell-Hall. 10. An Act to
Enable the Returns of Juries as formerly, until the first day of November, One
thousand six hundred ninety seven. Iuries. 11. An Act for the better preventing
Frivolous and Vexatious Suits. Snits. 12. An Act for continuing certain
Additional Impositions upon several Goods and Merchandises. Customs. 13. An Act
for continuing several former Acts for Punishing Officers and Soldiers, who
shall Mutiny or Desert his Majesty's Service, and for Punishing False Musters,
and for Payment of Quarters for One year longer. Soldiers. 14. An Act for the
Completing the Building, and Adorning the Cathedral Charch of St. Paul London,
and for Repairing the Collegiate Church of St. Peter Westminster, Churches. 15.
An Act for Repairing the Highway between Ryegate in the County of Surrey and
Crawley in the County of Sussex. Highways. 16. An Act for Enlarging Common
Highways. Highways. 17. An Act for Paving and Regulating the Hay-Market in
the Parishes of St. Martins in the Fields, and St. James within the Liberty of
Westminster. Hay-Market. 18. An Act for Relief of Creditors, by making
Compositions with their Debtors, in Case Two thirds in Number and Value do
Agree. Creditors. 19. An Act for Repealing a Clause in a former Act, relating
to Party Guiles, and for the better preventing Frauds and Abuses of Brewers,
and others Chargeable with the Duties of Excise. Excise. 20. An Act for making
good the Deficiences of several Funds therein mentioned; and for Enlarging the
Capital stock of the Bank of England; and for Raising the Public Credit.
Taxes. 21. An Act for Laying a Duty upon Leather for the Term of Three years,
and making other Provision for Answering the Deficiences, as well of the late
Duties upon Coals and Culm, as for Paying the Annuities upon the Lottery and
for Lives, charged on the Tunnage of Ships, and the Duties upon Salt. Taxes.
22. An Act for Granting to his Majesty certain Duties upon Malt, Mum, Sweets,
Cider and Perry, as well toward Carrying on the War against France, as for the
necessary Expense of his Majesty's Household, and other Occasions. Excise. 23.
An Act to enforce the Act for the Increase and Encouragement of Seamen. Seamen.
24. An Act for Granting to his Majesty a further Subsidy of Tunnage and
Poundage upon Merchandises Imported, for the Term of Two years and Three
quarters, and an Additional Land Tax for One year, for Carrying on the War
against France. Customs. 25. An Act for Licensing Hawkers and Pedlars, for a
further Provision for payment of the Interest of the Transport Debt for the
Reducing of Ireland. Taxes. 26. An Act for the better Preventing the
Counterfeiting the Current Coin of this Kingdom Coin. 27. An Act for the more
effectual Relief of Creditors in Cases of Escapes, and for preventing Abuses in
Prisons, and pretended Privileged Places. Prisons, etc. 28. An Act for the
better Observation of the Course Anciently Used in the Receipt of Exchequer.
Exchequer. 29. An Act for the Repair of the Peers of Bridlington alias
Burlington, in the East Riding of the County of York. Burlington. 30. An Act
for supplying some Defects in the Laws, for the Relief of the Poor of this
Kingdom. Poor. 31. An Act for the easier obtaining Partitions of Lands in
Coparcenary, Joint Tenancy and Tenancy in Common. Partitions. 32. An Act to
restrain the number and ill Practices of Brokers and Stock-Jobbers. Brokers.
33. An Act to make perpetual and more effectual an Act, Entitled, An Act to
prevent delays at the Quarter Sessions of the Peace. Justices of Peace. 34. An
Act for the Lessening the Duty upon Tin and Pewter Exported, and Granting an
Equivalent for the same by a Duty upon Drugs. Customs. 35. An Act for Raising
the Militia, for the Year One thousand six hundred ninety seven, although the
Months Pay formerly advanced be not repaid. Militia. 36. An Act for the further
Encouragement of the Manufacture of Lustrings and Alamodes within this Realm,
and for the better preventing the Importation of the same, Trade. 37. An Act
for Explaining and Enforcing the Act for Paving and Cleansing the Streets
within the Cities of London and Westminster, and Borough of Southwark, and
Weekly Bills of Mortality, and Streets adjoining thereunto; And for Widening
the Street at the South end of London Bridge. London.
Anno 9 W. 3. Part. 3. Sess. 3.
1. An Act against Corresponding with the late King James and his Adherents.
Treason. 2. An Act to prevent the further Currency of any Hammered Silver Coin
of this Kingdom, and for recoining such as is now in being, and for the making
out new Exchequer Bills, where the former Bills are or shall be filled up by
Indorsements. Coin. 3. An Act to give further time for the Administering of
Oaths relating to Talleys and Orders, and for the easier Dispatch of the
Public Business in the Exchequer, and in the Bank of England. Oaths. 4. An Act
for Continuing the Imprisonment of Counter and others, for the late Horrid
Conspiracy to Assassinate the Person of his sacred Majesty. Imprisonment.
Anno 9 and 10 W. 3.
5 An Act for satisfying and discharging the Arrears of several Annuities,
which Incurred between the Seventeenth Day of May, One thousand six hundred
ninety six, and the Seventeenth Day of May, One thousand six hundred ninety
seven. Annuities. 6. An Act that all Retailers of Salt shall sell by Weight.
Salt. 7. An Act to prevent the Throwing or Firing of Squibs, Serpents and other
Fireworks. Squibs. 8. An Act for Explaining an Act made the last Session of
Parliament, for Granting to his Majesty certain Duties upon Malt, Mum, Sweets
Cider and Perry. Taxes. 9. An Act for Rendering the Laws more effectual for
preventing the Importation of Foreign Bone-Lace, Loom-Lace, Needle Work, Point
and Cut Work. Trade. 10. An Act for Granting to his Majesty the Sum of One
million four hundred eighty four thousand and fifteen pounds One shiling Eleven
pence three farthings, for Disbanding Forces, Paying Seamen, and other Uses
therein mentioned. Taxes. 11. An Act for Explaining an Act made the last
Session of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for supplying some Defects in the Laws
for the Relief of the Poor of this Kingdom. Poor. 12. An Act for the Enlarging,
Repairing and Preserving the Bridge and Key of the Borough of Bridgwater, in
the County of Somerset. Bridgwater. 13. An Act for Granting to his Majesty
several Duties upon Coals and Culm. Taxes. 14. An Act for Continuing the Duties
upon Coffee, Tea and Chocolate and Spices, toward satisfaction of the Debt due
for Transport Service for the Reduction of Ireland. Taxes. 15. An Act for
determining Differences by Arbitration. Arbitration. 16. An Act to Execute
Judgments, and Decrees saved in a Clause of an Act of the First year of the
Reign of King William and Queen Mary, Entitled, An Act for taking away the
Court holden before the President and Council of the Marches of Wales. Judicial
Proceedings. 17. An Act for the better Payment of Inland Bills of Exchange.
Trade. 18. An Act for Repairing the Highways from the Town of Birdlipp, and
the Top of Crickly-Hill, in the County of Gloucester, to the City of
Gloucester. Highways. 19. An Act for Cleansing and making Navigable the
Channel from the Hithe at Colchester, to Wivenhoe. Rivers. 20. An Act to
Naturalize the Children of such Officers and Soldiers, and others the Natural
Born Subjects of this Realm, who have been born abroad during the War, the
Parents of such Children having been in the Service of this Government.
Soldiers. 21. An Act for the better Preventing the Counterfeiting, Clipping and
other Diminishing the Coin of this Kingdom. Coin. 22. An Act to Repeal an Act
made in the Nine and thirtieth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Entitled,
An Act to Restrain the Excessive making of Malt, and to Discharge and Vacate
Orders made by Justices of Peace by Virtue thereof, for Restraining Maltsters
from making Malt. Malt. 23. An Act for Granting to his Majesty a further
Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, toward Raising the yearly Sum of Seven
hundred thousand pounds, for the Service of his Majesty's Household, and other
uses therein mentioned, during his Majesty Life. Customs. 24. An Act for
Enlarging the time for Purchasing certain Estates or Interests in several
Annuities therein mentioned. Annuities. 25. An Act for Granting to his Majesty
his Heirs and Successors further Duties upon Stamped Vellum. Parchment and
Paper. Taxes. 26. An Act to Settle the Trade to Africa. Trade. 27. An Act for
Licensing Hawkers and Pedlars, for a further Provision of Interest for the
Transport Debt for Reducing of Ireland. Taxes. 28. An Act for the Exporting
Watches, Sword-Hilts, and other Manufactures of Silver. Trade. 29. An Act to
Repeal the Act made the last Session of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for
Relief of Creditors, by making Composition with their Debtors, in case Two
thirds in number and value do Agree. Creditors. 30. An Act for Increasing his
Majesty's Duties upon Lustrings and Alamodes. Customs. 31. An Act for Raising
the Militia for the year One thousand six hundred ninety eight, although the
Months pay formerly advanced be not Repaid. Militia. 32. An Act for the more
effectual suppressing of Blasphemy and Profaneness. Religion. 33. An Act to
Stop the Coining Farthings and Halfpence for One year. Coin. 34. An Act for the
better and more orderly payment of the Lottery Tickets now payable cut of
certain Additional Duties of Excise, and of other Annuities lately payable out
of the Tunnage Duties. Taxes. 35. An Act for preventing Frauds and Abuses in
the Charging, Collecting and Paying the Duties upon Marriages, Births, Burials,
Batchclors and Widowers. Taxes. 36. An Act for the Increase and Preservation of
Timber in the New Forest, in the County of Southampton. Ships and Shipping. 37.
An Act for applying to the use of his Majesty's Navy and Ordinance, the
Overplus of the Money and Stores which were provided for the Building Seven and
twenty Ships of War. Ships, etc. 38. An Act for Granting to his Majesty an Aid
by a Quarterly Poll for One year. Taxes. 39. An Act for Settling and Adjusting
the Proportions of Fine Silver and Silk, for the better making of Silver and
Gold Thread, and to prevent the Abuses of Wire-drawers. Trade. 40. An Act for
the explanation and better Execution of former Acts made against Transportation
of Wool, Fullers-Earth and Scouring Clay. Wool. 41. An Act for the better
preventing the Imbezlement of his Majesty's Stores of War, and Preventing
Cheats, Frauds and Abuses in paying Seamens Wages. Stores of War. 42. An Act
for Enlarging the time for Registring of Ships, pursuant to the Act for
preventing Frauds and regulating Abuses in the Plantation Trade. Trade. 43. An
Act for the better Encouragement of the Royal Lustring Company, and the more
effectual preventing the Fraudulent Importation of Lustrings and Alamodes.
Trade. 44. An Act for Raising a Sum not exceeding Two Millions, upon a Fund for
payment of Annuities, after the rate of Eight pounds per Cent. per Ann. and for
settling the Trade to the East Indies Trade. 45. An Act for taking away half the
Duties imposed on Glass Wares, and the whole Duties lately laid on Stone and
Earthen Wares, and Tobacco Pipes; And for Granting (in lieu thereof) New Duties
upon Whale, Fins and Scotch Linen. Taxes.
A CONTINUATION OF THE ABRIDGMENT OF ALL THE STATUTES OF King WILLIAM and Queen
MARY, AND King William III. In Force and Use, From October the 20th. 1696. to
July 5. School.
Annuities.
I. STat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 5. For discharging the Sum of 255663 l. 5 s. 8 d.
remaining unpaid upon the several Annuities, which between 17 May 1696. and 17
May 1697. became due, and ought to have been paid out of 5 seventh parts of the
late Duties of Tunnage, and 2 seventh parts of the same Duties; as also out of
certain Duties charged upon Salt; Any Persons, having any Estate for one life
in any Annuity purchased at the rate of 100 l. for every 14 l. per Ann. upon
the several Acts mentioned in the Act of 6 and 7 W. 3. Entitled, An Act for
Enabling such Persons as have Estates for Life in Annuities, payable by several
former Acts therein mentioned, to purchase and obtain further and more certain
Interests in such Annuities, and in default thereof for admitting other Persons
to purchase and obtain the same, for Raising Money for carrying on the War
against France, or any of them, may before 25 Mar. School. pay into the Exchequer
for every such Annuity of 14 l. per Ann. computed at 4 years, 56 l. more, for
converting such single Life into a certain Term, for the residue then to come
of the 96 years from 25 Jan. 1695. or for the residue of the said Term of 96
years after the said Estate for Life.

II. If any Person entitled to such present Annuity, shall not before the said
25 Mar. School. change such Estate for Life into a Term certain, or for a future
Interest, as aforesaid, then any other person, after the said 25 Mar. and
before 10 Apr. School. may purchase an Interest for the then residue of the said
Term of 96 years, as aforesaid, subject to the present Estate for Life, for the
like Sum of 56 pounds; and the persons paying the said Consideration, shall
immediately be entitled to such Annuity chargeable upon the respective Fund in
the former Act mentioned.

III. Persons entitled to any Arrears incurred between 17 May 1696, and 17 May
1697. upon the said Annuities, charged upon the Tunnage or Salt Duties, and
hereby intended to be provided for, who shall upon their Orders, Talleys, or
Lottery Tickets, for such Arrears, discharge the King in the Exchequer, of so
much as the purchasing such further Interest or Term shall amount to, shall
thereupon be entitled, to such Annuities so to be purchased, as if the
Consideration was actually paid in Money.

IV. The Directions and Powers in the said former Act, for Levying Talleys,
making Orders, Assignments, or applying the Moneys arising by the said Funds,
are hereby revived, in respect of such Annuities as shall be purchased upon
this Act.

V. All the Moneys which shall come into the Exchequer for the said
Contributions, shall be applied to the payment of the Arrears of the several
Annuities, charged upon the 5 sevenths and 2 sevenths of the Tunnage, and upon
the Duties on Salt, incurred out of those Funds, from 17 May 1696 to 17 May
1697, and a proportionable part applied to the making good each of those Funds,
and not diverted to any other use: And the Officer offending therein, shall
forfeit his Office, and double the value of the Money so diverted.

VI. After 1 Mar. 1697. No Officer appointed to pay the Annuities out of the
Duties of Excise, upon the Act made 4 and 5. W. and M. Entitled, An Act for
granting to their Majesty's certain Rates and Duties of Excise upon Beer, Ale
and other Liquors, for securing certain Recompenses and Advantages in the said
Act mentioned, to such persons as shall voluntarily advance the Sum of Ten
hundred thousand Pounds toward carrying on the War against France, and upon
diverse other subsequent Acts, without Survivorship, shall pay off any Quarterly
Payment of the said Annuities till the precedent Quarter be fully paid, or the
Money ready in the Office for payment thereof, whereof public notice to be
given, and hung up in the said Office: And every Officer offending herein,
shall forfeit his Office, and 50 pounds for every such Offense to the person
who shall sue for the same.

VII. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. Cap. 24. All persons having or not having any Estate
for one Life in an Annuity, purchased at the rate of 100 l. for 14 l. per Ann.
upon the several Acts mentioned in the Act of 6 and 7 W. 3. Entitled, An Act
for Enabling such Persons as have Estates for Life in Annuities, payable by
several former Acts therein mentioned, to purchase and obtain further and more
certain Interests in such Annuities, and in default thereof, for admitting
other Persons to purchase and obtain the same, for Raising Money for carrying
on the War against France, may at any time before 1 Dec. School. paying into the
Exchequer 56 pounds for every such Annuity of 14 l. per Ann. convert the said
Estate for Life into a certain Term, for the Residue of 96 years then to come
from 25 Jan. 1695, or have an interest in such Annuity for the said Term, to
take effect after the said Estate for Life, charged with and subject to the
present Estate for Life, and in the same proportion for higher or larger
Annuities: And the persons so paying the said Consideration Money, shall
immediately be entitled to such Annuities, charged upon the respective Fund in
the said former Act mentioned, as if the said Consideration Money had been
advanced within the times limited by the said former Act.

VIII. All the Clauses in the said former Act for Levying of Talleys, making
Orders or Assignments, or applying the Moneys arising by the said Funds, or for
any other matter relating to the said Annuities so to be purchased, are revived
by this Act, and shall be duly observed in respect of such Annuities as shall
be purchased upon this Act, as fully as if they were here particularly repeated.

IX. All Moneys which shall come into the Exchequer upon the said Contributions
for Annuities so to be purchased, shall be applied to the Payment of the
Off-Reckonings of the Army for the year 1697. And out of the same the persons
who clothed the Army for the said Year, shall be paid what is due to them for
such Clothing, chargeable upon the said Off-Reckonings.

Arbitration.
I. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 15. After 11 May, School. All Merchants and
Traders, and others, desiring to end any Controversy, Suit or Quarrel (for
which there is no other Remedy but by personal Action or Suit in Equity) by
Arbitration, may agree, That their submission of the Suit to the Award or
Umpirage of any person or persons, should be made a Rule of any of his
Majesty's Courts of Record, which the Parties shall choose, and may insert such
their Agreement in their Submission, or the Condition of the Bond or Promise:
And upon producing an Affidavit of such inserting, and upon Reading and Filing
such Affidavit in the Court so chose, the same may be entered of Record in such
Court; and a Rule of Court shall thereupon be made, That the Parties shall
submit to and finally be concluded by such Arbitration or Umpirage: And in case
of disobedience thereto, the Party neglecting or refusing, shall be subject to
all the Penalties of Contemning a Rule of Court, and Process shall issue
accordingly, which shall not be stopped or delayed, unless it appear on Oath that
the Arbitrators or Umpire misbehaved themselves, and that such Award was
corruptly or unduly procured; In which case such Arbitration or Umpirage shall
be void and set aside by any Court of Law or Equity, so as such corruption or
undue Practice be complained of in the Court where the Rule is made for such
Arbitration, before the last day of the next Term after such Arbitration made
and published to the Parties.

Blackwell-Hall.
I. STat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 9. Enacted, That after the 1st of May, 1697. the
Governors of Blackwell-hall and their Deputies, shall strictly observe and
keep the following Times and Rules, viz. The public Market of Blackwell-hall
shall be held every Thursday, Friday and Saturday, from eight of the Clock in
the Forenoon, till twelve, and from two of the Clock in the Afternoon, till
five; the said hours of beginning and ending the said Market shall be known by
ringing the Market Bell in the said Hall; the same to be continued Weekly
through the whole Year, except days of Humiliation or Thanksgiving; and the
Keepers of the said Hall shall not admit any buying or selling of any Woollen
Cloth at the said Hall upon any other days or hours than as aforesaid, upon the
penalty of 100 l.

II. The said Governors, etc. shall appoint to the Country Clothiers the most
convenient Room in the said Hall for the sale of their Cloth, and Warehouse
Room for Lodging and safe keeping the same, paying the Ancient Duties of the
said Hall and no more.

III. No Factor or any Person whatsoever, other than the Owner of the Cloth,
shall sell or expose to sale out of the said Market of Blackwell-hall, any
Cloth directed to be brought to the said Market or any Factor there, upon
penalty of 5 l. for every Cloth so sold.

IV. The Hall-keepers, Clerks and Master-Porters of the said Hall shall take
care that the Rules and Orders appointed by this Act be put in Execution, and
shall diligently and faithfully keep their weekly Registers of all Clothes
bought and sold there; in which Books they shall truly enter the names and
habitation of the Owners, Buyers and Sellers, and times of Sale, and Factor or
other person buying or selling of every Cloth, to which said Books it shall be
lawful for the Clothiers, their Agents or Servants, at all convenient times, to
have recourse, without Fee.

V. Any Hall-keeper, Clerk, or Master-Porter neglecting his Duty herein, shall
for every Offense forfeit 10 l. Every person after the said first of May,
buying any Cloth of any person (except of the Owner) otherwise than for ready
Money, the person selling shall within twelve days after the sale and delivery
of the same, take or demand of the Buyer a Note, testifying under the Buyers
hand the Cloth sold, and the Sum of Money sold for, payable to the Owner, and
shall deliver such Note on demand to the Owner, or any person authorized by him
to receive the same, on pain to forfeit to the Owner of the Cloth sold, double
the Value thereof, for every neglect of so doing. And if any such Buyer upon
trust shall refuse or neglect to give such Note, upon request, at any time next
after eight days after sale and delivery, he shall forfeit for every such
Offense 20 s. for every Cloth so sold, to the Owner; and every piece of Cloth
not returned within eight days after delivery of the same, shall be deemed to
be passed and approved of by the Buyer as a Merchantable Cloth, and all
Contracts and Agreements for allowing a longer time for the passing of any
Cloth, shall be Void.

VI. All forfeitures and penalties imposed by this Act, may be sued for by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, etc. in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record, in
which no Essoin, etc. and but one Imparlance shall be allowed; and if not
otherwise herein before disposed of, one Moiety to the King, the other to the
Informer.

VII. Provided, if the Owner of the Cloth neglect to sue for any of the
penalties by the space of six Months, then any other person may sue for the
same, and one Moiety shall be to the King, the other to the Informer.

VIII. Every known or reputed Factor for selling Cloth in the said Market of
Blackwell-hall, shall before the 24th of June, 1697. if requested, by any
Clothier, give and deliver a true Account in Writing of the Effects of such
Clothier, which now are, or before the first of May, 1697. shall be in the
hands of such Factor, and the particular Clothes of such Clothier sold by such
Factor, and the sums of Money due to such Clothier by any Contract of such
Factor, and of the names and abodes of such persons from whom such sums are
due; and if any such Factor shall refuse or neglect so to do, he shall forfeit
to the person to whom he ought to give such Account, 10 l. to be recovered, as
aforesaid.

Bridgwater.
I. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 12. For enlarging, repairing and preserving the
Bridge and Key of the Borough of Bridgwater in Com. Somerset, it is Enacted,
That for fourteen years after the first of May, School. Every Master or Person,
having the Command of any Ship or Vessel Unlading on the said Key, or into any
Barge, Boat, Hoy or Lighter, to pass through the said Bridge, shall pay at the
Unlading thereof, as follows, viz.

II. For every Weigh of Coals, (according to the measure used there) Last of
Wheat, Rye, Barley, Malt and other Grain, and for every Weigh of Salt, and
every Tun of any other Goods or Merchandises whatsoever (and so proportionably
for a greater or lesser Quantity Imported and Unladen in the said Port) such
sum, not exceeding twelve pence (Inclusive of all Keyage, Wharfage, Pontage and
Cranage, heretofore payable) as the Mayor, Aldermen, Burgesses and Commonalty
of the said Borough, and their Successors, in Common Council assembled, shall
from time to time order or appoint.

III. The said Mayor, Aldermen, Burgestes and Commonalty so assembled, as
aforesaid, during the said fourteen Years, may choose such persons to be
Collectors of the Money, so to be appointed to be paid, as they shall think
fit; which Collectors shall pay the same to the Receiver of the Profits of the
said Borough, to the use of the said Mayor, Aldermen, Burgesses and Commonalty,
for the purpose aforesaid, and no other use whatsoever.

IV. There shall be Eight or any Five of them Commissioners to take the
Accounts of the Receipts and Disbursements of the Moneys so Collected, during
the said Term; Four of which shall be yearly nominated by the Mayor, Aldermen,
Burgesses and Commonalty in Common Council assembled, and the other Four by the
Justices of the Peace for the said County of Somerset, at the respective
Quarter Sessions of the Peace; which Commissioners, or any five of them, may
from time to time Require the Collectors, who shall receive the Moneys in
pursuance of this Act, to render them a true Account of the Moneys which shall
rest due upon such Account, which they shall order to be laid out for the Uses
aforesaid, as there shall be cause: And the Mayor of the said Borough is to
Administer an Oath to the Collectors, and persons employed, for the faithful
Executing their Offices, in and about the Premises.

V. The said Collectors shall be allowed for their pains in Executing the said
Office, out of the Money by them received, so much as the said Mayor, etc. in
Common Council assembled shall think fit, not exceeding one Shilling in the
Pound.

VI. The said Collectors may at seasonable times Enter into any Ship or Vessel,
within the said Port of Bridgwater, to see what Goods shall be in the same
Unlading: And in case the sums of Money appointed to be paid, as aforesaid,
shall not be paid by the Master or other person having the Command of any Ship
or Vessel Unlading, as aforesaid, then the said Collectors may, by Warrant from
the Mayor or Aldermen of the said Borough, or one of them, Distrain such Ship
or Vessel, and all Tackle, Apparel and Furniture thereunto belonging, and keep
the same till they be satisfied and paid the sums Imposed by this Act; which if
not paid within Ten days next after such Distress, then the said Collectors may
sell the said Distress, and therewith satisfy themselves for the Duty so
unpaid, and also for keeping such Distress, rendering the Overplus.

VII. The said Mayor, etc. in Common Council assembled, may by Indenture under
their Common Seal, Convey the Duties Granted by this Act, or heretofore
payable, as a security for any sums of Money by them to be borrowed for the
ends and purposes of this Act, to any persons that have advanced or shall
advance any Moneys upon such security: All which Money to be borrowed shall be
employed toward the Enlarging, Preserving and Repairing the said Bridge or Key
of Bridgwater aforesaid.

VIII. The Keys or Wharfs now standing on each side of the River, below the
Bridge of Bridgwater aforesaid, or that shall be Enlarged or Repaired (not
exceeding in length on each side of the said River 150 Yards) are and shall be
taken for lawful Keys or Wharss for the Landing or Laying on Shore any sort of
Goods and Merchandises whatsoever.

IX. From and after the Expiration of the Years hereby Granted, the ancient
Duties of Keyage, Pontage and Cranage shall be demanded and paid, as heretofore.

Brokers.
I. Stat. 8 and 9. W. 3. cap. 32. For Restraining the III practice of Brokers
and Stock-jobbers, It is Enacted, That after 1 May. 1697. No person whatsoever
shall use or exercise the Office or Employment of a Broker, or deal as such in
London, Westminster, or Southwark, or the Limits of the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, in making or concluding Bargains between Merchant and Merchant, or
others, concerning Wares and Merchandises, or Moneys to be taken up by
Exchange, or concerning any Talleys or Orders, Bills of Credit or Tickets
payable at the Exchequer, or any public Office, or concerning any of the
Bank-Bills or Notes, or Stock of the Bank, or Stock of any Company or Society,
that is or shall be Incorporated, until such person shall be admitted and
licensed by the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of London.

II. Upon admittance of any such Broker, he shall take an Oath to the effect
following, viz. That he will truly and faithfully execute and perform the
Office and Employment of a Broker between party and party, in all things
appertaining to the Duty of the said Office and Employment, without Fraud or
Collusion, to the best of his skill or knowledge, and according to the Tenor
and Purport of the Act Entitled, An Act to Restrain the Number and Ill
practice, etc.

III. And every such person within Three Months after such Admittance, shall in
the Court of Chancery or King's Bench, or Quarter Sessions, take the Oaths
appointed in the Act, 1 W. and M. cap. 8. and Subscribe the Association
appointed by the Act made, 7 W. 3. cap. 27. And every such person shall at his
Admittance, give Bond to the Lord Mayor, Citizens, and Commonalty of London, in
the Penalty of 500 l. with Condition, That if he do and shall well and truly
Use, Execute and Perform the Office and Employment of a Broker between Party
and Party, without Fraud, Covin, or any Corrupt or Crafty Devices, according to
the Purport, true Intent and Meaning of the Statute in that case lately made
and provided, then the Obligation to be void.

IV. The Number of such Brokers shall not at one time exceed 100. and the Fees,
upon Admittance into the said Employment, shall not exceed 40 s.

V. The Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen shall cause the Names of such Brokers
as shall be Admitted by Virtue of this Act, and their places of habitation, to
be publicly affixt on the Royal Exchange, in Guildhall, and in such other
public places in London, as they shall think fit.

VI. If any person shall act as a Broker, after the time aforesaid, not being
admitted according to this Act, he shall forfeit 500 l. over and above such
other Forfeitures as he shall any ways incur by virtue of this Act; and if any
person, after the time aforesaid, shall knowingly Employ any person to deal for
him as a Broker or Stock-jobber, not being admitted and sworn, as aforesaid,
such person shall forfeit the sum of 50 l. and if any person, after the time
aforesaid, not being a sworn Broker according to this Act, shall act and deal
as a Broker in Discounting Talleys or Bills, or in Stock-jobbing, in selling
Bank-stock, or any other Securities upon any Fund granted by Parliament, such
person shall Forfeit 500 l. and stand in the Pillory in some public place in
London, three several Days, for the space of one Hour in the Morning.

VII. After the time aforesaid, every sworn Broker shall keep a Book or
Register, in which he shall enter all Contracts and Bargains that he shall make
between any persons within three days after the Contract, with the parties
Names, and for omitting so to do, he shall forfeit 50 l.

VIII. If any such Broker after the time aforesaid, shall directly or
indirectly, take above 10 s. per Cent. for Brokage, he shall for every such
Offense forfeit 10 l.

IX. Every sworn Broker, after his Admittance, as aforesaid, shall carry about
him a Silver Medal, having the Kings Arms on one side, and the Arms of the City
of London, with his own Name on the other side, which he shall produce at the
concluding of every Bargain, to the Parties concerned, upon pain to forfeit 40
s. for every Omission.

X. If any such Broker, after the time aforesaid, shall deal for himself in the
Exchange or Remittance of Moneys, or Buy any Talleys, Orders, Bills, or Shares
in any Joint Stock for his own use, or buy Goods or Merchandises to sell again,
or make any profit in buying or selling any Goods, more than the Brokage
allowed by this Act, he shall forfeit the sum of 200 l. and be for ever
incapable to act as a Broker.

XI. Every Policy, Contract, Bargain, or Agreement, which is to be performed
after the 1st day of May, 1697. upon which any Pramium is, or shall be given or
paid, for Liberty to deliver; receive, accept, or refuse any share in any
Joint Stock, Talleys, Orders, Exchequer Bills, or Bank Bills, other than such
Policies and Contracts as are to be performed within three days from the time
of making the same, shall be utterly null and void, and every such Praemium
shall be paid back.

XII. If any Praemium shall be given contrary to the intent and meaning of this
Act, with the privity of a sworn Broker, or if any person shall Act or Trade as
a Broker, not being Admitted according to this Act, and the same shall come to
the knowledge of a sworn Broker, in every such Case such sworn Broker shall
forthwith discover the same, and in case he shall not so do, the Lord Mayor and
Court of Aldermen shall displace such sworn Broker, who shall for ever be
incapable to use or exercise the Trade of a Broker.

XIII. All penalties and forfeitures given by this Act shall be recovered by
Action of Debt, etc. in any of the Kings Courts of Record at Westminster, in
which no Essoin, etc. one Moiety to the King, the other to him that shall sue
for the same.

XIV. This Act to continue from the 1st of May, 1697. for the space of three
years, and from thence to the end of the next Session of Parliament.

XV. No person buying or selling of Cattle, Corn, or any other Provision, or
Coal, shall be esteemed a Broker within this Act.

XVI. No Broker Admitted by this Act, shall, after the time aforesaid, till the
end of next Session of Parliament, act or deal, or drive any Bargain to buy or
sell Talleys or other Securities upon Parliamentary Funds, unless Licensed so
to do by the Lords of the Treasury or three of them, under the penalty of 500 l.

I. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 29. For Repair of the Peers of Bridlington alias*
Burlington, in the East Riding of Yorkshire, It is Enacted, That after 1 May
1697, and until 1 May 1704, there shall be paid for the repairing and amending
the said Peer, one farthing for every Chalder of Coals that shall be laden on
Board any Ship, or other Vessel, at or in the Port of Newcastle upon Tyne, or
at Sunderland, Blythe, Suton Sluice, Culler Coats, or any place reputed a Member
of the Port of Newcastle. Which said Duties during the term aforesaid, shall be
answered and paid unto Arthur Lord Viscount Irwin, Sir Griffith Boynton, Sir
Charles Hotham, Sir William Strickland, Sir William St. Quintin, Baronets; Sir
Michael Wharton, Sir Matthew Peirson, Sir William Hustler, Sir Richard
Osbaldeston, Knights; Ralph Wharton, John Buck, Robert Monckton, Hugh Bethell,
Robert Byerly, Charles Osborn, Esquires; and to the Wardens of Trinity-House at
Hull for the time being, the Survivors and Survivor of them, and the Executors
and Administrators of such Survivor, or to their Deputy or Deputies thereunto
appointed by some Writing under their or the major part of their Hands and
Seals, by the Master of the Vessel whereupon such Coals shall be laden: The
said Duties to be paid at such place or places as shall be appointed, in or
near the place of Loading.

II. No Officer of the Customs within the Ports, Harbors, Creeks or places
aforesaid, shall during the time aforesaid, take any Entries, or give any
Cocket or other Discharge for any Ship, or other Vessel so laden with Coals,
as aforesaid, till the Duties hereby granted shall be paid to the respective
Deputies appointed to receive the same, as aforesaid; and that the Master of
such Ship or Vessel do produce an Acquittance testifying the Receipt thereof:
And every Officer of the Customs making default in any of the Premises, shall
forfeit the Sum of 50 l. to the said A. Lord Viscount J. Sir G. B. etc. to be
recovered, with Costs, in any of the Kings Courts of Record by Action of Debt,
etc. wherein no Essoin, etc. shall be allowed.

III. Any person or persons, by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of the said
A. Lord Viscount J. Sir G. B. etc. or the major part of them, may go on Board
any Ship or other Vessel laden with Coals at any the foresaid places, to
inspect and take an account of the lading of such Coals.

IV. All such Sums of Money which shall be raised by the Duties aforesaid, and
recovered for any Forfeitures in this Act appointed (other than what shall be
laid out, or allowed for Collecting the said Duty, not exceeding 6 d. in the
pound,) shall be by the said A. Lord Viscount J. Sir G. B, etc. applied to the
rebuilding, repairing, and amending the said Port or Peer of Bridlington alias
Burlington; and there shall be provided and kept by the said persons, their
Deputy or Deputies, one or more Books, in which all Receipts and Payments by
virtue of this Act, shall be entered, expressing the time when, and persons from
and to whom the same were made. And once yearly the Justices of the Peace for
the East Riding of the County of York, at their Quarter Sessions, may order the
said Books to be brought before them to inspect the same, and upon any
mis-imployment of the said Duties, to make such Orders for the better
management of the same, according to the intent of this Act, as they shall
think most fit. Which Orders shall be observed by all persons concerned, upon
such Penalties, not exceeding 100 l. as they shall set, to be levied upon the
Goods of the Offenders, by Warrant from the said Justices.

V. The said A. Lord Viscount J. Sir G. B, etc. or the greatest number of them
that shall be then living, may by Indenture under their Hands and Seals, convey
and assure the Duties granted by this Act or any part thereof, as a Security
for Money to be borrowed for the ends and purposes of this Act.

VI. If any person shall be sued for any thing done by virtue of this Act, he
may plead the General Issue, and give the special Matter in Evidence, and upon
Nonsuit or Verdict for the Defendant, he shall recover double Costs.

VII. After 1 May 1697, the said A. Lord Viscount J. Sir G B etc. or any three
or more of them, may from time to time survey and inspect the sufficient
Building and Repairs of the Peer aforesaid, with all Walls, Jetteys, Sluices,
Sockers, and Locks thereof, and certify the State and Condition of the same in
Writing, to the said Justices at their Quarter Sessions, who are hereby
empowered to charge the Lands formerly granted by K. James I. 20 Sept. in the
21st. year of his Reign, to John Earl of Holdernesse, his Heirs and Assigns,
with such equal assesment as they shall judge sufficient and necessary for
repair of the same, and in default of Payment of the said assesment, the
Defaulter to be distrained by Warrant of three of such Justices, and after four
days the Goods to be appraised by two or more Inhabitants, and to be sold, and
the overplus above the Assesment and Charges of Distress, to be immediately
restored to the Owner.

Churches.
I. STat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 14. For Completing the Building and Adorning the
Cathedral of St. Paul, London, and for Repairing the Cathedral of St Peter,
Westminster, It is Enacted, That for all Coals and Culm Imported into the Port
of London, from the 29th of September, 1700. until the 29th of September, 1716.
there shall be paid for every Chalder of Coals or Culm, One Shilling, and for
every Tun of such as are sold by Weight, One Shilling; which said Imposition of
One Shilling shall be Levied, and Paid in such manner and form, and under such
penalties, as are expressed and directed by the Act 1 Jac. 2. ( cap. 15) The
Articles, Rules and Clauses of which Act (except otherwise hereafter provided)
shall be of such force and effect, as if the same were particularly set down
and Enacted by this Act.

II. All Moneys Levied by this Act shall be disposed as herein after mentioned:
And the Archbishop of Ganterbury, the Bishop of London, and Lord Mayor of
London, for the time being, or any two of them, shall have such Powers and
Authorities (unless otherwise herein after directed) as they had by the said
former Act.

III. One Sixth part of all Moneys which shall be raised by virtue of this Act
shall be appropriated and disposed to the Repairing of the Collegiate Church of
St. Peter in Westminster, and the said Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishop of
London, and Lord Mayor of London for the time being, or any two of them, shall,
during the Continuance of this Act, pay or cause to be paid to the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and the Dean of
the said Church, for the time being, Commissioners hereby appointed for
Repairing the said Church, the said Sixth part of such Moneys, by Quarterly
Payments, the first Payment to be made on the Thirtieth of December, 1700.
Which said Money shall be laid out and expended in Repairing the said
Collegiate Church. And the like Books of Accounts (to be inspected by any
person gratis) shall be kept by the Commissioners, and the like Abstract of
such Books of Accounts shall be yearly transmitted into the Exchequer, in such
manner as is directed to the said Archbishop, Bishop, and Lord Mayor in the
aforesaid Act.

IV. The said Archbishop, Bishop, and Lord Mayor, may deduct yearly out of the
sums to be by them paid, as aforesaid, one Sixth part to their Deputies and
Officers, for their Collecting the Duties hereby continued, and Inspecting the
Coal-Meters.

V. The said Commissioners, or any Two of them, may, by Indenture under their
hands and seals, engage the Profits arising out of the sums hereby Granted,
toward the Repairing of the said Collegiate Church, as a Security for Money by
them to be borrowed for the intent and purpose aforesaid, which Money is to be
employed accordingly.

VI. A sum not exceeding Three thousand Pounds, part of the Duty hereby
Granted, shall in Four Years be paid toward the Building the Parish Church of
St. Thomas in Southwark, according to such Directions as the President,
Treasurer and Governors of the Hospital there, with allowance of the foresaid
Archbishop, Bishop and Lord Mayor, or any two of them, shall approve and allow.

VII. After the 29th of September, 1697. the Stipend or Allowance of the
Surveyor General of the Building of the said Cathedral of St. Paul, shall be
paid one Moiety yearly, and the other Moiety in one entire sum within Six
Months after the finishing the said Cathedral, and not before.

Coin.
I. STat. 8 W. 3. cap. 1. The Act past in the First Sessions of this present
Parliament, Entitled, An Act for taking off the Obligation and Encouragement
for Coining Guineas for a certain time therein mentioned, and all things
therein contained (except what relates to the Recompenses by the said Act
appointed to be applied to the Silver Mints, and what concerns the African
Company) shall be Repealed and utterly made Void; and all persons may freely
Import into this Kingdom Guineas and Half-Guineas, as they might before the
making the said Act.

II. The Master and other Officers of the Mint in the Tower of London, shall on
or before the Tenth day of November, 1696. prepare and set apart one or more
Mill or Mills, with other Conveniences to be employed for the Coinage of Gold,
which shall be brought thither by any persons, Natives or Foreigners, to be
Received in, Coined, and Delivered out, in such manner, as by the Statute made
18 Car. 2. is directed; so that the Course in Coinage of Gold and Silver be
kept in distinct Accounts, and not interfere; and such Coining and Delivering
out of Gold in a distinct Course, although there be Silver remaining there
Uncoined, shall not be interpreted any undue Preference, any thing in the said
Statute of 18 Car. 2. notwithstanding.

III. Stat. 8 W. 3. cap. 2. All Hammered Silver Money, Clipped or Unclipped, as
shall be brought to any of his Majesty's Mints between the Fourth of November,
1696. and the First of July, 1697. shall be received there at the Rate of 5 s.
4 d. per Ounce Troy.

IV. All his Majesty's Receivers, or other Officers concerned in the Receipt or
Collection of his Majesty's Aids, Taxes, or other Revenues, or of any Loans,
shall and are hereby required to receive in payment all such Hammered Silver
Coin, as shall be Tendered for any Aids, Taxes, or other Revenues, or upon
Loans, at any time after the Fourteenth of November, 1696. until the First of
February next following, as to Loans and all Arrears of Aids, Taxes or
Revenues, due before the said First of February, and until the First of June
then next following, as to all future Aids, Taxes and other Revenues, at the
Rate of 5 s. 8 d. per Ounce. And the Tender, Payment or Loan, of every Ounce of
such Hammered Silver Coin, shall be as good for the sum of 5 s. 8 d. as if the
said sum of 5 s. 8 d. had been Tendered, Paid, or Lent in Lawful Current Coin.

V. After the First of December, 1696. no Hammered Silver Coin of this Kingdom
shall be Current in any Payment, except such as before mentioned, otherwise
than by Weight only, after the Rate of 5 s. 2 d. per Ounce of Sterling Silver.

VI. All such Hammered Money, consisting only of Pieces having both the Rings,
or the greatest part of the Letters, or Six Pences of Sterling Silver not Clipped
within the innermost Ring, as have been before the Eighteenth Day of November,
1696. actually received by any Commissioner, Receiver General, or other
Receiver, or Collector, by Tale for any Public Tax or Revenue whatsoever,
shall and may be paid by them by Tale, and not by Weight, within the times
hereafter following, viz. Every particular Receiver or Collector shall have
time to make his Payments to the Head Collector, till the Eighteenth of
December, 1696. making Oath before such Head Collector, That the Hammered Money
then Brought or Tendered, was actually and bona fide received by him before the
Eighteenth day of November, 1696. upon the respective Tax or Revenue upon which
he offers to pay the same, and that he has not made any Profit thereby, other
than what is allowed by Act of Parliament: Which Oath shall be taken in
Writing, and brought with the Money it relates to, into the Receipt of the
Exchequer. And the respective Receiver General or Head Collectors of any the
said Taxes or Revenues shall have time till the Tenth day of January, 1696. for
paying such Hammered Moneys, as aforesaid, into the Receipt of the Exchequer,
who are to make Oath before the Auditor of the Receipt or Clerk of the Pells,
That the Money so by them Tendered or Brought was actually and bona fide
received by them by Tale before the said Eighteenth day of December, 1696 on
Account of such Tax or Revenue, or was brought to them by such particular
Receivers within the time limited, and that they have not made any Profit
thereby, other than what is allowed by Act of Parliament. All which said Oaths
or Affidavits in Writing, shall be filed by the Clerk of the Fells.

VII. Which said Hammered Money so brought into the Exchequer, and all such
like other Hammered Moneys actually being and remaining in the Receipt of the
Exchequer on the Eighteenth day of November, 1696. having been bona fide
received there by the respective Tellers (who are to make Oath, as aforesaid)
for any Tax or other Revenue, shall from time to time be melted down and cast
into Ingots, and delivered into his Majesty's Mint, to be there reduced to
Sterling, and Coined by the Mill and Press into the Lawful Coins of this Realm.
And all the New Money proceeding from such Ingots (except necessary Charges)
shall be brought back into the Exchequer, and there placed to the respective
Accounts of the said particular Revenues, Taxes, Loans, etc. to which the said
Hammered Moneys respectively did belong, and shall be issued, paid out and
disposed in like manner as ought to be, in case the said Hammered Money were
not Recoined, under the same Penalties and Forfeitures as would have been
incurred in case the same were not Recoined.

VIII. All Money that shall be brought in, on the Account of Taxes, Revenues or
Loans, at 5 s. 8 d. per Ounce, shall be by the respective Officers, Receivers
or Collectors, carried to the next Adjacent Mint to be Recoined; and the said
Taxes, etc. shall not be brought into the Exchequer till Recoined.

IX. The Collectors and Receivers of the Moneys for making Navigable the Rivers
Wye and Lugg in the County of Hereford, shall and may, till the First of June,
1697. receive Hammered Money, Clipped or Unclipt, at 5 s. 8 d. per Ounce, and pay
it in at that Rate to the Receiver General, who shall, according to the
Direction of the Trustees, either pay the same forthwith to the persons who
have Lent Moneys for the Purposes abovesaid, or send the same to the next Mint
to be Coined, and after it shall be received from the Mint; then pay the same.

X. Stat. 8 and 9. W. 3 cap. 8. Any Persons, Natives or Foreigners, who by
themselves or others shall bring any sort of Wrought Plate between 1 Jan. 1696.
and 4 Nov. 1697. to any of his Majesty's Mints, or to such Persons as shall be
Authorized to Receive the same, shall be then and there paid for such Plate at
5 s. 4 d. per oz. And all such Plate, having the Goldsmiths Hall Mark and
Workmans Mark, shall be Received as Sterling Silver: But where it has not the
said Marks, the Quantity of Sterling Silver contained therein, shall, at the
Election of the Party, be adjusted upon Oath by the proper Officers of the
Mint, or such other Person as shall be Authorized to Receive the same, or else
shall be forthwith Melted, and Essayed, and Allowed for accordingly.

XI. Which said Officers of the Mint, and other persons Authorized to Receive
the said Plate, shall first take an Oath faithfully and impartially to declare
the Quantity of Sterling Silver contained in any Wrought Plate so brought in.

XII. And the Plate so brought in shall be Entered in Books, with the Weight and
Value thereof, and shall be forthwith Coined, and not delayed by the Coining of
other Silver: And the New Moneys proceeding from the same, with such other
Moneys as shall be appropriated for this Service, shall be applied to pay for
the Plate so brought in.

XIII. The Moneys Imprested for this Service, and the New Money proceeding from
the said Plate, shall go to pay the Allowance of 5 s. 4 d. per oz. to the
Bringers in of the said Plate at the time of bringing in the same.

XIV. The Officers where such Plate is brought in, or where Hammered Money is
to be Recoin'd, shall once in 14 days publish in Writing, how much Wrought
Plate or Hammered Money has been brought in and Recoin'd, or remains not
Coined, under a Penalty of 20 l.

XV. Provided, That all such Plate, having the said Marks, shall be received as
Sterling Silver, without deduction for Soader, unless in any hollow part of the
said Plate.

XVI. The Commissioners of the Treasury may Issue and Apply 50000 l. toward
payment of the said Allowance of 5 s. 4 d. per oz. to be reckned part of the
sum of 125000 l. for Coining of Hammered Money and Plate.

XVII. After 25 Mar. 1697. no silver Vessel, Plate or Manufacture of silver
shall be Wrought or Made less in Fineness than 11 oz. Ten Penny Weight of Fine
Silver in every Pound Troy, nor sold or exchanged, if made after the said 25
March (unless it be silver wire or small Things not capable of receiving a
Mark) until the same has been Marked with the two first Letters of the surname
of the Worker, and with the Marks of the Goldsmiths Company, which instead of
the Leopards Head and the Lion, shall be a Lions Head erased, and the Figure of
a Woman, commonly called a Britannia, and with the Wardens Mark denoting the
Year, under the penalty of Forfeiture.

XVIII. If the Wardens or Masters of the Goldsmiths Company Mark any Plate made
after 25 Mar. contrary to this Act, or wherein there is any Falsehood or Deceit,
they shall forfeit the value thereof.

XIX. Any person possessed of Plate, and Assessed to the Aid (lately) Granted
to his Majesty, as well by a Land Tax as by several Subsidies and other Duties
payable for One Year, may, before 1 Jun. 1697 pay all or any such Monthly
payments in wrought Plate at 5 s. 4 d. per oz. without deduction for Soader
(unless in any hollow part thereof) which the Collectors are Required to
Receive accordingly.

XX. All Hammered Moneys made Current at 5 s. 2 d. per oz. and paid into the
Exchequer at that Rate; And all Plate received by virtue of this Act at 5 s. 4
d. per oz. shall be Melted down and Coined into Mill Money, and applied and
placed to the Accounts of the particular Revenues to which the same did belong,
and shall be disposed accordingly, so far as it will extend, without being
diverted to any other Use than such as the same is appropriated unto by
Parliament.

XXI. Stat. 8 and 9. W. 3. cap. 26. For preventing the Counterfeiting the Coin,
It is Enacted, That after 15 May 1697. no Smith, Ingraver, Founder, or other
person whatsoever (except such as are Employed in his Majesty's Mints, for the
use of the said Mints only, or persons Lawfully Authorized by the Lords of the
Treasury) shall knowingly make or mend any Punchion, Counter-punchion, Matrix,
Stamp, Dye, Pattern, or Mold of Steel, Iron, Silver, or other Metal, or of
Spaud, or Fine Founders Earth, or Sand, or other Materials whatsoever, by which
shall be Made or Impressed the Figure, Stamp, or similitude of both or either
side of any Gold or Silver Coin, Current within this Kingdom, or make or mend
any Edger, Instrument or Engine contrived for making of Money round the Edges
with Letters, Grainings, or other Marks resembling those on the Edges of Money
Coined in the Kings Mint, nor any Press for Coinage, or Cutting Engine for
cutting round Blanks, nor knowingly buy, sell or hide, or without Lawful
Authority or Excuse, have in his House, or Possession, any such Tool or
Instrument before mentioned: And any person whatsoever (except as before) who
shall offend in any the matters aforesaid, every such Offender, his Aiders and
Abetters shall be guilty of High Treason.

XXII. If any person after the said 15 May, shall without Lawful Authority,
wittingly Convey out of any of the Kings Mints, any of the said or other
Instruments used about Coining of Money there, or any useful part of such
Instruments, such persons so Offending, their Aiders and Abetters, shall be
guilty of High Treason.

XXIII. If any person (other than such as are Employed in the Kings Mints, or
who have Authority from the Lords of the Treasury) shall after the said time,
mark on the Edges any the Current Coin of this Kingdom, or any Diminisht Coin
of this Kingdom, or any Counterfeit Coin resembling the Coin of this Kingdom,
with Letters, Grainings, or other Marks, like those on the Edges of Money
Coined at the Kings Mint, every such Offense shall be High Treason, and the
Offenders shall suffer accordingly.

XXIV. If any person after the said time shall Color, Guild, or Case over with
Gold or Silver, or any Wash or Materials producing the Color of Gold or
Silver, any Coin resembling the current Coin of this Kingdom, or any Round
Blanks of base Metal, or of course Gold or Silver; of the size of Milled Money,
or Guild over silver Blanks to be Coined into pieces resembling the current
Gold Coin of this Kingdom, every such person, his Aider and Abetter, shall be
guilty of High Treason.

XXV. If any Punchion, Dye, etc. used or designed for Coining or Counterfeiting
of Gold or Silver Money, shall at any time after the said 15 May, be hid,
concealed, or found in the House or Possession of any person, not employed in
some of the Kings Mints, or having the same by some Lawful Authority, any
person may seize the same, and carry them forthwith to some Justice of Peace,
to be produced in Evidence against the person who shall or may be prosecuted
for such Offense, and after such producing in Evidence, the same shall be
totally defaced and destroyed, by Order of Court, or in the presence of the
same or some other Justice of Peace.

XXVI. And if after the said 15 May, any counterfeit or diminisht Money shall
be produced in Evidence or otherwise, that immediately after such producing the
said Money shall be cut in pieces in open Court, or in the presence of some
Justice of Peace, and then delivered to the Rightful Owner.

XXVII. If any person, after the said time, shall Blanch Copper for sale, or
mix Blancht Copper with Silver, or knowingly buy or sell, or offer to sell
such, or buy or sell any Malleable Composition or Mixture of Metals or
Minerals, which shall be heavier than Silver, and look and wear like Standard
Gold, but be manifestly worse than Standard, or shall receive, pay, or put off
any counterfeit Milled Money, or Milled Money unlawfully diminisht, and not cut
in pieces, at a lower Rate than the same by its denomination shall import,
every such person shall be guilty of Felony, and suffer Death as in case of
Felony.

XXVIII. This Act shall not extend to make any Corruption of Blood, or loss of
Dower. And all persons, who after the said 15th of May, shall be accused of any
Treason or Felony by this Act, shall be tried in such manner as is used against
Offenders for Counterfeiting the Kings Money.

XXIX. All and every the Crimes mentioned in an Act made 6 and 7 W. 3.
Entitled, An Act to prevent Counterfeiting and Clipping the Coin of this
Kingdom, may be heard and determined upon Indictment or Presentment, either in
the Court of Kings Bench, or before, the Justices of Assize.

XXX. This Act to continue and be in force till the end of the next Session of
Parliament and no longer; and no prosecution shall be made upon this Act,
unless commenced within Three Months after the Offense committed.

XXXI. Stat. 9. W. 3. cap. 2. After 10 Jan. 1697, no Hammered Silver Coin of
this Kingdom, shall be esteemed the lawful Coin of this Realm, nor be current
in any payment at any Rate or Value by Weight or otherwise; nor shall the
Tender of any such Hammered Silver Money after the said 10 Jan. be deemed a
good Tender in Law, nor the Refusal thereof in any payment, be adjudged a
Refusal of the lawful Coins of this Kingdom

XXXII. Provided that any persons may carry into any of the Mints in the Tower
of London, or in the Cities of Bristol, Exeter, Chester, Norwich and York,
before 1 Mar. 1697. any Old Hammered Money to be Recoined; And the Master or
Worker of every such Mint, or his Deputy, is to receive the same, and cause it
to be melted down, and Recoin'd into the lawful Coins of this Kingdom, and pay
back the same so Recoin'd by 25 Mar. School. to the several Importers.

XXXIII. The Commissioners of the Treasury, or any three of them, may cause new
Exchequer Bills to be made forth, and delivered to such persons as shall demand
them, in lieu of such Bills as shall be brought in filled up with Indorsements;
which Old Bills shall be cancelled and kept apart from all other Bills
whatsoever: And such New Bills shall have the like Currency; and the same
punishment shall be inflicted for Forging or Counterfeiting the same; and they
shall be subject to the same Rules, Methods and Continuance as the Old Bills
were; and shall bear the same Numbers, Dates, Principal Sums and Rate of
Interest per diem, as were born on the Old Bills brought in so to be cancelled:
And as to the Interest that shall have incurred on the said Old Bills, to their
being brought in, it shall be so computed as to abate what did accrue, whilst
they lay in any of the Receivers or Collectors Hands, or in the Exchequer, and
shall be written on the said New Bills.

XXXIV. Stat. 9 and 10. W. 3. cap. 21. Any person to whom any piece or pieces
of Silver Money shall be tendered, being diminisht, otherwise than by Wearing,
or by the Stamp, Impression, Color or Weight, suspected to be Counterfeit, may
cut, break, or deface such Piece or Pieces: And thereupon appearing
Counterfeit, the Tenderer shall bear the Loss; but being of due Weight, and
appearing Lawful Money, the person who cut it shall take it for what it was
Coined for.

XXXV. If any Dispute arise, whether the Piece so cut be Counterfeit, it shall
be determined by the Mayor, Bailiffs, or Chief Officer of the Place where
Tendered, if a City or Town Corporate, or if not, then by the next Justice of
Peace of the County.

XXXVI. The Tellers of the Exchequer, their Deputies and Clerks, and the
Receivers General of his Majesty's Revenue, shall cut, break or deface every
piece of Counterfeit or unlawfully diminisht Silver Money, Tendered them in
Payment for his Majesty's Use: And the said Tellers and Receivers General,
their Deputies and Clerks, shall weigh all Silver Money by them Received, and
the same or any piece thereof, appearing by the Weight, or otherwise, to be
Counterfeit or Unlawfully Diminisht, shall not be received by or from them in
the Exchequer.

XXXVII. The Act made the last Session of this present Parliament, Entitled,
An Act for the better Preventing the Counterfeiting the Current Coin of this
Kingdom, and every Article thereof, shall be in Force till 25 March, 1701. and
thence to the end of the next Session of Parliament.

XXXVIII. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 33. No persons shall after 24 June School,
and before 24 June 1699. Coin, or make, or cause to be coined or made, any
Farthings or Halfpence, or tokens to go for Farthings or Halfpence, of
Copper, or any other Metal whatsoever, on pain of forfeiting Five Pounds for
every Averdupoize Pound Weight of such Farthings and Halfpence so Coined; one
Moiety to the King, the other to such persons as will sue for the same.

XXXIX. The Contractors for making or coining of Copper Farthings and
Halfpence, shall not by virtue of any Agreement made with his Majesty and the
late Queen, for giving in Exchange to his Majesty's Subjects weekly, Farthings
and Halfpence made of Copper, for Farthings and Half pence made of Tin, be
obliged to perform such Exchange for so many weeks only as are between the said
24 June, School. and the said 24 June, 1699.

Creditors.
I. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap 18. Two thirds or more in Number and Value of all
real Creditors, their Executors, Administrators, Guardians and Trustees, and
other Persons Authorized by them, may make such Compositions, as they think
fit, with their Debtors, who being unable to pay the whole, are withdrawn or
absconded, or are Prisoners for Debt before 17 Nov. 1696.

II. Which Composition being for the Equal Benefit of all the Creditors, and
Subscribed and Sealed by the said Two thirds, without any fraudulent Agreement,
shall be Binding.

III. And all persons Subscribing and Sealing such Composition, shall within
Twenty days after being required thereunto in writing, before two Witnesses, by
any of the Creditors, make Oath in writing before a Master in Chancery,
Ordinary or Extraordinary, on what account their Debts became due; and that
they neither have nor are to receive any greater advantage than the said
Composition: Which Oath shall be made, and filed in Chancery, at the charges of
the requirer within twenty days; and the persons forswearing themselves shall
suffer as for Perjury.

IV. Persons refusing to make such Oath, or claiming a greater Debt than due,
or receiving or agreeing to receive a greater advantage than the said
Composition, their Subscription shall be void, they shall forfeit 100 l. and
treble the Value fraudulently claimed, received or agreed to be received, with
full Costs of Suit to the Creditors suing for the same; and the Money so
recovered, over and above the Charges, shall go to the Creditors Contributing
thereto.

V. Where any Debtor compounded with shall be kept in Prison contrary to such
Composition, the Lord Keeper, Master of the Rolls, or any of the Judges, may,
in presence of the Creditor, or absence, if lawfully Summoned, discharge such
Debtor out of Prison, upon producing such Composition and Schedule of Debts,
upon Oath, and swearing the cause of Imprisonment to be only for such Debts,
and the Creditor shall pay the Charges of such detaining: and the Keeper of the
Goal is to Attend with and Discharge such Prisoner, under penalty of 5 l. a day.

VI. Persons Sued for any thing done in prosecution of this Act, the Plaintiff
being Nonsuit or Cast, shall pay treble Costs.

VII. Provided this Act shall not make void any Securities by Mortgage, Pawn,
Judgment, Statute or Recognizance or otherwise, whereby the Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels of such Debtors may be charged, so as the
same affect not the person of the Debtor Compounded with.

VIII. And provided that Agreements already made between Debtors and Creditors
shall be of Force, subject to the Benefits of this Act for enforcing such
Agreements.

IX. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 29. After 24 June, School. The Act made in the
second Session of this present Parliament, held 8 and 9 W. 3. Entitled, An Act
for Relief of Creditors by making Compositions with their Debtors, in case Two
thirds in Number and Value do Agree, and every Clause, Matter and Thing therein
contained, shall be Repealed, Determined and of no Force.

X. This Act shall not make void any Agreement or Composition made bona fide
before the said 24 June, nor any Order for the Discharge of any Debtor out of
Custody, made in pursuance of such Composition, by virtue of the abovesaid Act,
or within the saving or benefit thereof, before the said 24 June. But every
such Composition whereupon any such Order of Discharge is made, shall be good
and effectual, and every such Order of Discharge is hereby Confirmed: and every
such Composition whereupon no such Order of Discharge shall be made, shall be
of the same force as if this Act had not been made: Nor shall it Pardon or
Discharge any person, who before the said 24 June, shall Incur any Penalty, by
committing any Offense against the said Act.

XI. No Persons Discharged by virtue of the said Act, before the said 24 June,
shall be deemed to be Discharged thereby, who to procure any Agreement or
Release from their Creditors, have before one of the Judges, or one of the
Masters in Chancery, corruptly made any false Oath, to the Defrauding their
Creditors, but every such Agreement and Release obtained upon a false Oath, by
any person, being thereof Convicted upon any Indictment or, Infomation shall be
void.

Customs.
I. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 12. The several Additional, and other Rates,
Impositions, Duties and Charges upon Goods and Merchandises Imported and
Exported, Mentioned and Granted by an Act made the 4 and 5 W. and M. Entitled,
An Act for Granting to Their Majesty's certain Additional Impositions upon
several Goods and Merchandises, for the Prosecuting the present War against
France, shall be continued from the First of March, 1696. and be Levied and
Paid till the Seventeenth day of May, 1697. And the foresaid Act, and all
Articles and Clauses therein contained, shall continue and be of force till the
said Sevententh of May, 1697.

II. Stat. 8 and 9. W. 3. cap. 24. Over and above all Subsidies of Tunnage and
Poundage, and other Duties already payable for Wines, Goods and Merchandises,
there shall be paid for all Wines imported into this Kingdom from 1 May, 1697.
to 1 Feb. 1699. one other Subsidy called Tunnage, viz.

III. For every Tun of French Wine brought into the Port of London as
Merchandise by Natural Born Subjects 4 l. 10 s. and by Aliens 6 l. And every
Tun of Wine brought into any other Port of this Kingdom, by Natural Born
Subjects 3 l. and by Aliens 4 l. 10 s.

IV. Every Butt, or Pipe of Sweet Wines of the Growth of the Levant, Spain, or
Portugal, or elsewhere, brought into the Port of London by Natural Born
Subjects 45 s. and by Aliens 3 l. And every Butt or Pipe brought into any other
Port by Natural Born Subjects 30 s. and by Strangers 25 s.

V. Every Awm of Rhenish Wine, or of the Growth of Germany imported by Natural
Born Subjects 20 s. and by Aliens 25 s.

VI. And Wines Landed in the Out Ports and afterward brought to London by
Certificate, shall pay so much more as they paid short of the London Duty.

VII. Which several Rates for Wines are the same as in the Book of Rates,
referred to by the Act, Ann. 12. Car. 2. chapter 4.

VIII. All manner of Goods and Merchandises imported from the said 1 May, 1697.
to 1 Febr. 1699. shall pay one further Subsidy of Poundage of 12 d. per l. of
the Value thereof, according to the said Book of Rates.

IX. And if any such Goods are not particularly Rated in the said Book, the
Duty shall be Levied according to the Value affirmed upon the Oath of the
Merchant.

X. Except all Wines before limited, to pay Subsidy of Tunnage, all Fish
English taken, and imported in English Bottoms, all Fresh Fish and Bestial
imported, and all other Goods mentioned to be Custom-free in the said Book of
Rates, and such Goods as are commonly used in Dying.

XI. Provided, That all Drugs imported from the Place of their Growth in
English Built Ships, shall be rated to this Act but One Third Part charged in
the said Book of Rates.

XII. All Spicery (except Pepper) imported from the place of its Growth in
English Built Shipping, shall be rated to this Act but one Third Part charged
in the said Book of Rates.

XIII. Linen imported shall not pay the Additional Duty of one Moiety charged
in the said Book of Rates.

XIV. All Foreign Wrought Silk exported within one Year from the Importation,
shall have Two Thirds of the Rate hereby charged, repaid at the Custom-house.

XV. Wrought Silks imported, shall not be charged with the Additional Duty of
One Moiety mentioned in the said Book of Rates: Nor is Tobacco of the English
Plantation to be charged with the Additional Duty of One penny per Pound over
and above the Subsidy in the said Book of Rates: Nor are the Wines of France,
Germany, Portugal or Madera, to be charged with the Additional Duty of 3 l. per
Tun, or any other Wines with 4 l. per Tun, mentioned in the said former Acts or
Book of Rates.

XVI. For all Tobacco of the English Plantations, exported within a Year from
its importation, the Subsidy of 1 d. per l. hereby granted, shall be repaid at
the Custom-house.

XVII. Out of the Duties by this Act granted, there shall be the like
Allowances as are prescribed in the former Act or Book of Rates.

XVIII. The Duties hereby granted, shall be Levied by the Officers of the
Customs, under direction of the Commissioners of the Customs, and paid into the
Exchequer, for the Uses in this Act mentioned. And the Rules and Directions of
the former Act of Tunnage and Poundage and Book of Rates, shall be observed for
Levying the Duty by this Act granted.

XIX. The Additional Duty on French Goods and Merchandises, granted the last
Session, ( chapter 24) shall not extend to such as shall be bona side seized, or
taken and condemned as Prize; except such seizing be by Connivance or Collusion.

XX. The whole Duty charged by this Act on Sugars of the English Plantations in
America, shall be paid back upon Exportation.

XXI. There shall be repaid at the Custom-house, within one month after demand,
3 s. for every Hundred Weight of Sugar refined in England, and exported; Oath
being made that it was produced from Brown and Muscavado Sugar charged by this
Act, imported from the English Plantations in America, and for which the Duty
was paid upon importation.

XXII. For the Duty hereby granted on Tobacco of the English Plantations in
America, the Importer shall have Three Months time to pay the same, with a
Discount of 10 l. per Cent. per Ann. for Prompt Payment.

XXIII. Ginger of the English Plantations in the West Indies, valued in the
Book of Rates at 16 d. per l. shall pay for the said former Subsidy 12 d. per
Hundred Weight, and for this present Subsidy 12 d. also per Hundred Weight,
and no more.

XXIV. After 1 May, 1697. no cut Whale-bone (other than in Fins only) shall be
imported, under the Penalty of Forfeiting the same, and double the Value.

XXV. Provided, That the Goods and Merchandises charged by this Act (except
Foreign Wrought Silk, Tobacco, Sugars and Refined Sugars,) Exported by any
Merchant English within a year, or by a Stranger within nine months after
Importation, for which the Duty hereby granted has been paid Inward, the whole
Subsidy hereby granted and paid for such Goods, Wines or Merchandises, shall be
repaid within one month after Demand: But that there be no Drawback for such
Wrought Silks, Tobacco and Sugars, unless exported within the time limited for
other Goods, and all other Requisites performed; and then not only the Two
Thirds, but the remaining One Third of the Subsidy hereby granted, is to be
repaid.

XXVI. Provided, That his Majesty's Naval Stores bought before 25 Mar. 1697.
shall not be charged with the Duty hereby granted.

XXVII. And whereas by an Act of this present Parliament, for granting a Supply
of 3 s. in the Pound by a Land Tax, etc. It is thereby Enacted, That all Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, be charged for One Year, with 3 s. in
the Pound of the true Yearly Value, to be paid by twelve equal monthly
Payments, the first Payment to be made 25 Febr. 1696. And that every Papist or
reputed Papist of the Age of Sixteen Years, who had not taken the Oaths
required, Ann. 1 W. and M. should pay double, unless such Papist did take the
same within ten days after the first Meeting of the Commissioners. And that
every person of the Age of Sixteen Years, who, not having taken the Oaths, did
not upon Summons take the same, should also pay double: And that every
Gentleman, or so reputed, who ought to have paid double to the Quarterly Poll,
Ann. 3. W. and M. and did not voluntarily take the same before the
Commissioners, within ten days after their first Meeting, should likewise pay
double: And that the Commissioners should, upon information or suspicion Summon
every suspected person to take the said Oaths; but that Quakers making and
subscribing the Declaration of Fidelity appointed, Ann. 1 W. and M. should not
be liable to pay double.

XXVIII. For a further supply it is now Enacted, That all Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments whatsoever, charged by the other Act with 3 s. in the pound,
shall now be charged for one Year, from 25 Jan. 1696. with the further Sum of 1
s. in the pound, viz. 4 s. per pound in the whole.

XXIX. And all persons who by the other Act ought to pay double, or 6 s. per
pound, shall pay 2 s. in the pound over and above the said 6 s.

XXX. The Commissioners appointed for the 3 s. in the pound, shall be
Commissioners for this present Act of 1 s. per pound, and the said double
Rates, with all the Powers and Authorities of the said other Act. And the
Assessors and Collectors of the 3 s. shall be the Assessors and Collectors of
the 1 s. and the said double Rates.

XXXI. For the avoiding repeated Assessments, the Assessors and Collectors
shall charge, collect, and levy One third part of the Duty of the 3 s. and
double rates, for and in satisfaction of the said rate of 1 s. and the double
rates, by Kalendary Months, the first payment for three months to be on 25 Apr.
1697. or within 14 days after, and afterward each Kalendary Month
successively, in such manner as they are required by the said other Act of 3 s.
per l. and shall pay the same to the Head Collectors accordingly, to be
answered by the Receivers General into the Excheqner, according to the
directions of the said other Act. And all persons concerned or employed by
virtue of this Act, shall be subject to the Penalties, and have the Benefits of
the said other Act. And all Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, subject by
Distress or otherwise, to the rates of 3 s. per l. shall in like manner be
subject to the rates of 1 s. per pound.

XXXII. And whereas by the said other Act of 3 s. in the pound, etc. the
Commissioners of the Treasury may issue Exchequer Bills, not exceeding the Sum
of 1500000 l. for the use of the War; and by the Act for making good the
deficiencies of Funds, etc. the said Bills are to be Current to the Receivers,
or Collectors of any Tax or Supply granted this Session for the War, or
otherwise, and also at the Exchequer, with 5 d. per Day Interest for each
Hundred Pounds: It is further Enacted, That the Commissioners of the Treasury
may issue Exchequer Bills, not exceeding 1200000 l. over and above the said
1500000 l. so as there be not at any one time above 2000000 l. standing out in
such Bills; which Bills to have like Currency and Interest as the said Bills
for 1500000 l.

XXXIII. The persons contracting with the Treasury, to advance Money for
Circulating the said Bills for 1500000 l. shall be discharged of their
Contracts, as soon as the Sums by them agreed to be advanced, shall be called
for and paid, or so soon as Bills for 1500000 l. issued by the former or this
present Act shall be Cancelled, or that the Funds for the War for this present
Year, shall have produced sufficient to take up, and Cancel the same.

XXXIV. The Commissioners of the Treasury may in like manner agree for the
Advancing any further Sums for Exchanging such Bills of the said 1200000 l. as
may be refused, at the Rate of 10 l. per Cent. per Ann.

XXXV. The Bills issued for the said 1500000 l. and 1200000 l. which shall not
be Cancelled by the Produce of those Funds by the 25th of March, School. shall be
taken up and Cancelled by the Arrears of those Funds, or by the Moneys Granted
next Session of Parliament. And the persons advancing Moneys for Exchanging
such Bills of the 1200000 l. as shall be refused, shall be discharged of their
Contracts as soon as the Sums Contracted for shall be paid by them, and if the
same be not called for by the 25th of March, School. they shall thenceforth be
absolutely discharged of their Contracts.

XXXVI. Till it shall be published by Proclamation that the Treasury has made
Provision that the said Bills may be Exchanged for ready Money, such Bills for
the 1200000 l. shall be Current only in the Supplies Granted for the War this
present Year 1697. (except the 3 s. in the Pound.)

XXXVII. It shall be Felony, without benefit of Clergy, to Forge or Counterfeit
any of the said Bills, or Demand Money thereon, knowing the same to be
Counterfeited.

XXXVIII. Out of the Moneys arising by this Act, by Bills of Credit or
otherwise, 672197 l. is Appropriated for the Navy, and for the Sea-Service in
the Office of the Ordnance, the Ordinary of the Navy, the Payment of
Marine-Officers, and Charge of Registring Seamen, to complete the Sum of
2372197 l. for those Services; and the remainder for the Land Forces, Ordnance,
Ammunition and Incidents of War.

XXXIX. The Rules and Directions in the Act Ann. 1 W. and M. for Granting an
Aid of 2 s. per. Pound, touching the Payment thereof, and Management in the
Exchequer, with the Penalties in case of Diversion, shall be revived and
applied to the Sums hereby Appropriated.

XL. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 34. For lessening the Duty on Tin and Pewter
Exported, It is Enacted. That after the 10th of May, 1697, there shall be paid
on any Entry of Tin to be Exported for every Hundred Weight, containing 112
Pounds, of Tin unwrought, 3 s. and for every hundred Weight of wrought Tin,
commonly called Pewter, 2 s. and so proportionably, and no more.

XLI. After the said 10th of May, till 1 Aug. 1706. the Subsidy to be received
for all Drugs Imported directly from the place of their Growth in English Built
Ships, shall be according to the full Value of the respective Species
enumerated in the Book of Rates, and for all Drugs otherwise Imported, treble
such Value.

XLII. Nothing in this Act shall extend to the laying a further Duty on any
sort of Drugs used in Dying.

XLIII. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3 cap 23. Over and above all Subsidies of Tunnage and
Poundage, and all Additional Duties and Impositions already payable for any
Wines, Goods or Merchandises Imported, there shall be paid to his Majesty, one
other Subsidy called Tunnage, for all Wines which after the last of January,
1699. during his Majesty's Life, shall be Imported into this Kingdom, viz.

XLIV. Of every Tun of French Wine that shall come into the Port of London by
way of Merchandise, by his Majesty's Natural born Subjects, 4 l. 10 s. and by
Strangers and Aliens, 6 l. Every Tun of like Wine brought into any other Port
of this Kingdom, by way of Merchandise, by his Majesty's Natural born Subjects,
3 l. and by Aliens 4 l. 10 s.

XLV. Every Butt or Pipe of Muscadells, Malmseys, Cutes, Tents, Alicants,
Bastards, Sacks, Canaries, Malaga's, Madera's and other Sweet Wines of the
Growth of the Levant, Spain or Portugal, brought into the Port of London by his
Majesty's Natural born Subjects, 45 s. and by Strangers or Aliens 3 l. And
every Butt or Pipe of the like Wine brought into any other Port of this
Kingdom, by way of Merchandise, by his Majesty's Natural born Subjects, 30 s.
and by Strangers 45 s.

XLVI. Every Awm of Rhenish Wine, or of the Growth of Germany brought into this
Realm, by his Majesty's Natural born Subjects, 20 s. and by Strangers and
Aliens 25 s. And such Wines landed in any the Out Ports and afterward brought
to London by Certificate, shall pay so much more Subsidy by this Act, as they
paid short of the Duty due in the Port of London: Which several Rates for Wines
are the same as in the Book of Rates, signed by Sir Harbottle Grimstone
Baronet, formerly Speaker of the House of Commons, and referred to by the Act
12 Car. 2. Entitled, A Subsidy Granted to the King of Tunnage and Poundage,
and other Sums of Money payable upon Merchandises Exported and Imported. And
one further Subsidy, called Poundage, viz. Of all manner of Goods and
Merchandises by whomsoever brought into this Realm after the said last of
January, 1699. during his Majesty's Life, by way of Merchandise, Twelve Pence
in the Pound of the Value of the same Goods and Merchandises in the said Book
of Rates. And if any Goods so Imported shall not be particularly Rated in the
said Book of Rates, the Subsidy by this Act Granted shall be Levied according
to the Value of such Goods upon Oath of the Merchant. Except out of this
Subsidy all Wines before limited to pay Tunnage, and all Fish English taken,
and brought by English Bottoms into this Realm, and all Fresh Fish and Bestial,
and all other Goods and Merchandises which in the said Book of Rates are Custom
Free, and all Goods and Merchandises commonly used in Dying.

XLVII. All Drugs Chargeable by this Act, Imported directly from the place of
their Growth in English Built Shipping, shall pay only one third part of what
is Charged thereupon in the said Book of Rates: And all Spicery, except Pepper,
Imported directly from the place of its Growth in English Built Shipping, shall
pay by this Act but one third part of what is Charged in the said Book of
Rates. And this Act shall not Charge Linen Imported with the Additional Duty of
one Moiety of the Rate mentioned in the said Book of Rates. And all Foreign
Wrought Silks Exported within one Year from the Importation, shall have two
thirds of the Rate hereby Charged Repaid at the Custom House: And this Act
shall not Charge Wrought Silks Imported with the Additional Duty of one Moiety
mentioned in the said Book of Rates; Or Tobacco of the English Plantation with
the Additional Duty of One Penny per Pound over and above the Subsidy in the
said Book of Rates; Or the Wines of France, Germany, Portugal or Madera, with
the Additional Duty of 3 l. per Tun, or any other Wines with the Additional
Duty of 4 l. per Tun mentioned in the said former Acts or Book of Rates: And
that for all Tobacco of the English Plantations Exported within one Year after
its Importation, the further Subsidy of one Penny per Pound, hereby Granted,
shall be Repaid at the Customhouse.

XLVIII. Out of the several Subsidies of Tunnage and Poundage by this Act
Granted, there shall be the like Allowances and Abatements as are prescribed by
the said former Act or Book of Rates, or the Rules thereunto annexed.

XLIX. The said Subsidies of Tunnage and Poundage, hereby Granted, shall be
Collected by the Officers of the Customs, under the Management of the
Commissioners of the Customs, and shall be paid into the Exchequer, for the
Purposes in this Act mentioned (the Charge of Management only excepted) and all
the Clauses in the said former Act of Tunnage and Poundage, or in the Book of
Rates, or the Rules thereunto annexed, or in any other Laws in Force, touching
the said Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, shall be put in Execution for
Answering the Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, by this Act Granted, as if
particularly repeated in this Act.

L. The whole further Subsidy laid by this Act upon all Sugars Imported from
the English Plantations in America shall be paid back at the Exportation
thereof.

LI. For every hundred Weight of Brown and Muscavado Sugars Refined in England
Exported out of this Kingdom, after the said last of January, 1699. during the
Continuance of this Act, there shall be repaid at the Custom-house, to the
Exporter, within a Month after Demand, 3 s. Oath being made by the Refiner,
that the said Sugar was produced from Brown and Muscavado Sugar, Charged by
this Act, and, as he believes, Imported from his Majesty's Plantations in
America, and the Duty paid at Importation, and duly Exported, the Searcher also
Certifying the Shipping, and all other Requisites performed.

LII. For the further Subsidy hereby Granted upon Tobacco of the English
Plantations in America, the Merchant, giving Security, shall have Three Months
from the Importation to pay the same; with a Discount after 10 per Cent. per
Ann. for Prompt Payment, if sooner paid.

LIII. Ginger of the English Plantations in the West Indies, Valued by the Book
of Rates at 16 d. per Pound, shall pay for the said former Subsidy 1 s. for
every hundred Weight, and for the Subsidy by this Act 1 s. for every hundred
Weight, and no more.

LIVE. If any persons import or bring into this Kingdom any Cut Whalebone, other
than in Fins only, they shall Forfeit the Goods, and double the Value of the
Cut Whalebone, so Imported, one moiety to the King, the other to them that
shall Seize or Sue for the same.

LV. Where any the Foreign Goods, Wines or Merchandises, by this Act Charged
with the Subsidy of Tunnage or Poundage (Except Foreign Wrought Silk, Tobacco,
Sugars and Refined Sugars, touching which other Provisions are hereby made)
shall be again Exported by any Merchant English, within a Twelve Month, or by
Strangers, within Nine Kalendary Months after Importation, and that Proof be
made by Certificate from the proper Officer of the Entry and Payment of the
Subsidy hereby Granted, with the Oath of the Merchant Importing and Exporting
the same, affirming the truth thereof, and all other Requisites performed,
touching Repayment of the Half Subsidy by the former Act; the whole Subsidy
actually paid upon this Act, shall be repaid within one Month after Demand, or
the Security vacated, as to so much as shall be so Exported: And as to Foreign
Wrought Silks, Tobacco, Sugars and Refined Sugars, no Drawback upon this Act
shall be made, unless Re-exported within the times hereby limited for other
Goods, and that like Proof be made, and other Requisites performed for the said
Silks, etc. as for other Goods Re-exported: But upon such Exportation of
Foreign Wrought Silks, and Proof made, and other Requisites performed, not only
the two thirds of the Subsidies by this Act. Directed to be Repaid for such
Silks, but also the remaining one third of the same Subsidy shall be entirely
repaid at the Custom house.

LVI. It being intended that the yearly Sum of 700000 l. be Supplied to his
Majesty for his Household and Family, and other his necessary Expenses and
Occasions out of the Hereditary Excise, Granted Ann. 12. Car. 2. and out of the
Temporary Excise payable during his Majesty's Life, by an Act of 2 W. and M.
after the Talleys Charged upon the Weekly Sum of 6000 l. issuing out of the
said several Duties of Excise, pursuant to the Act of 7 W. 3. and still
unsatisfied (with the Interest thereof) shall be fully paid; and out of the
Revenue of the Post Office, after all the Talleys Charged on the Weekly Sum of
600 l. issuing out of that Revenue, pursuant to the said Act of 7 W. 3. and
still remaining unsatisfied, and the Interest thereof shall be fully paid; And
out of the small Branches of his Majesty's Revenue, viz. The First Fruits,
Alienation Fines, Post Fines, Wine Licenses, Sheriffs Proffers, Seizures of
Uncustomed and Prohibited Goods, The Revenue of the Duchy of Cornwall, or any
other Revenue in Lands in England or Wales, or Fines of Leases for the same,
and the Duty of Four and a half per Cent. in Specie in Barbados and the
Leeward Islands in America; and out of the Moneys arising by this Act, after
the Commencement of the same; It is Enacted, That if the said Great and Small
Branches and Revenues shall produce clear more than the yearly Sum of 700000 l.
after 25 Dec. 1699. the Overplus shall not be Disposed of but by Parliament;
And all Dispositions of such Overplus, without Authority of Parliament, shall
be Void, and the persons to whom such Dispositions shall be made, shall be
incapable to Enjoy the same.

LVII. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 30. All Lustrings and Alamodes Imported into
this Kingdom, which by the Act of Tunnage and Poundage made, Ann. 12 Car. 2.
were valued in the Book of Rates at 40 s. the Pound Weight, containing 16
Ounces, shall, after 24 June, School. be valued at Four Pounds for every Pound
Weight, containing 16 Ounces, as aforesaid: And the several Subsidies,
Additional and other Duties and Impositions payable thereupon, by virtue of
several Acts of Parliament, since that time made, during the Continuance of the
same respectively, shall be Collected, Paid and Answered upon the said
Lustrings and Alamodes, according to the said Valuation of Four Pounds for
every Pound Weight, as if the same had been Originally Inserted in the said
Book of Rates, and had been particularly referred to (instead of the said Rate
of 40 s.) in the several Acts beforementioned; And that according to the same
Rules and Methods, and with such or the like Allowances, and under such
Penalties, as are by the said Acts, or any of them prescribed, for the
respective Duties on the same Commodities.

Exchequer.
I. STat. 8. and 9. W. 3. cap. 28. For better observation of the Course
anciently used in the Exchequer, It is Enacted, That after 20 April 1697. when
any Money shall be brought into the Receipt of the Exchequer, the respective
Teller, into whose Office it shall be brought, if the Officers belonging to the
Talley Court be then attending, or as soon as they shall attend for the Levying
a Talley, shall without delay receive the said Money, Weighing the same in
entire Sums or otherwise, and making due entry thereof, shall throw down a Bill
or Bills written upon Parchment and Signed, into the Talley Court, whereby a
Taller may be duly Levied (according to the nature of the Payment;) And that
such Teller, his Clerk or Substitute, shall not for such Money give a Note
importing a Depositum, or other private Note or Security, to prevent the due
charging thereof in the Exchequer, as aforesaid, upon pain that such Teller,
who shall offend against this Act, by neglecting to receive and duly charge
himself with such Money, or giving any private Note, as aforesaid, shall
forfeit his Office, and be disabled to serve the King in any Office, and
Forfeit double damages to the King, or party damnified, and full costs of Suit;
and every Clerk and substitute of such Tellers, who shall offend against this
Act, by giving any private Note, shall for every such offense forfeit double
the sum for which such Note was given, one moiety to the King, the other to the
Informer, and also be removed from the said Receipt.

II. After the said 20th of April, No Teller shall charge himself by Bill with
the receipt of any Moneys in the Exchequer, but when the Officers of the Talley
Court are there present, nor shall any Teller or his substitute throw down into
the said Court any Bill, purporting the receiving of any Money, unless such
Teller or his Clerks have actually received the same, except in such cases
where Talleys are or shall be Levied by special Warrant of the Lords of the
Treasury, or Treasurer of the Exchequer, or where the person for whom any
Talley shall be Levied, shall at the same time, or on the same day, give a
Discharge according to the course of the Exchequer, upon some Order or
Debenture for the Money for which such Bill shall be thrown down, upon pain of
incurring the like forfeiture of Office and Disability, as before mentioned,
and forfeiting double the sum so unduly charged, one moiety to the King, the
other to the Informer, and for Clerks and Substitutes the like penalty, as
aforesaid.

III. No Teller, his Clerk or Substitute, after the Bills thrown down into the
Talley Court, shall lend, pay, or by any way whatsoever, depart with such Money
out of his Office, without an Order for the same, made forth by the Auditor,
and Recorded by the Clerk of the Pells, and taking a Receipt to discharge the
King according to ancient course, under the like forfeitures and penalties as
for unduly charging any Money before actually received.

IV. After the said 20 April, the Chamberlains or Deputy Chamberlains, and such
other Officers, Clerks and Deputies as belong to the Talley Court, shall daily,
except Sundays and Holidays, constantly attend, at least from eight of the
Clock to one, between Lady Day and Michaelmas, and from nine to one between
Michaelmas and Lady Day yearly, unless they be sick, or have leave from the
Commissioners of the Treasury, or Treasurer, or Under-Treasurer of the
Exchequer, in which case the Room shall be sufficiently supplied as has been
accustomed, upon pain to answer and make to the King or party that shall suffer
by reason of such Absence, double Damages and full Costs.

V. And the Auditor of the Receipt, Writer of Talleys, Clerk of the Pells, the
four Tellers, and other Officers of the Receipt, shall by themselves, or their
respectives Deputies (in such cases where they may act by Deputy) give due and
constant attendance in their respective places, under the like penalties of
double the Damages and full Costs, as aforesaid.

VI. The first Clerk in the Offices of the Auditor of the Receipt, the Clerk of
the Pells, and of the four Tellers, shall be sworn for the due, just, and
faithful performance of all matters to be performed by them in the said Offices
respectively.

VII. None of the Moneys which are or shall be in the Receipt of the Exchequer,
shall be thence paid or issued but in pursuance of some sufficient Grant under
the Great Seal, or by Virtue of some sufficient Authority under the Privy Seal,
or pursuant to some Act of Parliament.

VIII. A Table or Tables shall be made and set up at the Door of the Auditor of
the Receipt, showing how far the Officers there have proceeded in the repayment
of Loans upon the credit of Taxes or Revenues, and how far the Moneys paid in
by the respective Receivers thereof do extend, from time to time, to discharge
Principal and Interest upon the said Taxes, etc. respectively.

IX. The Auditor of the Receipt shall from time to time (for his Lawful Fees)
duly enter all Letters Patents, and Privy Seals, for issuing the Kings
Treasure, and shall draw the Orders for issuing thereof, as required by the
Lords of the Treasury, or Treasurer of the Exchequer, and shall keep Entries
thereof, and Weekly take the Tellers Accounts, and make Certificate to the
Treasury of all Receipts, Issues, and Remains of the Kings Money there, and
make out the Impressed Certificates, and transmit the Ordinary Impressed Rolls
half-yearly to the Remembrancer, and shall half-yearly, at Easter and
Michaelmas, transmit to the Treasury the Declaration of the Receipts, Issues,
and Remains at the Exchequer, in such manner as has been anciently accustomed.
And the Clerk of the Pells shall from time to time (for his Lawful Fees) duly
Enroll all Letters Patents, and Privy Seals, for issuing the Kings Treasure,
and fairly enter all Receipts and Issues at the said Exchequer, and take the
Tellers Weekly Accounts, and certify to the Treasury Weekly the Receipts,
Issues and Remains of the Kings Money there, and carefully examine the Impressed
Certificates and Impressed Rolls, and transmit to the Treasury, half-yearly,
Declarations of the Receipts, Issues and Remains within the half year, and
shall in all matters appertaining to his Office carefully observe the ancient
course and method; And the said Officers, their Deputies and Clerks, shall be
answerable for their Demeaners in their respective Duties, as well to the King,
as to any person who may suffer by any neglect or failure therein.

X. All Penalties and Forfeitures by this Act shall be recovered by Action of
Debt, or of the Case, Bill, Suit, or Information, in any of the Kings Courts of
Record, wherein no Essoign, etc. shall be allowed.

XI. This Act not to lessen or diminish the Lawful Power, Order, Rule or
Government which the Commissioners of the Treasury, or Treasurer for the time
being have, and ought to have in their places and trusts respectively.

XII. This Act not to alter or change any Method of receipts or payments by
Bills of Credit in the Exchequer allowed by Parliament.

XIII. All the Money in the said Receipt shall be kept in Chests under three
different Locks and three Keys, the Tellers to keep one, the Clerk of the Pells
one, and the other shall be kept by the eldest of the two Deputy Chamberlains;
and no Orders shall be paid the same day they are sent up from the Auditors
Office to the Clerk of the Pells (except for the Navy, Ordnance, Forces, or for
Moneys registered) And the Clerk of the Pells, and Deputy Chamberlains shall
every morning, except Sundays and Holidays, cause the respective Chests to be
opened in their presence, and so much Money to be taken out, and left with the
Tellers, as will satisfy the Orders so directed and ready to be satisfied, and
the rest to be safe Locked up again; and every day see all the Money which was
received that day (except what shall be paid away) to be first weighed in the
Bags, a Ticket of the Content put into each Bag, and so secured in the said
Chests; And in case Moneys in the said Chests be directed to be issued for the
Navy, Ordnance, etc. so that the payments must not be deferred, the Clerk of
the Pells and Deputy Chamberlains shall go up forthwith to the Tellers Offices,
and see the Chests opened for that Money, and the Public Service dispatched,
and the Chests secured again in manner aforesaid; and when the Clerk of the
Pells cannot attend, his eldest Clerk shall keep his Keys of the said Chests;
if the Deputy Chamberlain cannot attend, his Keys shall be kept by his Fellow;
and no Money shall be taken out of the said Chests but in presence of the
respective Tellers, the Clerk of the Pells, and Deputy Chamberlain, or in case
of Sickness, or Absence with Leave, of their Clerks, as aforementioned.

XIV. After the said 20th of April, the Auditor of the Receipt, or his chief
Clerk, shall at least once in 28 days, visit every Tellers Cash, and by
numbering the Bags, opening some of them, and (if he thinks fit) by weighing or
telling the Money, see that the Tellers have in real Money the remains
wherewith he charges them, and that at least once in three Months he examine
the Tellers Vouchers for the payments which he allows them in his Weekly
Certificates.

Excise.
I. Stat. 8. W. 3. cap. 3. All the Talleys of pro, or other Talleys, which have
been Levied, and are charged upon the Hereditary or Temporary Excise, or upon
the weekly Sums of 6000 l. payable thereout, shall be duly paid in course,
according to their respective Dates, and not otherwise, without preference,
unless where Money is reserved for payment of the preceding Talleys, and the
Interest of the said Talleys shall be paid every three Months out of the said
weekly Sums of 6000 l. a Week; and all Talleys of pro, or other Talleys which
have been Levied, and are Charged upon the Revenue of the Post Office, or upon
the weekly Sum of 600 l. appropriated thereout, shall be in like manner duly
paid in Course, according to their respective Dates, without preference, as
aforesaid, and the Interest of the last mentioned Talleys shall be likewise
paid every Three Months out of the said weekly Sums of 600 l. a Week, under the
same Penalties or Forfeitures, as by the aforementioned Act are prescribed.

II. Stat. 8 and 9. W. 3. cap. 19. After the Tenth of April, 1697. the Clause
relating to Party Guiles, in the Act made the last Sessions of this Parliament
(7 and 8 W. 3. cap. 30. Abr. Excise, n. 106.) shall be Repealed to all Intents
and Purposes.

III. Every Common Brewer shall, after the said Tenth of April, declare to the
Gauger how much Strong Beer or Ale he intends to make of a Guile, and how much
Small (if he intends any) before any part of such Guile is cleansed or removed;
and upon refusal of such Discovery, the Gauger shall return the whole Guile to
be Strong, and the Brewer shall beside Forfeit for every Barrel of Ale or Beer,
contained in such Guile, 20 s. And in case after such Declaration, any Increase
be made of the Strong Beer or Ale, or any part thereof laid off, the said
Brewer shall Forfeit for every Barrel so Increased or laid off, 5 l. and the
Servant assisting therein shall Forfeit for every Barrel 20 s. and in Default
of Payment, shall suffer Three Months Imprisonment. In case the Increase be
made by adding Beer or Ale left of a former Brewing, the Brewer shall Incur all
the said Penalties, unless it be proved by Oath, that it was done in the sight
and view of the Gauger.

IV. If it shall appear to the Gaugers, that the Quality of Strong Beer or Ale
remaining of a former Guile, and added to a Guile of New Drink, has been
altered since it was Brewed, he shall Return all such Beer and Ale, so added to
a Guile of new Drink, as if the same were then originally Brewed, and the
Brewer shall pay the Duties accordingly.

V. No Common Brewer shall after the 28th day of April, 1697. have or keep any
Pipe or Stop-cock under Ground, or other private Conveyance, by which any Beer,
Ale, or Worts, may be conveyed from one Tun, Brewing Vessel, or Place, to
another, on pain to Forfeit for every such Offense the Sum of 100 l.

VI. From and after the said 28th of April, any Gauger or Officer of Excise,
may in the day time, and in the presence of a Constable, or other Lawful
Officer of the Peace, and request first made, break up the Ground in any Common
Brew House, or the Ground adjoining, or any Wall, to search for such private
Pipe or Conveyance; and if any such be found, to follow the same, and to
examine and try whether such Pipe can convey any Beer, Ale, etc. into any other
place; but if no such private Conveyance shall be found, such Gauger shall make
good the Ground, or other Place so broken, or make satisfaction for the same.
The person opposing any Gauger in such search, shall Forfeit 50 l.

VII. It shall be Lawful nevertheless for any Common Brewer to keep any Pipes,
Stop-cocks, or other Conveyances above Ground, in open View, for the use of his
Trade.

VIII. Every Common Brewer, who, after the foresaid 10th of April, shall,
without first giving notice to the next Office of Excise, set up or alter any
Tun, Batch, Float, Cooler or Copper, or have or keep any private or concealed
Tun, Batch, etc. other than such as are openly known to be commonly used in his
Brewhouse, he shall Forfeit for every such Vessel 200 l.

IX. If any Common Brewer or Maker of Cider shall, after the said 10th of
April, deliver to any Distiller or Vinegar Maker, any Wash, Tilts, Ale, Beer,
Vinegar Beer or Cider, without first giving notice to the Gauger of that
Division, of what Quantity he intends to deliver, and when, and to whom, he
shall Forfeit for every Barrel so delivered 20 s.

X. No Common Distiller shall after the said 10th of April, set up, alter or
enlarge any Tun, Cask, etc. or have or keep any private or concealed Tun, Cask,
Copper, Still or other Vessel, or any private or concealed Warehouse, Cellar,
etc. without first giving notice thereof, as aforesaid, upon pain to Forfeit 20
l. And every Person, in whose Occupation any House shall be where such things
shall be discovered, shall Forfeit 50 l.

XI. After the said 10th of April, every Person making or keeping any Wash,
Cider, or other Materials fit for Distillation, and having in his Possession
any Still or Stills, containing Twenty Gallons or upwards, Proof being made
thereof by Oath before some Justice of Peace, shall be deemed a Common
Distiller for Sale, and subject to the Duties of Excise.

XII. All Fines, Penalties, and Forfeitures, by this Act imposed, shall be Sued
for and Recovered by such Ways and Means as used by the Laws of Excise, or by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, etc. in the Courts of Record at Westminster,
whereof one Moiety to the King, the other to the Informer.

XIII. Any Persons who have already set up, or hereafter shall set up any Works
or Offices for Making or Distilling for Sale, any Low Wines or Spirits, from
Drink brewed from Malted Corn or Cider, giving notice to the Commissioners of
Excise, within Ten days after the Entering such Office or Work, may follow such
Work, and may Refine the Spirits of their own making, paying the Duties, and
being subject to the Fines and Penalties as other Distillers are.

XIV. Stat. 8 and 9. W. 3. cap. 22. There shall be paid to his Majesty for all
Malt (made of any Grain whatsoever) which any Malster, or maker of Malt for
Sale, Seller or Retailer of Malt, Brewer, Distiller, Inn keeper, Victualler or
Vinegar-maker in this Kingdom, or any other, for their use, shall be possessed
of 20 April, 1697. Six Pence per Bushel by such persons respectively. And for
every Bushel of Malt made within this Kingdom of any Grain whatsoever, from 20
April, 1697. to 20 July, 1699. by any person whatsoever (for Sale or not for
Sale) the Sum of Six Pence, by the Makers thereof respectively. And for every
Barrel of Mum made or sold in England, from 20 April, 1697. to 20 July, 1699.
Ten Shillings (over and above the present Duties) by the Maker or Seller
respectively. And for every Barrel of Sweets made from Foreign or English
Materials, from 20 April, 1697. to 20 July, 1699. (over and above the present
Duties) Twelve Shillings, by the Maker thereof. And for all Cider and Perry
made for sale, from the said 20 April, 1697. to 20 July, 1699. (over and above
the present Duties on Cider and Perry sold by retail) 4 s. per Hogshead, by the
first Buyer or Retailer.

XV. And every person who shall buy any Cider or Perry, or Fruit to make into
Cider or Perry, and shall sell any of the said Cider or Perry, so bought or
made, by the Hogshead, or any greater or lesser Measure, shall be deemed a
Retailer, and chargeable with the said Duties.

XVI. All which Duties shall be under the Management of the Commissioners of
Excise; and all the Inferior Officers in the Excise, shall be the Officers for
the said Duties, under the direction of the said Commissioners, who may dismiss
or alter them, and make such others, as to them shall seem meet.

XVII. And all such Malsters, etc. having on 20 April, 1697. any quantity of
Malt whatsoever, shall before 10 May, 1697. enter the same particularly at the
next Office of Excise, under Penalty of 50 l. and to Forfeit the Malt not
Entered: and within six days after, shall either pay down the Duties for the
same, to the proper Officer, or give Security to pay the said Duties within six
months, with an allowance of 10 l. per Cent. per ann. for the said six months,
if paid within the said six days.

XVIII. And the said Officers are Authorized to take an Account of all such
Malt as any Malsters, etc. shall be so possessed of 20 April, 1697. and to that
end are to be permitted, at their request, to enter in the daytime, into the
Dwelling House, etc. of any such Malster, etc. under the Penalty of 10 l.

XIX. And such Officers are further to be permitted at their request, to enter
in the daytime, into the House, Malt house, or other place of any person
whatsoever, who after the said 20 April, 1697. till 20 July, 1699. shall make
any Malt (for sale or not for sale) to Gauge the Vessels used for the Steeping
of Barley, or other Grain for making of Malt, and to take an account of the
Quantity of Barley and other Grain, steeping or steeped therein, and report the
same to the Commissioners, leaving a Copy of such Report with the Malster, or
maker of Malt, for a Charge.

XX. And no such maker of Malt for Sale or private Use, shall refuse Entrance
to such Officer, for the purposes aforesaid, under Penalty of 5 l.

XXI. After the said 20 April, 1697. Every maker of Malt, for sale or not for
sale, shall every month make an Entry at the said Excise-Office of all the Malt
so made, under Penalty of 10 l. and shall within three months after pay the
Duties for the same respectively.

XXII. And upon neglecting or refusing to make such Payment, to Forfeit, for
every such Offense, double the Duty. And after such default, shall not sell,
deliver, or carry out any Malt until the said Duty be cleared, on pain to
Forfeit double the value of such Malt.

XXIII. The Bushel in this Act is meant to be the Winchester Bushel, and the
Barley or Grain in steeping or steeped, shall be returned as so many Bushels of
Malt, according to such Bushel.

XXIV. After 20 April, 1697. No maker of Malt shall alter his Vessel for
steeping of Barley or Grain for Malt, without first giving Notice thereof to
the next Office of Excise, nor keep any private Vessel for that purpose, under
penalty of 50 l.

XXV. After 20 Aril, 1697. no Sweet-maker shall set up any Vessel for making of
Sweets, without first giving Notice thereof at the next Office of Excise, on
pain of Forfeiting 50 l.

XXVI. The Directions and Rules Established by the Act, An. 12. Car. 2. for
settling the Revenue of Excise, or by any other Law now in force, relating to
that Revenue (not otherwise provided for by this Act) shall be put in
Execution, for Levying the said Duties on Malt, Mum, Sweets, Cider and Perry,
hereby granted.

XXVII. All Penalties and Forfeitures in this Act, shall be recovered, as any
Forfeiture or Penalty may be by the Laws of Excise, or by Action of Debt, etc.
at Westminster.

XXVIII. The Commissioners of Excise, or such persons as they shall appoint, or
else the Collector or Supervisor of the District, may compound with any person
for the said Duties on Malt, not made for sale, at the rate of 5 s. per Ann.
for every Head in the Family, and take Security for paying the same Quarterly,
and then their Malt-houses and other places, shall not be liable to the said
Duty, or to the Survey of the Officer of Excise.

XXIX. But if such person, after Composition, sell or deliver out any Malt to
others, or sell any Beer, Ale, or other Liquors made of Malt, then to Forfeit
50 l. and lose the benefit of such Composition.

XXX. Out of every 20 Bushels of Malt, so charged by the Gauger, there shall be
an allowance of Four Bushels, in Consideration of the difference between Corn
wet and swollen, and the same converted into dry Malt.

XXXI. Any person may export Malt, for which the Duty has been paid, to any
Foreign Parts, except Scotland, giving Security not to Reland the same in this
Kingdom; but if the same should nevertheless be Relanded, then (besides the
Penalty of the Bond) the Malt, or the Value thereof, to be Forfeited.

XXXII. The Exporter of any Malt shall produce a Certificate from the proper
Officer, That the Duty thereof has been paid or secured to be paid, which must
be proved upon Oath, and that it is the same Malt mentioned in the Certificate;
whereupon the said Duty of 6 d. per Bushel is to be repaid to the Exporter, by
the Collector or Commissioners.

XXXIII. Provided, That all Malt sold before 20 April, 1697. and not delivered
to the Buyer, or Contracted so to be, the Buyer shall pay the Seller 6 d. per
Bushel upon delivery, or the Contract to be void.

XXXIV. Rent payable in Malt, or in Money to be ascertained by the price of
Malt, the Tenant to deduct so much as amounts to 2 s. for every Quarter of
Malt, which is to be allowed accordingly.

XXXV. After 20 April, 1697. no Malt to be imported into this Kingdom from
beyond the Seas, on pain of Forfeiting such Malt, or the value thereof.

XXXVI. Out of the Money arising by Loans or Bills upon the Aid of 3 s. per l.
and other Duties, 1200000 l. shall be appropriated to the Navy and Ordnance,
etc. And the Remainder arising by that Act, other than the Loans upon the Act
7. W. 3. for Purchasing Annuities, and 23006 l. 17 s. 8 d... lent on the
Exchequer in general, both transferred to the said Act, shall be appropriated
to the Land Forces, etc.

XXXVII. Out of the Moneys arising by this Act, the first 200000 l. shall be
appropriated for the Expenses of his Majesty's Household, and other his
necessary Occasions, and one Moiety of the remainder to the same Service, and
the other Moiety to the Navy and Army equally, till the said Sum of 515000 l.
be fully paid; and the Surplus to the Navy and Land Forces equally.

XXXVIII. The Rules in the Act, An. 1. W. and M. for an Aid of 2 s. per l.
shall be applied to the distribution and application of the Sums hereby
appropriated.

XXXIX. The Moneys arising by the Duties on Malt, shall be appropriated to the
payment of the Moneys due upon Bills and Tickets hereafter mentioned; And if by
20 April, School. the Produce thereof brought into the Exchequer in Specie, be
not 800000 l. the Deficiency to be made good out of the first Aid, granted
after the said 20 April, School. And if the said Duties on Malt brought into the
Exchequer by 29 Sept. 1699. with the Provisional Supply of the forementioned
Deficiency, be not 1515000 l. the Deficiency to be made good out of the first
Aid granted after 29 Sept. 1699.

XL. For advancing the Sum of 1400000 l. Any person, Native or Foreigner,
paying by 24 June 1697. to the Receivers thereto appointed, 10 l. or several 10
pounds upon this Act, shall for every 10 l. have a Lot. Which Receivers are to
take New Milled Money, or Hammered Silver Money, or Standard Plate, at 6 s per
Oz.

XLI. The Managers or Directors to be appointed by his Majesty for that
purpose, shall prepare Books divided into four Columes; in each of which, shall
be Printed 140000 Tickets, the Third Colume mentioning that such Ticket
Intitles the Bearer to Ten Pounds, with a Farthing a day Interest, from 24 June
1697. or to a better chance, which Tickets to be Signed by the Receivers, and
delivered to the Adventurers upon payment of the several 10 l. as aforesaid.
And the Money and Plate so received, to be answered into the Exchequer by the
said Receivers, who shall by 10 July 1697. re-deliver the Books to the
Managers, with an account of the Money and Plate so received, and paid into the
Exchequer. And the Tickets of the Third Colume not disposed of shall be
delivered into the Exchequer for the use of the War, and of his Majesty's
Household, and other Uses in this Act, and thence be issued for the said Uses,
as if they were Cash or Moneys, and the Owners be esteemed Adventurers
accordingly.

XLII. The Tickets in the second Colume are to be Rolled up and Fastened, being
cut off Indentwise, and put in a Box Marked A, to be secured by the Managers,
who are to prepare another Book distinguished into Two Columes, in each of which
are to be Printed 5000 Tickets, whereof 3500 in the outermost Columes to be
Fortunate, and Written upon in Figures and Words at length, viz. Upon one of
them 1000 l. Upon two of them 500 l. each, Upon three of them 400 l. Upon four
of them 300 l. Upon six of them 200 l. Upon Fifty one of them 100 l. Upon One
hundred and three of them 50 l. Upon One hundred and thirty of them 30 l. Upon
Four hundred of them 20 l. Upon Two thousand eight hundred of them 10 l. Which
with 150 l. to the First drawn Ticket, and 100 l. to the Last drawn Ticket,
amounts to 56000 l.

XLIII. The said 5000 Tickets in the outermost Columes to be Rolled up and
Fastened, being cut off Indentwise, and put in a Box Marked B. to be secured also
by the Managers, till the time of Drawing; And no Money or Plate to be received
from any Adventurer, after the said 24 June, 1697. And the whole business of
preparing the said Tickets fit for Drawing, shall be performed by 2 Aug. 1697.

XLIV. On 10 Aug. 1697. The Managers shall cause the Boxes to be brought to the
Guild Hall, London, and being opened, and the Tickets well mixed, to be Drawn by
two indifferent Persons, a Number and a Ticket; which Lot, if it be a Blank,
shall be Filed with the Number drawn with it; but if it be a Fortunate Ticket,
then to be Entered with the Number coming up with it, and the Entry Signed by
one of the Managers, and then put on another File; And so the Drawing to
continue till the 3500 Fortunate Tickets, and one more for the last, be
completely Drawn, and no longer.

XLV. And afterward the Numbered and Fortunate Tickets drawn against the same,
shall remain in a Box locked up by the Managers, to be examined and adjusted, if
occasion requires. And the Managers are to Print and Publish the Fortunate
Tickets, and the Numbers drawn against them.

XLVI. And incase of Dispute, the Property of the said Fortunate Tickets is to
be determined by the majority of the Managers.

XLVII. And it shall be Felony, to Counterfeit any such Ticket, or knowingly
bring the same to the Managers to defraud his Majesty.

XLVIII. The said Managers are also to provide a Parchment Book, to Enter the
Numbers of the Tickets belonging to the 3500 Extraordinary Benefits, with the
first and last Drawn Tickets, to be Signed by the Managers, and Transmitted
into the Exchequer by 10 Sept. 1697. And the Prizes or Benefits shall be paid
accordingly, as the Fund comes into the Exchequer, in course, without Interest:
And the Contributors not having Prizes, shall receive Ten Pounds for every such
Contribution, out of the said Fund, with a Farthing per diem Interest from 24
June, 1697. till paid off. And every person having a Prize not above 20 l.
shall have 10 l. over and above, with Interest, as aforesaid; All payable to
the Bearers.

XLIX. And the Managers, just before the Drawing, shall prepare 140 Tickets, as
the Indices to the 140000 Tickets, to be Rolled up and Drawn, for adjusting the
Course of Payment of each Thousand of the said 140000. And shall be Writ down
in a Book, and Transmitted into the Exchequer: And the Duties arising on Malt
sufficient to pay the first Thousand Tickets, as Entered in the last mentioned
Book, shall be applied thereunto, and so on till the whole be satisfied.

L. An Account is to be Published the First Monday in every Month, and set up
at the Exchequer, what Thousand Tickets are to be paid that Month: And after
the Money is ready to be paid, the Interest to cease, and the Money not called
for to be reserved.

LI. Every Manager to take an Oath faithfully to execute his Trust, etc.

LII. Out of the residue of the Fund, after paying the Fortunate and other
Lots, the Managers, Clerks, Officers, etc. may be rewarded as his Majesty shall
direct.

LIII. The Adventurers paying in their Money before 24 June, 1697. shall be
allowed Interest to that time, after the rate of 14 per Cent. per Ann.

LIVE. And the Receivers to have an Allowance not exceeding 2 d. per l.

LV. All Receipts and Issues of the said 1400000 l. to be performed by the
Officers without Fee or Reward; And the Moneys lent, or payable by this Act,
not to be Taxed.

LVI. There shall be a distinct Office at the Exchequer, for paying the
Benefits by this Act appointed, till all be satisfied; And the Officers thereto
appointed to give Security for paying the same accordingly.

LVII. The Moneys so brought into the Exchequer upon the said Fund, shall be,
without any further Warrant, paid over to such Officers, by way of Impressed, for
the uses aforesaid; Which Officers to be subject to the Inspection and Comptrol
of the Treasury, and to such Rules as shall be prescribed them, conduceable to
the ends and purposes of this Act.

LVIII. Any Persons may lend his Majesty 200000 l. at 8 per Cent. Interest, not
Taxable, to be repaid in Course, with the Interest, every three months, till
repaid out of the Contributions for the said Tickets: And if such Contributions
before 24 June, 1697. be not sufficient to pay the said Loans with Interest,
such Loans shall be satisfied out of the Duties on Malt brought in, in specie;
And so many Tickets not delivered out as are equal to such Principal Money
unsatisfied, to be Cancelled, and the rest Drawn, and proportioned accordingly.
Which Money so Lent to His Majesty, to be part of the Sum appropriated to his
Majesty's Household, and other his necessary Occasions.

LIX. Every Round Bushel 8 Inches and wide throughout, and 8 Inches deep,
shall be esteemed a Winchester Bushel.

LX. The 1400 l. in Hammered Money paid into the Custom-house of Exon by Daniel
Ivry and Henry Arthur Merchants, before 4 May last, shall be received by Tale
by the Collector there, and be carried to the Mint to be Coined into Milled
Money.

Hawkers and Pedlars,
Vide Taxes, Stat. 8 and 9. W. 3. cap. 25.

Hay Market.
I. STat. 8 and 9. W. 3. cap. 17. After 25 March, 1697. Every Cart Load of Hay
that shall stand to be Sold in the Street, called the Hay-Market, in the
Parishes of St. Martins in the Fields and St. James's, within the Liberties of
Westminster, shall Pay 3 d. and every Cart Load of Straw 1 d. in ease of the
Parishioners of the said Parishes, for and toward the Paving and Amending the
said Street.

II. Every Cart Load that Pays, and is not Sold, shall not Pay the next Market
Day for standing.

III. Upon refusal of Payment, the Offenders Goods may be Distrain'd, by
Warrant of any Justice of Peace of Middlesex or Westminster, and Sold within
Three Days after Distress, returning the Overplus.

IV. The said Street shall be Construed to extend in Length from the Old Toll
Post at the upper end of the Hay-Market, to the Phaenix Inn at the lower end,
and in Breadth from Kennel to Kennel, which shall be esteemed the Bounds of the
said Market.

V. A Hand-Bell shall be Rung by the Toll-gatherer about the Market, Twice a
Day on every Market Day, viz, Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday weekly, at One
Hours Distance, to give Notice of the time of ending the Market, according to
the Stat. 2 W. and M cap. 8. In default of such Ringing, Persons Selling Hay or
Straw, shall the next immediate Market Day, Stand and Sell Toll-free.

VI. All Forfeitures given by the foresaid Act, shall be Demanded in the said
Market, by the Bell-Ringer, on the same Day on which they are incurred, and
Complaint shall be made of the Offense to some Justice of the Quorum in
Westminster, before the next succeeding Market Day, or else no person shall be
liable to such Forfeitures.

VII. The Collectors of the said Toll, shall yearly, at every Easter Sessions,
give to the Justices of Peace of the said County and City, a particular
Account, upon Oath, of their Receipts and Disbursements, and the Overplus to go
to the County of Middlesex.

Highways.
I. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 15. The Justices of Peace at their next Sessions
for the County of Surrey, shall Appoint Surveyors of the Highways for the year
ensuing, pursuant to the Statute 3 and 4 W. and M. cap. 12. who shall meet and
Survey the Lanes leading from Woodhatch Borough to Sidlow Mill, and Salmons
Cross in the Parish of Ryegate, and the Lanes called Horsehill, and Bonehurst,
and Petteridge in the Parish of Horley, in the County of Surrey, and make their
Certificates thereof to the Justices, who thereupon shall make such Orders in
and about the same, as to them shall seem good.

II. The Surveyors shall require such Carts and Persons as are liable to work
in the Highways, to work in the respective Places, paying according to the
usual Rate of the Country.

III. Where there is not sufficient Gravel, Chalk, Sand, or Stones to be found
in the proper Parish, the Surveyors, or whom they shall Appoint, may Dig, Take
and Carry away the said Materials, By direction of the Justices, out of the
Waste or Common of any Neighboring Parish, paying a reasonable Satisfaction
for the same, and filling up the Ground, if directed or desired.

IV. The Justices at their special Sessions shall Appoint one or more Receiver
or Receivers of Toll, viz. Of every Horse 1 d. Coach 6 d. Calash or Chariot 6
d. Wagon or Cart 6 d. Score of Sheep or Lambs 1 d. and so proportionably;
Score of Calves 2 d. Score of Hogs 2 d. and so proportionably for a greater or
lesser Number, not being under Five; Score of Oxen or Neat Cattle 6 d. and so
proportionably; that shall pass through the said Way after the passing of this
Act. The Place for Collecting the said Tolls to be at such convenient Place
upon the Highway, in or near the said Lanes as the Justices of Peace at their
special Sessions shall appoint.

V. The Receivers or Collectors of the said Toll shall give a monthly Account
upon Oath, to one or more of the next Justices, to be Returned to and Examined
by the Justices at the next special Sessions. The Horse, Cart, etc. of any
Person refusing to pay the said Toll, may be Distrain'd and Detained, till the
Toll and Damages of Distress be satisfied.

VI. The Surveyors shall at the next special Sessions, Account to the Justices
in Writing under their Hands, for all Moneys Received of the Collectors, and
Disbursements in or about the said Highways, Paying the Overplus to the
Surveyors for the year ensuing. And the Justices shall make Allowances to them
for their Care and Pains, as to them shall seem good.

VII. If the Collectors of the Toll shall not upon request duly pay the same to
the Surveyors, or in case the Surveyors shall not make such Account and
Payments as the Justices shall Order, the Justices, upon due Proof, may
Imprison the Offenders.

VIII. The Surveyors, or the more part of them, by Order of the Justices at
their Special Sessions, may engage the Profits arising by the said Toll, by
Indenture under their Hands and Seals, for any Term not exceeding Fifteen
years, to any Persons who shall Lend any present Sum of Money at 6 per Cent.
Which Money so Advanced shall be Distributed by the Justices at their Special
Sessions, for the Purposes aforesaid.

IX. Such as neglect or refuse (having no Lawful excuse) to take upon him the
Office of Surveyor, being thereunto chosen, shall be Fined by the Justices, not
exceeding 5 l. to be Levied by Distress and Sale of Goods, and in such case, or
in case of Death, some other Person to be chosen Surveyor.

X. All Fines and Forfeitures, Incurred by virtue of this Act, shall be paid to
the Surveyors for the time being, for and toward the Repairing the said Lanes.

XI. Actions brought against any Person, for any thing done in pursuance of
this Act, shall be laid in the said County of Surrey, and not elsewhere; the
Defendant may Plead the General Issue, and give the Special Matter in Evidence,
etc. and in case the Cause goes for the Defendant, he shall have double Costs.

XII. Persons passing the Place where Toll is taken, and returning the same
day, shall not Pay Toll twice, nor shall Persons pay who pass with Carriages
from any next adjoining Parish, going to Market, or in Matters of Husbandry,
nor Soldiers upon their March, nor Persons Riding Post.

XIII. Persons Chargeable by Law toward Repairing of the said Highways shall
still remain so.

XIV. This Act shall be of force no longer than for Twenty years; and if the
said Lanes shall be sooner amended, and so adjudged by the Justices at their
Quarter Sessions, then after payment of the Money Borrowed, the aforesaid Toll
shall cease.

XV. The Justices of Surrey, and also the Justices of Sussex shall yearly at
the Epiphany Quarter Sessions, if they think fit, appoint Three Persons of each
County, to view the said Lanes, and examine the Surveyors Accounts; and in case
they find any misapplication of the Moneys Levied by this Act, to certify the
same to the Judges at the next Assizes for the County of Surrey, who are to
hear and finally determine the same.

XVI. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 16. For enlarging Common Highways, It is
Enacted, that the Justices of Peace of any County, City, etc. or the major Part
of them (Five at least) at their Quarter Sessions, may enlarge or widen any
Highways in their respective Counties, etc. So that the Ground to be taken
into the said Highways do not exceed Eight Yards in Breadth, and that they do
not pull down any House, nor take away any Ground from Garden, Orchard, Court
or Yard.

XVII. For Satisfaction of the Owners, the said Justices shall Impannel a Jury,
and Administer an Oath to them, that they will Assess such Damages, and
Recompense to the Owners or others Interested in the Ground (not exceeding 25
Years Purchase) as they shall think reasonable, etc. And upon payment of the
said Money so Awarded, or leaving it in the Hands of the Clerk of the Peace of
the County, for the Use of the Owner, the Interest of the said Owner shall be
divested out of him, and the said Ground shall be esteemed a Public Highway
to all Intents whatsoever.

XVIII. And the said Justices shall order Assessments to be made and Levied
upon all such persons that ought to Repair the said Highway; and the Money
thereby Raised shall be Employed toward Purchasing the Land, to enlarge the
said Highways, and making Ditches and Fences. The said Assessments to be
Levied by the Overseers of the Highways, by Distress and Sale of Goods, if not
paid within Ten Days after Demand.

XIX. No such Assessment shall, in one Year, exceed the Rate of 6 d. in the
Pound for Lands, nor 6 d. in the Pound for personal Estates.

XX. The said Justices, at the Request of any Person for enlarging Highways,
shall, at their Quarter Sessions, Issue out their Precepts to the Owners of
Ground to be Laid to the said High ways, to Appear and show Cause why the said
Highways should not be enlarged.

XXI. After an Order or Decree is made for the Laying out of Ground for
enlarging Highways, the Owner has Liberty, in Eight Months after, to Cut down
any Wood or Timber growing upon the said Ground; or upon neglect, the Justices
shall Sell it, and deliver to the Owner the Value.

XXII. Persons Agrieved by Order of the Justices, may Appeal to the Judges of
Assize at the next Assize only, who may Affirm or Reverse the same; and if they
see cause to affirm, to Award Costs against the Appellant.

XXIII. Where any Common Highway shall be enclosed, after a Writ of Ad quod
Damnum Issued and Executed, any person Injured or Agrieved by such Enclosure,
may Complain to the Justices at the Quarter Sessions next after such
Inquisition, who may hear and finally determine the same, etc. But if no such
Appeal be made, then the said Inquisition and Return, Recorded by the Clerk of
the Peace, to be for ever Binding.

XXIV. Justices of Peace at their respective special Sessions, to be held by
Virtue of the Stat. 3 and 4 W. and M. ( cap. 12.) in such Cases as they shall
think necessary, shall direct their Precepts to the Surveyors of the Highways,
where Two or more Cross Highways meet, requiring them to erect, where such
Ways join, a Stone or Post with an Inscription, directing to the next Market
Town, to which each of the said Cross Ways lead. And in case the Surveyor or
Surveyors neglect or refuse so to do, for the space of Three Months, every such
Offender shall Forfeit 10 s. to be Levied by Warrant of one Justice, directed
to the Constable, requiring him to Distrain and Sell the Goods of such
Offender, and Employ the Money to the said Purpose.

XXV. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 18. The Justices of Peace at the Quarter
Sessions for the County of Gloucester (or any Five of them) next after 1 May,
School. may then and every Year nominate and appoint Surveyors of the ruinous
Highway and Road from the Town of Birdlipp, and the Top of Crickley-Hill in
the County of Gloucester, to the City of Gloucester, for the Year ensuing, out
of the Inhabitants of the adjacent Parishes, who, within one Week after Notice
given them of their Election, are to meet in their several Divisions to Survey
the same, and consider the best Method for Repair thereof, and Certify the
same to the Justices at the next Quarter Sessions, who thereupon shall make
such Orders about the same, as to them shall seem good, which shall be observed
by the said Surveyors, and all others concerned in putting this Act in
Execution.

XXVI. The said Surveyors may appoint such Carts and Persons within the said
adjacent Parishes, to come and Work in the said respective Places as they shall
think needful, for which the Surveyors shall pay the usual Rate of the
Country, in case they shall be required to Work beyond the times limited by
the Statutes.

XXVII. Where there is not sufficient Gravel, Sand or Stones, in any Parish or
Hamlet where the said ruinous places lie, to Repair the same, the said
Surveyors, and such as they shall appoint, may dig and carry away any Gravel,
Sand, or Stones, out of the Waste or Common of any Neighboring Parish or
Hamlet, without paying for the same, and in Default thereof, may dig the same
in any persons Grounds (not being an House, Garden, Orchard, Yard or Meadow, or
Avenue to an House) making only such reasonable satisfaction to the Owner or
Occupier of such Ground, as the Damage sustained thereby.

XXVIII. The said Justices at the Quarter Sessions may appoint Receivers or
Collectors of the Toll to be paid (toward the said Work) viz. For every Horse,
One Penny. Every Stage Coach or Hackney Coach, One Shilling. Every other Coach,
Calash or Chariot, One Shilling. Every Wagon, Six Pence. Every Cart, Six Pence.
Every Score of Hogs or Pigs, Three Pence, and so proportionably for a greater
or lesser Quantity not under Five. Every Score of Oxen or Neat Cattle, Eight
Pence, and so proportionably for every greater or lesser Number: To be paid
from the passing of the Act by all persons who shall Travel with Horse, Coach,
Cart or Wagon, or shall lead or drive any Oxen or other Cattle beforementioned,
in and through the Highway aforesaid, to the said Collectors or Receivers, at
some convenient place on the said Highway, between the Top of Birdlipp and City
of Gloucester, where a Turn-pike or Gate may be set up, as the Justices shall
appoint.

XXIX. Every Receiver or Collector, shall, if Required, give in a weekly
Account, upon Oath, to one or more of the Justices, to be returned to the
Justices at the Quarter Sessions, to Examine and make such Order therein, as to
them shall seem meet.

XXX. Any person refusing or neglecting to pay the said Toll on Demand, the
Collector or Receiver may Distrain and Detain such Horse, Cart, Coach, Calash,
Chariot, Wagon, Oxen, Hogs and other Cattle till the Toll be paid, with Damages
in making the Distress: Which Money so received shall be paid to the Surveyors,
toward mending the said Ruinous Places in the said Highways, and not
elsewhere.

XXXI. The said Surveyors at the Quarter Sessions next after the end of their
Year shall give an Account to the Justices of their Receipts and Disbursments,
that the Overplus of the Money (if any) may be paid to the succeeding
Surveyors, toward amending the said Highways, or Repaying the Money Lent
before hand: And such Allowances shall be made by the Justices, to the
Surveyors and others, assisting in the said amending, or advancing Moneys
thereto, as to them shall seem meet.

XXXII. If the Collector or Receiver shall not duly pay the Surveyors, or if
the Surveyors shall not make the payments Ordered by the Justices, then the
Justices at the Quarter Sessions shall enquire thereinto upon Oath, and Commit
the persons Convicted thereof to Goal, till they have made a true Account and
Payment.

XXXIII. The said Surveyors for the time being, by Order of the Justices, or
any Five of them, may Engage the Profits arising by the said Toll, and by a
Levy upon the respective Parishes, pursuant to the Act made 3 and 4 W. and M.
for the better Repairing and Amending the Highways, and for Settling the Rates
of Carriage of Goods, or by any other Act, for the Moneys by them borrowed for
that purpose, and may, under their Hands and Seals, Transfer the said Profits
for any Term, not exceeding Fifteen Years, to such as will, upon that Security,
Advance the Money so Lent, with Interest: And the Justices shall Distribute the
said Money to any persons, giving Security to Repair and Amend the said High
way, in the proportions aforesaid.

XXXIV. Any person, without Lawful excuse, neglecting or refusing to take upon
him the Office of Surveyor, being thereunto chosen, or to do his Duty therein,
may be Fined by the Justices, not exceeding 5 l. And in such case, or in case
of Death, some other person shall be appointed Surveyor by the Justices, or two
of them: Which Fines and Forfeitures shall be paid to the Surveyors, toward
Repairing the said Highways.

XXXV. If a Suit be Commenced for any thing done in pursuance of this Act, the
Action shall be laid in the County of Gloucester only, and the Defendant may
Plead the General Issue, and give this Act and the Special Matter in Evidence,
and if the Action be laid elsewhere, or the Plaintiff be Non Suit, or
Discontinue his Action, or have Judgment against him upon Demurrer, the
Defendant shall have Double Costs and Charges.

XXXVI. No person passing where the Toll is taken, and returning the same day,
shall pay a second time; and persons passing through the said place from any
adjoining Parish, may carry Stones, Lime, Gravel, Dung, Mould or Compost, and
Carts with Hay not sold, or going to Market, or Corn in the Straw at Hay time
or Harvest, Ploughs, Harrows and other Implements of Husbandry, and Stock of
Cattle belonging to the Lands of the respective Parishes, shall pass the said
place without paying; as also all Soldiers on their March, and the Carts,
Wagons and Coaches attending them, and all persons riding Post.

XXXVII. All persons Chargeable by Law, toward Repairing the said Highways,
shall still remain so.

XXXVIII. This Act shall not be in Force longer than Twenty Years from 24 Jun.
School. And if before the Expiration of the said Term, the said Highways shall
be sufficiently amended, and so adjudged by the Justices at their Quarter
Sessions, then upon repayment of the Moneys borrowed, the said Toll shall cease.

XXXIX. No Turnpike shall be Erected, nor Toll Demanded, till Security given to
the Justices at the Quarter Sessions, that the said Highway shall, within Five
Years, be sufficiently Repaired.

XL. The persons so giving Security shall have full power to Levy, for Twenty
Years after 24 Jun. School. Six Pence in the Pound, with the Arrears thereof, on
all the Parishes adjoining to the said Highway, toward the Repairing thereof;
and shall cause to be done by the Parishioners, within the said Parishes, all
that is required by the forementioned Act of 3 and 4 W. and M. for the better
Repairing the Highways, or by any other Act: And if the Toll Granted by this
Act, with the Sum Charged on the said Parishes, be not sufficient to Repair the
said Highway, within the time limited, the persons so giving Security shall
Levy and Collect Two Pence in the Pound on the Hundred and Hundreds in which
the said Highway, or any part thereof, does lie; to be Levied by Distress and
Sale of Goods, if not paid within Ten days after Demand: And if the persons so
giving Security shall not do what is required of them by this Act, they shall
forfeit 100 l. per Ann. to such person as shall sue for the same.

XLI. The persons so having given Security, in case the said Highway shall not
be sufficiently Repaired, or Certified so to be by the Justices of the Peace
for Herefordshire, or Ten of them, by the time limited in their Security,
shall, over and above the Sums they shall be bound for, Forfeit 500 l. One
moiety to the Repairing the said Highway, the other to such person as shall
Sue for the same.

XLII. The Toll shall not be Demanded, by virtue of this Act, unless the
Security given to the Justices of Peace of Gloucestershire, at the Quarter
Sessions, shall be approved of by Five Justices of Peace for Herefordshire,
under their Hands and Seals.

Imprisonment.
I. STat. 9 W. 3 cap. 4. Enacted, That Counter, John Bernardi, Robert Cassells,
Robert Meldrum, James Chambers and Robert Blackburne, being in Newgate for a
Traitorous Conspiracy to Assassinate his Majesty, together with such other
persons as shall hereafter render themselves, or be apprehended, and against
whom Oath shall be made of their being concerned in the said Conspiracy, shall
be Detained and Kept in Custody, without Bail or Mainprize till 1 Jan. School.
and to the end of the next Session of Parliament, unless they shall be sooner
Bailed or Discharged by Six of the Privy Council.

Iuries.
I. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 10. It shall be lawful at any time before the 1st
of Nov. 1697. for all Sheriffs or Coroners of Counties where Lists have not
been Returned, pursuant to the Act made the first Sessions of this present
Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the Ease of Jurors, and better Regulating of
Juries, to make Returns of Jurors in all Cases, as they might have done before
the making of the said Act. And from and after the Feast of S. Michael, 1697.
all Justices of the Peace are Required and Commanded, at their Sessions of the
Peace next before the Feast of S. Michael yearly, to Issue forth Precepts to
the respective Constables within their respective Counties or Divisions,
requiring them to make such Return of Persons to Serve upon Juries, as by the
said Act is directed.

Judicial Proceedings.
I. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 16. The High Court of Chancery, Court of
Exchequer at Westminster, or Court of Great Sessions in the respective Counties
in Wales, where the Cause or Causes Originally arose, may issue forth Execution
or Executions, and other Processes, upon every Judgment or Decree given or made
in the Court held before the President and Council of the Marches of Wales,
before 1 June, 1689. as if such Judgment or Decree had been given or made in
either of the said Courts of the Exchequer or Grand Sessions.

II Provided, That the said Courts have power to Review, Rehear, Reverse or
Affirm the said Judgments and Decrees.

Justices of Peace.
I. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 33. The Act made 5 and 6 W. and M. Entitled, An
Act to Prevent Delays of Proceedings at the Quarter Sessions of the Peace,
shall be and is continued and made Perpetual.

II. After the 21st of April, 1697. the Party prosecuting any Certiorari to
remove an Indictment from the Quarter Sessions, may find two sufficient
Manucaptors to enter into a Recognizance before any one of the Justices of the
Kings Bench, in the same Sum, and under the same Condition as are required by
the former Act, whereof mention shall be made on the Back of the Writ, under
the Hand of the Justice who took the same, which shall be as Effectual to stay
Proceedings, as if taken before a Justice of Peace in the Proper County, and it
shall be added to the Condition of the Recognizance that the Party Suing out
the Certiorari shall appear from day to day in the Court of Kings Bench, and
not depart till discharged by the said Court.

London.
I. STat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 37. After 10 April, 1697. all and every person and
persons inhabiting in the Out Parishes of Middlesex and Westminster, and
Liberties thereof, in the Borough of Southwark, or in the Streets, Lanes, or
Alleys comprised in the Weekly Bills, and in the Town of Kensington, shall
Weekly on Wednesday and Saturday at the least, between the hours of Six and
Nine in the Forenoon, cause to be swept and cleansed, all the Streets, Lanes,
Alleys and public places, before their respective Houses, Buildings and Walls,
as well as of Churches and other public places, that the Dirt and Soil in the
Streets may be heaped ready for the Scavenger to carry away, upon pain to
forfeit 10 s. for every Offense.

II. If any Conviction upon this Act, or that of 2 W. and M. (Sess. 2. cap. 8.)
shall be by view or knowledge of a Justice of Peace, then one half of the
penalty shall be to the Poor, the other (if for default of Pavement) toward
repairing the same and cleansing the Streets, to be paid to the Scavenger,
otherwise to the relief of the Poor.

III. Where one side of a Street or Lane lies within the Bills of Mortality,
and the other side without, the Justices of Peace may cause the respective
Inhabitants to Pave that other side, under the same penalty as if the same had
been within the Bills of Mortality.

IV. The aforementioned Act of 2 W and M. and the Clause therein, against the
Breeding, Feeding or Keeping of Swine in the Backsides of the Paved Streets of
the said Cities, etc. shall after 10 April, 1697. be effectually put in
execution against all persons whatsoever who shall presume to keep any manner
of Swine, so far as the Contiguous Buildings of the said Streets shall extend,
or within 50 yards thereof.

V. Where there is any Liberty, Precinct, or Vill, within the Weekly Bills,
that uses to repair their own Highways, and also perform days work to other
Highways, and are or shall become unable, then after the said 10th of April,
the Justices of Peace at their special Sessions to be held every Four Months,
may allow so many days work, as the said Justices shall think fit, to be
employed by the Inhabitants of such Liberty, etc. in repairing the Highways
within such Liberty, etc. and the residue of the days Work as such Inhabitants
are liable to do, shall be employed in repairing the other Highways.

VI. So much of the Ancient Highway leading from Tottenham-Court near St.
Giles's Pound toward Tiburn, as is now built on both sides thereof, shall be
hereafter repaired, paved, and maintained, by such persons as have heretofore
used to repair, pave, and maintain the same, under the Penalties aforesaid.

VII. Sir Robert Clayton, Sir William Ashhurst, Sir Richard Onslow Bart. Denzil
Onslow Esquire Anthony Bowyer Esquire Charles Cox Esquire John Arnold Esquire Samuel Lewyn Esquire
Thomas Wymondesal Esquire William Gulston Esquire Francis Wilkinson Esquire Thomas Roffey
Esquire John Riches Esquire Sir John Fleet, Sir John Parsons, Sir James Houblon, Sir
Rich. Levett, Spencer Cooper Esquire Joseph Scriven Esquire or any 11 of them, shall
have Power and Authority, to treat and agree with the Owners of such Houses on
or near the South end of London Bridge, as they shall think fit to be removed,
rebuilt, or pulled down, or any part of them, and upon payment of such Money as
shall be agreed on, to appoint Workmen to pull down the said Houses, or cause
the said Owners to rebuild accordingly.

VIII. And this Act shall indempnify the said Commissioners and all persons
Authorized by them, as if the same had been sold by Deed, and done by Fine and
Recovery, or any other way. And if any person or persons shall wilfully refuse
to treat and agree, as aforesaid, or through Nonage or other Disability cannot,
in such cases the said Commissioners may issue out a Warrant or Warrants to the
Sheriffs of London and Surrey, to return a Jury before the said Commissioners
or any 11 of them; which Jury are, upon their Oaths, to enquire and assess such
Damage and Recompense as they shall judge fit to be awarded to the Owners and
Occupiers of any such Houses; and such Verdict of the Jury, and Judgment of the
Commissioners thereupon, and the Legal payment or tender of the Money, so
awarded, shall be binding against the Parties, their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and all others claiming any Interest in the said
Houses, or Ground whereon they stand, and shall be a full Authority for the
said Commissioners, or any 11 of them, to cause the said Houses to be removed
and pulled down.

IX. None shall Act as a Commissioner to the purposes aforesaid, till Sworn
before the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, for the Due and Impartial execution
of the Trust reposed in him.

Malt.
I. STat. 9 and 10. W. 3. cap. 22. Whereas there has been some doubt whether
the Act made 39 Eliz. Entitled, An Act to restrain the Excessive making of
Malt, be now in Force, yet nevertheless several Justices of Peace at their
Quarter Sessions, have made Orders to Restrain Malsters from Buying of Barley
for Malting, and from Exercising the Employ of Malting for a year, to the
lessening his Majesty's Revenue by the Duty of 6 d. per Bushel laid on Malt,
and a Discouragement to Malsters: Enacted, That the said Act of A. 39 Eliz. be
Repealed, and all Orders made by Justices of Peace, for Restraining Malsters
from making of Malt, since the said Duty of 6 d. per Bushel was laid on Malt,
are hereby Vacated.

Militia.
I. Stat. 8 and 9. W. 3. cap. 35. If at any time before 25 Apr. School. It shall
be found by his Majesty to be necessary for the Defense of this Kingdom, to
draw out the Militia Soldiers into actual Service, and the same shall be
signified to the respective Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, etc. It shall be
Lawful for the said Lieutenants, etc. notwithstanding that one or more Months
Pay before that time advanced, be not reimbursed, to raise and draw out the
said Soldiers into actual Service, and to cause the persons charged, to provide
each their Soldier with Pay in hand, not exceeding one months Pay.

II. Stat. 9 and 10. W. 3. cap. 31. If at any time before 24 June, 1699. It
shall be found necessary by his Majesty for the defense and safety of this
Kingdom, to draw out into actual Service, the Soldiers mentioned and appointed
in and by the Act made Anno 13 and 14 Car. 2. Entitled, An Act for Ordering
the Forces in the several Counties of this Kingdom, and the same shall be
declared and signified by his Majesty to the respective Lieutenants, or
Deputy Lieutenants, and the Warden of the Cinqueports, etc. It shall be lawful
for the said Lieutenants, or their Deputies, or any three or more of them, and
the Warden of the Cinque ports, or his Lieutenant, in pursuance of such Orders
from his Majesty, notwithstanding that one or more months Pay before that time
advanced be not reimbursed, to raise and draw out the said Soldiers into actual
Service, charged with Pay in hand, not exceeding one months Pay.

III. Papists or reputed Papists, and persons refusing to take the Oaths
mentioned in the Act 1 W. and M. Entitled, An Act for abrogating the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, and appointing other Oaths, chargeable in respect of
their Estates to the finding a Horse, Horseman and Arms, or a Foot Soldier and
Arms, the Lieutenants or Deputy Lieutenants of the County, or Division where
such Estates do lie, or three or more of them, may appoint such person as they
shall think meet, to furnish one or more Horsemen, or Foot-Soldiers and Arms
for the said Estates, and may charge the said Estates with 8 l for a Horse,
Horseman and Arms, and 30 s. for every Foot-Soldier and Arms: And if the
persons so chargeable, neglect or refuse to pay the same on demand, the said
Lieutenants, or Deputy Lieutenants, may levy the same by Distress and Sale of
Goods of such Papists, etc. or upon their Tenants; and the Arrears for the like
Services already performed, to be determined by three or more
Deputy Lieutenants, rendering the Overplus, the charge in levying thereof being
first deducted: And the Tenants so distrain'd on, may deduct the same out of
their Rents.

IV. Where two or more persons are charged to find any Horse, or Foot-Soldier
and Arms, three or more Deputy Lieutenants of the County or Division, may
direct who shall find the Horse and Arms, or Foot-Soldier and Arms, and who
shall be the Contributors; and settle the Payments by every Contributor, if not
ascertained by the Parties: And such Contributor or his Tenant, not paying his
proportion upon demand, three or more of the Deputy Lieutenants of the County
or Division, may levy the same by Distress and Sale of Goods of the person so
neglecting or refusing to pay, rendering the Overplus, the charge in levying
being first deducted: And the Tenant may deduct the Sum so charged out of the
Rent, payable to his Landlord.

Oaths.
I. STat. 9. W. 3. cap. 3. All persons who since 10 June, 1697. or before the
said 10 June, have bought any Orders, or parts of Orders or Talleys, and have
or shall neglect to take Assignments, and Register the same, and to make an
Oath thereupon concerning the Praemium or Allowance, within the 10 days limited
by the Act, Ann. 8 and 9 W. 3. Entitled, An Act for making good the
Deficiencies of several Funds therein mentioned, and for enlarging the Capital
Stock of the Bank of England, and for Raising the Public Credit, and their
Executors, Administrators, Successors and Assigns, shall have liberty for the
doing thereof, till 10 June, School. And the Officers Empowered by the said
former Act, to Administer the said Oaths, within the times thereby limited, are
to Administer the like Oaths within the times by this Act appointed.

II. Where Orders of Loan or Talleys were actually bought before 10 June, 1697.
and Oath there of shall be made by 10 June, School. before the persons appointed
by the said former Act, for Administering the other Oaths concerning the
Praemium or Allowance; the persons claiming such Orders or Talleys by
Assignments not Registered, or by Indorsements only, shall not be obliged to
take the said other Oath concerning the Praemium: And where the respective Oath
shall be duly made, pursuant to this Act, touching such Orders or Talleys, as
aforesaid, the Assignment thereof shall be as effectual, as if the Oath had
been made within the time limited by the said former Act.

III. After 10 Jan. 1697. The Officers of the Exchequer may upon request of the
persons Entitled to Orders and Talleys of Loan, take in and cancel so many of
the said Orders as follow successively in number and course, and are of the
same date, and payable to one and the same person, or Corporation, and whereof
the Interest has been paid to one and the same time, together with the Talleys
belonging to such Orders, and to give them as few Orders and Talleys in lieu
thereof, and of the same value and course of payment, as shall be desired; no
one such new Order containing above 5000 l. Upon which new Orders shall be
Indorsed, how far the Interest has been satisfied, and to whom last Assigned:
Which said new Orders and Talleys shall be valid to all intents and purposes,
and the principal Moneys thereupon payable in Course, and the Interest every
three months, as if the former Orders were not cancelled.

IV. The Governor and Company of the Bank of England, shall not be obliged to
make Dividends of the Moneys received by them, by virtue of the Talleys and
Orders which have been subscribed into the Capital Stock of the said Bank,
since the enlarging thereof, once in every four months; but after 25 Mar. School.
shall make such Dividends once in every six Kalendary Months at the least, unto
the Members of the said Corporation, according to their respective Shares and
Interests in the said Capital Stock.

Partitions.
I. STat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 31. From and after the first day of May, 1697,
after Process of Pone or Attachment returned upon a Writ of Partition, and
Affidavit made of due notice given of the said Writ of Partition, to the Tenant
or Tenants to the Action, and a Copy thereof left with the Occupier, or in the
Tenants absence to the Wife, Son or Daughter (of the Age of 21) of the Tenant
in Possession, of the Manors, Lands, etc. whereof the Partition is to be,
(unless the Tenant in Possession be Demandant in the Action) at least 40 days
before the return of the Pone or Attachment, if there be no Appearance entered
in 15 days after the return, in the Court where such Writs are returnable, then
the Demandant having entered his Declaration, the Court may proceed to examine
the Demandants Right and Part, and according as they shall find the same to be,
they shall for so much give Judgment by Default, and award a Writ to make
Partition; which Writ being executed after 8 days notice to the Occupier, and
returned, and thereupon final Judgment entered, the same shall be good, and
conclude all persons whatsoever, although all persons concerned are not named
in the Proceedings, nor the Title of the Tenants truly set forth.

II. Provided, that if any person concerned, against whose Right such Judgment
by default is given, shall within one year after, (or in case of Infancy,
Coverture, Non Sanae Memoriae, or absence Beyond-Seas, within one year after
such Inability removed) move the Court where such Judgment is entered, and show
good matter in Bar of such Partition; then the Court may suspend or set aside
such Judgment, and admit the Tenant to appear and plead, and the Cause shall
proceed, as if no such Judgment had been given; and if the Court shall adjudge
for the first Demandant, then the first Judgment shall stand confirmed, and the
person so appealing shall pay Costs; or if within such time, the persons
concerned shall show to the Court an inequality in the Partition, the Court may
award a new Partition to be made, in presence of all Parties concerned (if they
will appear,) which second Partition returned and filed, shall be good and firm
against all persons (except as before) for ever.

III. No Plea in Abatement shall be admitted in any Suit for Partition, nor
shall the same abate by reason of the Death of any Tenant.

IV. When the High Sheriff cannot conveniently be present at the Execution of
any Judgment in Partition, the Undersheriff in presence of two Justices of
Peace of the County, may proceed to the Execution of the same, by Inquisition
in due Form of Law, and the High Sheriff shall make the same Return as if he
were personally present: After Partition made, returned, and filed, the
Under-Tenants shall continue in their Tenancies, as before they were divided
and set out to the respective Landlords, under the same Rents and Covenants,
etc. so also where any Demandant is Tenant in actual Possession to the Tenant
to the Action for his part and proportion, or any part thereof.

V. The respective Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs and Deputies, and Justices of Peace
(in case of Disability in the High Sheriff) shall give due attendance to the
Executing of such Writ of Possession, or every of them to pay the Demandant
Costs and Damages not exceeding Five pounds; for Which the Demandant may bring
his Action in any of the Kings Courts at Westminster, wherein no Essoin, etc.
In case the Demandant shall not pay the Sheriffs, etc. such Fees as they
demand, the Court shall award what each person shall receive.

VI. This Act to continue for seven years, and from thence to the end of the
next Session of Parliament.

Poor.
I. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 30. If any person who after the First Day of May,
1697. shall come to any Parish or other Place to Inhabit, shall at the same
time deliver to any of the Church Wardens or Overseers of the Poor of the Place
where he comes, a Certificate under the Hands and Seals of the Churchwardens
or Overseers of the Poor of any other Parish or Place, Attested by Two or more
Witnesses, thereby owning the Person mentioned in the Certificate to be an
Inhabitant legally Settled in that Parish or Place, such Certificate having
been Allowed and Subscribed by Two Justices of Peace of the County, City or
Borough from whence it comes, shall oblige the said Parish or Place, to receive
and provide for the person mentioned in the Certificate with his Family, as
Inhabitants, whenever the party shall happen to become Chargeable to the place
to which such Certificate was given; and then, and not before, it shall be
Lawful for such Person, and his Children (though Born in that Parish) not
having otherwise Acquired a Legal Settlement, to be removed to the place from
whence such Certificate was brought.

II. After 1 September, 1697. every such person as shall receive Relief of any
Parish or Place, and the Wife and Children cohabiting in the same House (except
such Child as shall be permitted to live at home to attend some helpless
Parent) shall, upon the Right Shoulder of their upper Garment, in a visible
manner, wear a large Roman P, with the first Letter of the Name of the Parish
or Place where the said person Inhabits, cut in Red or Blue Cloth, as the
Churchwardens or Overseers shall appoint. The Poor person neglecting or
refusing to wear such Badge or Mark, may be punished by any Justice of Peace of
the County, either by ordering his or her Relief on the Collection to be
abridged or withdrawn, or by Committing the party to the House of Correction,
not exceeding 21 Days; and if any Churchwarden or Overseer of the Poor, after
the said 1 September. shall relieve any such Poor person, not wearing such Badge,
he being Convicted by one Witness before a Justice of Peace, shall Forfeit for
every such Offense 20 s. to be Levied by Distress and Sale of Goods, one Moiety
to the use of the Informer, the other to the Poor of the Parish.

III. Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions, upon any Appeal concerning
the Settlement of any Poor person, or upon Proof of notice given of an Appeal
(though the Appeal was not afterward Prosecuted) shall Award to the party for
whom such Appeal shall be Determined, or to whom such notice had been given,
such Costs and Charges as the said Justices shall think reasonable; and if the
person ordered to pay such Costs shall live out of the Jurisdiction, any
Justice of the Peace where such person shall Inhabit, may and shall, upon
request, and a true Copy of the Order for payment produced and proved upon
Oath, cause the Money mentioned in that Order to be Levied by Distress; and in
case no Goods can be found, to Commit the person to Prison for Twenty Days.

IV. No unmarried person, not having Child or Children, lawfully hired into any
Parish or Town for one year, shall be deemed to have a good Settlement in such
Parish, unless he shall continue in the same Service during one whole year.

V. Where any poor Children shall be Appointed to be bound Apprentices,
pursuant to the Act of 43 Eliz. ( cap. 2.) the Persons to whom they are
appointed to be Bound, shall receive and provide for them according to the
Indenture; and upon refusal so to do, upon Oath thereof made by a Churchwarden
or Overseer, before Two Justices, he or she, so Offending, shall Forfeit 10 l.
to be Levied by Distress and Sale of Goods, to be Applied to the use of the
Poor of the Parish where such Offense was Committed. Saving to such persons
their Appeal to the next Quarter Sessions for that County, whose Order therein
shall be final.

VI. After the 1 of May, 1697 the Appeal against any Order for the Removal of
any Boor person, shall be had at the Quarter Sessions of the County or
Division, wherein the Parish or Place from whence such Person shall be removed,
does lie, and not elsewhere.

VII. Nothing in this Act to extend to make void any promise already made, to
receive and take back any persons, in case they should become poor or want
Relief.

VIII. Nor be construed to hinder the Justices of Peace, within the Liberty of
St. Albans, from Hearing and Determining Appeals in their Quarter Sessions, as
they might have done before the making this Act.

IX. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 11. For Explaining the Act made the last
preceding Session, Entitled, An Act for supplying some Defects in the Laws for
the Relief of the Poor of this Kingdom, whereby it was Enacted, That such
persons as after 1 May, 1697. shall come into any Parish or Place to Inhabit or
Reside, should at the same time deliver to the Churchwardens or Overseers of
the Poor there a Certificate, as by the Act directed, It is Declared, That no
persons, who shall come into any Parish by any such Certificate, shall be
adjudged by any Act whatsoever, to have procured a legal Settlement in such
Parish, unless such persons shall bona fide take a Lease of a Tenement of 10 l.
per Annum, or shall legally be placed in and execute some Annual Office in such
Parish.

Prisons and pretended Privileged Places.
I. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 27. After 1 May, 1697. All Prisoners in the Kings
Bench or Fleet, on Contempt, Mesne Process or Execution, shall be actually
detained within the said Prisons, or the Rules of the same, till discharged by
Law.

II. If after 1 May, 1697. the Keeper of any Prison suffer any Prisoner
Committed on Mesne Process or Execution, to be out of the Rules, except on a
Habeas Corpus or Rule of Court, it shall be deemed an Escape.

III. After 1 May, every person obtaining Judgment in an Action of Escape
against the Marshal or Warden of the said Prisons of the Kings Bench and Fleet,
shall have not only the Remedies already allowed by Law, but (if such Judgment
was obtained without fraud upon a real Debt) the profits of the said Marshal or
Warden, or some fit part thereof, shall be Sequestered toward Satisfaction of
the said Debt, with Costs and Damages.

IV. And after the said 1 May, such Marshal or Warden Suing forth a Writ of
Error, for delay only, shall put in special Ball, or no Execution shall be
stayed.

V. If the Keeper of any Prison take Money to connive at any Escape, he shall
Forfeit 500 l. and his Office.

VI. This Act shall not make void the Securities given by Prisoners for their
Lodgings without the said Prisons of the Kings Bench and Fleet, being within
the Rules of the same.

VII. After the said 1 May, No Retaking shall be given in Evidence in an Action
of Escape, unless specially Pleaded, and Oath made by the Keeper of the Prison,
That such Escape was without his Consent; But if such Affidavit prove false,
such Keeper shall Forfeit 500 l.

VIII. If after 1 May, any Prisoner in Execution Escape, the Creditor may
retake such Prisoner by any New Capias, or may Sue forth any other kind of
Execution.

IX. Every Keeper's refusing, after one days notice, to show the Prisoner in
Execution to the Creditor or his Attorney, shall be judged an Escape.

X. Persons desiring to Charge any Person with an Action or Execution, shall,
at their request, have a Note in Writing from the Keeper of the Prison, whether
such person be a Prisoner or not, under Forfeiture of 50 l. And such Note shall
be sufficient Evidence.

XI. All Conveyances and Mortgages of the Inheritance of the said Prisons of
Kings Bench and Fleet, and their Appurtenances, and all Leases thereof, and the
Titles of the Marshal and Warden, or other Proprietor thereunto, and all Trusts
and Declarations of Trust touching the same, shall be Enrolled before the 24 of
June, 1697. viz. That of the Kings Bench in the Kings Bench Court, and that of
the Fleet in the Common Pleas, and also all such Conveyances, etc. for the
future, within six Months after executing the same, or else to be void.

XII. After the said 1 May, the Offices of Marshal of the Kings Bench Prison
and Warden of the Fleet, shall be Executed by the Persons to whom the
Inheritance of those Prisons, etc. belongs, or their sufficient Deputies, for
whom the persons having such Inheritances, shall be answerable, and the said
Inheritances and Profits shall be subject to make satisfaction upon Escapes and
the Misdemeanors of such Deputies.

XIII. After the said 1 May, any Person having Cause of Action against the
Warden of the Fleet, may File a Bill in the Common Pleas or Exchequer, and a
Rule being given to Plead thereto within Eight Days, Judgment shall be Signed
against the said Warden, if he Plead not within Three Days after such Rule is
out.

XIV. After the said 1 May, Any person having Cause of Action against any
Prisoner in the Fleet, entering a Declaration, and delivering a Copy thereof to
such Prisoner, in any personal Action, or to the Turn-key or Porter of the
Fleet, after a Rule to Plead, to be out at Eight Days, and Oath made before a
Judge of the Delivery of such Declaration, may Sign Judgment against such
Prisoner or Defendant.

XV. After the said 1 May, No Prisoners shall pay Chamber Rent in the Kings
Bench or Fleet Prisons, longer than while they are actually in possession of
such Chambers, and not above 2 s. 6 d. per Week; and if the Keeper of any
Prison take more, to Forfeit 20 l.

XVI. After the said 1 May, All persons having Moneys owing from any person in
any pretended Privileged Place, as White Friars, Savoy, Salisbury Court,
Ram-Alley, Mitre Court, Fullers Rents, Baldwyns Gardens, Mountague Close, or
the Minories, Mint, Clink or Deadmans Place, may, upon a Legal Process taken
out, Require the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, the Head Bailiff of the
Duchy Liberty, or the High Sheriff of Surrey, or Bailiff of Southwark, or
their Deputies or Officers, to take the Posse Comitatus and Arrest such person,
or Seize their Goods upon Execution or Extent; And such Sheriffs or Officers
neglecting or refusing, to Forfeit to the Plaintiff 100 l. And every person
Opposing or Resisting such Officers shall Forfeit 50 l. and be sent to Goal
till the next Assizes, etc. and suffer such Imprisonment, and be set in the
Pillory, as the Court shall think fit.

XVII. And if any Rescous be made of any such Prisoner, the persons aiding
therein, shall respectively Forfeit to the Plaintiff 500 l.

XVIII. Which Forfeiture with Costs of Suit, not being paid within One Month
after Judgment for the Recovery thereof, the person so refusing or neglecting,
shall be Transported to some of the Plantations for Seven years; and returning
again within the Seven years, to be guilty of Felony without Benefit of Clergy.

XIX. And the persons inhabiting within any such pretended Privileged Places,
harboring any person who shall have made such Rescous, shall be Transported,
as aforesaid, unless they pay the Plaintiff the whole Debt and Costs within One
Month after Conviction.

XX. The Penalties in this Act to go one half to his Majesty, and the other
half to the Prosecutor.

XXI. This Act shall be taken to be a general Law, and not necessary to be set
forth in Pleading. Any person Sued for putting it in Execution, may Plead the
general Issue, and give the Act in Evidence; and if upon a Verdict,
Discontinuance or Demurrer, Judgment pass for the Defendant, he shall have
double Costs.

XXII. Saving to Martha Johnson Widow, and her Children, their Claim to the
Houses and Shops belonging to the Fleet. And this Act not to lessen the
Security for Money out of the Mashalship of the Kings Bench Prison, made by
William Lenthall Esquire to Sir John Cutler, Bart. decased, or to his Executor
Edmund Boulter Esquire

XXIII. And saving to Anthony Smith Mariner, his Heirs, etc. their Claim to the
Office of Warden of the Fleet, or to the Prison or Houses and Shops thereto
belonging, after a Mortgage made thereof by Thomas Bromhall unto Henry Norwood
Esquire with a Proviso for Thomas Norwood Surviving Executor of Henry Norwood,
touching a Mortgage of the said Office of Warden for 2153 l. And for John
Clements Gent. for a like Mortgage for 2299 l.

XXIV. All Deputations, etc. made heretofore by William Lenthall Esquire of the
said Office of Marshal of the Marshalsea of the Kings Bench Prison, are
declared void, and all succeeding Marshals shall be appointed by the said
William Lenthall, with the Consent of Edmund Boulter Esquire till the Debt owing to
the said Edmund Boulter, as Executor to the said Sir John Cutler, be satisfied.

Religion.
I. STat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 32. For Suppressing Blasphemy and Profaneness, It
is Enacted, That such persons as having been Educated in, or having made
Profession of the Christian Religion within this Realm, and shall by Writing,
Printing, Teaching, or Advised Speaking, deny any one of the Persons in the
Holy Trinity to be GOD, or shall assert or maintain there are more Gods than
One, or shall deny the Christian Religion to be True, or the Holy Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament to be of Divine Authority, and be thereof lawfully
Convicted, shall for the First Offense be incapable to have or enjoy any
Offices or Employments Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military, or any part in them,
or profit by them; and the Offices, Places and Employments enjoyed by such
persons at their Conviction shall be Void: And being a second time Convicted of
any the aforesaid Crimes, shall be Disabled to Sue, Prosecute, Plead or Use any
Action or Information in Law or Equity, or be Guardian of any Child, or
Executor or Administrator of any person, or capable of any Legacy or Deed of
Gift, or to bear any Office Civil or Military or Benefice Ecclesiastical for
ever, within this Realm, and shall suffer Three Years Imprisonment, from the
time of such Conviction, without Bail or Mainprize.

II. No person shall be Prosecuted by Virtue of this Act for Words spoken,
unless the Information be given upon Oath before some Justice of Peace within
Four days, and the Prosecution be within Three Months after such Information.

III. Persons Convicted of any of the said Crimes, shall for the First Offense
(upon Renouncing such Erroneous Opinions in the Court where Convicted, within
Four Months after Conviction) be Discharged from all Penalties and Disabilities
incurred by such Conviction.

Rivets.
I. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 19. For cleansing and making Navigable the Chanel
from Hithe at Colchester, to Wivenhoe, It is Enacted, That for 21 Years from 1
May, School. All Merchants or Owners of Goods, Wares and Merchandises, that shall
be brought into the River and Chanel, commonly called Colne, and shall be
Landed at, or Shipped from Wivenhoe or the New Hithe in Colchester, or between
either of the said places, shall pay to the Collectors to be chosen, toward
the cleansing and making Navigable the said River and Chanel, the Duties
hereafter expressed, viz. For every Bay, Say or Perpetuane, One Half penny per
piece; For every Tun of Timber, six pence; For every Tun of Chalk for Lime,
three pence; For every Tun of Paving Stone, six pence; For every Tun of all
other kind of Stones or of Tobacco-pipe Clay, Ashes or Pan Tyles, and for every
Chalder of Fullers Earth, or Chalder of Sea Coal, twelve pence; For every Tun
of Oil, three shillings; For every Tun of Wines or Brandy, five shillings; And
for every Tun of all other Goods, Wares and Merchandises, two shillings, and so
proportionably for a greater or lesser Quantity of the foresaid Goods, to be
paid before the said Goods, etc. shall be Landed and Delivered out, by the
Merchant or Owner, to the Uses aforesaid.

II. All which Money shall be paid to the Collectors upon Demand, to be by them
paid over to such person as shall be appointed the General Receiver by the
Mayor, Aldermen, Assistants and Common Council of the Borough of Colchester,
for the Uses aforesaid.

III. In case of Failure of payment of the said Duties, the Collectors, so soon
as such Goods, etc. shall be Landed or Delivered out, or Laden into any Ship or
Vessel, may Distrain so much of the said Goods as may answer the said Duties,
with Costs and Charges of Distraining, and keep the same till the said Duties
be satisfied, and if not paid within Ten days, then to sell the same.

IV. The said Mayor and Aldermen, or their Assignees, may by the 25th of
December. School. Design and Lay out where such Chanel or River shall be made,
enlarged, opened and continued between Wivenhoe and the New Hithe, and what
points or parcels of Land are fit to be Cut and Laid out for making or
enlarging such Chanel, as to them, their Deputies and Workmen, with the
allowance of the Commissioners hereafter mentioned, or any Five of them, shall
seem meet, so as such Land, so to be laid out, exceed not One hundred Foot in
breadth in any place.

V. It shall be lawful for the said Mayor and Commonalty, their Assignees and
Workmen, to Cut and Dig the Land so laid out, and make new or larger all the
passages for Water through such Land, being the Ground or Soil of any person
whatsoever, between Wivenhoe aforesaid and the New Hithe, and to remove all
Gravel, Beds of Ouze, or any other Impediment to the Navigation, and lay the
Earth, Soil and Stuff thence dug on any side of the Bank of such Chanel, and
have free passage for Cutting, Cleansing or Amending the same, and to do all
other necessary Matters for carrying on the said Undertaking.

VI. But not to make any new Cut through any Land belonging to Anthony Earl of
Kent, other than one piece called Gravel-Pit-Land, the Cut through the same not
exceeding 40 Perches or Poles in length; and other than two other pieces called
Forelands, belonging to the said Earl, the Cut through the same not exceeding
45 Perches in length, in either of them; Nor shall the Cut be made on the
Land-side of the Wall or Bank there, nor so near as to prejudice such Wall or
Bank: Nor to make any Cut through any Land belonging to Nicholas Corsellis Esquire
other than one piece called The Reed Point, the Cut through the same not
exceeding 45 Perches or Poles in length. And in case any Wall, Sluice or Bank
for the defense or benefit of the Lands of the said Earl of Kent or Nicholas
Corsellis, or any other person or persons be damnified in Cutting or Cleansing
the said Chanel, the said Mayor and Commonalty shall make good the same. And
that no part of the Ground or Soil so dug shall be thrown on the Landside of
any persons Ground, without the License of the respective Owners thereof, but
only upon the Walls or Banks, or the Border of the said Chanel, or some place
between the Walls and Chanel; And for such points of Land as shall be severed
from the main Land, by making a new Cut, the like satisfaction shall be made as
to the Owners of such Land through which such Chanel shall be made or enlarged.
And upon payment of the Money agreed on for the said Points, so severed, the
said Points or Parcels of Land shall be, together with the New Chanel, vested
in the said Mayor and Commonalty and their Successors for ever.

VII. Provided, That if the said Mayor and Commonalty shall not repair and make
good the Premises so damnified, they shall answer double Damages, besides
Costs of Suit to the Owner or Proprietor of such Lands or Premises, to be
recovered by Action of Trespass, or upon the Case.

VIII. Provided, That the said Mayor and Commonalty shall make satisfaction to
the Owners of such Land, or such as may sustain any Damage thereby, and
proportion the satisfaction in respect thereof, and what Share any Tenant or
other person shall have for the same. And in case any person refuse to Agree,
or through Disability by Nonage or otherwise cannot, the said Commissioners
shall issue their Warrants to the Sheriff of Essex, for Impanelling and
Returning a Jury or Juries, who being Sworn, shall enquire of and assess such
Damages as they shall judge fit: And the said Commissioners shall give Judgment
for such sums so assessed by the Juries, and by Examination upon Oath, etc.
shall hear and determine all Controversies touching the Premises.

IX. Which said Judgments pronounced by the Commissioners (Notice in Writing
being first given of their Meeting to every Party concerned, or left for them)
shall be Binding: And being in Writing, under the Hands and Seals of such
Commissioners, shall be kept among the Records of the Sessions of Peace for
Colchester, for all persons to resort to without Fee or Reward; and shall be
taken as Evidence in any Court of Record.

X. Upon payment of the Money so agreed on, or decreed, or tender thereof, or
refusing to receive the same so tendered, then upon payment thereof to such
persons as the Commissioners shall appoint, for the use of the persons
interested therein (and not before) the said Mayor and Commonalty, their
Workmen, Agents and Servants may Dig and Cut any such Land, as aforesaid, or do
any such further Act for making the said Chanel and River Navigable. And the
said Mayor and Commonalty, Commissioners and Persons Authorized by them, shall
be Indempnified against the Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns of
such Owners, as if such Land had been sold or conveyed from them to the said
Mayor and Commonalty, and their Successors.

XI. The said Mayor, Aldermen, etc. may from time to time, during the said 21
Years, nominate and choose Collectors of the Money payable, as aforesaid, who
shall pay the same to the Receiver General, for the Use of the said Mayor and
Commonalty, for the purposes aforesaid, and no other.

XII. The Mayor of Colchester for the time being, and the Justices of Peace for
the East Division of Essex for the time being, shall be Commissioners for the
purposes aforesaid, and take the Accounts of the Receipts and Disbursements of
the Money Collected and Levied during the said Term, and shall and may call
before them such Collectors or Receivers, and all other persons Entrusted with
the Collection or management thereof, who shall give an Account thereof in
Writing upon Oath; And the said Commissioners may Order the Moneys remaining
upon such Account to be laid out for the purposes aforesaid: And if any such
Collectors, Receivers or others, refuse to give such Account, or pay the Moneys
then due, as the said Commissioners shall direct, they or any five of them may
commit such persons to the Common Goal of the said Town, till they shall give
such Account, and pay the Money due thereupon.

XIII. Every such Collector and Receiver shall, before the Execution of such
Office, take an Oath for the true Executing the same before the said Mayor.

XIV. After 1 May, School. no Goods, Wares or Merchandises (except Wood or
Timber) shall be laden or unladen at any Key or Wharf in the said River or
Chanel, but only at Wivenhoe and the New Hithe aforesaid, on pain of Forfeiting
to the said Mayor, etc. 5 l. for the uses aforesaid: But not to prohibit the
lading or unlading of any Goods at or from the late erected Wharf of Giles
Sayer in the Parish of St. Giles in Colchester.

XV. Provided, That all Goods, etc. unloaden out of any Ship or Vessel at
Wivenhoe, and not brought to Colchester, or within the Liberties thereof, or
Laden at Wivenhoe, and not first Carried from or through Colchester, or the
Liberties thereof, shall not be liable to the said Duties, Oath being made
thereof, if required, before such Collector, or any Custom-house Officer.

XVI. The said Mayor and Commonalty, by Indenture under their Common Seal, with
consent of the Commissioners, may engage the Profits arising, as aforesaid, for
any Term not exceeding 21 Years, to any persons that will, upon such Security,
advance Money for Carrying on the said Work, for securing the Repayment
thereof, with Interest, not exceeding 6 per Cent.

XVII. Provided, That if before the end of 21 Years sufficient Moneys shall be
raised for the purposes aforesaid, and so adjudged by the Commissioners, that
then after Repayment of the Money so borrowed, with Interest, the said Duties
shall cease.

XVIII. Provided, That upon Dispute touching the Weight and Quantity of the
Goods liable to the said Duties, the Collector may weigh the same, and if they
prove more than the Collector did insist upon, the Owner shall bear the charges
of weighing.

XIX. If any persons be proseeuted for Acting, in pursuance of this Act, they
may plead the General Issue, and give this Act and the Special Matter in
Evidence: And if the Prosecutor be Nonsuit, or Discontinue, or a Verdict, or
Judgment pass against him, the Defendant shall recover Costs.

XX. Provided, That if a New Cut be made through the said Earl of Kents Land,
called Gravel-Pit-Land, it shall be at the Election of the said Earl to have
the Value of the Land so severed, or to keep the same. And if the said Earl
shall within Twelve Months after such severance signify his Election to keep
the same, the Right thereof shall be Vested in the said Earl, and the said
Mayor and Commonalty, etc. shall make a Wall and Bank cross the present Old
Chanel at both ends thereof; which said Old Chanel shall also be Vested in the
said Earl.

XXI. Provided, That this Act take not away any Persons Right of Fishing in the
said River.

Salt.
I. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 6. After 25 Mar. School. No Badger, Retailer or
other person, making or dealing in Salt, or buying Salt to sell again, shall
sell or dispose of any Salt in England or Wales, and Town of Berwick, otherwise
than by Weight, after the Rate of 56 Pound Weight to the Bushel, and not by
measure or any other manner, upon Forfeiture of Five Pounds to the Informer who
shall prosecute for the same.

II. The Forfeitures and Offenses against this Act shall be determined by any
two or more Justices of Peace residing near the place where such Offense was
committed: But persons agrieved may appeal to the Justices at the next General
Quarter Sessions, whose Judgment therein shall be final.

III. All Justices of Peace, upon complaint of Offenses contrary to this Act,
are to Summon the Party accused, and upon proof of the Matter of Fact, by Oath
of two or more Witnesses, or Confession of the Party, to give Judgment, and
issue out Warrants for Levying such Forfeitures, on the Goods and Chattels of
the Offender, to be sold, if not redeemed in six days, rendering the Overplus;
and for want of Distress to Imprison the Offender till satisfaction be made.

IV. When any Salt shall be Entered to be put on Board any Boat, Ship or Vessel,
or carried by Land, and the Duty paid or secured, together with all Moneys then
or before due and payable by Bond or otherwise, on Account of Salt delivered,
the proper Officer shall upon due Notice, by himself or Deputy, in the Day
time, between Sunrising and Sunsetting, attend the Weighing out such Salt,
without loss of time to the persons that shall Ship off or carry the same, upon
Forfeiture of 40 s. to be recovered as other Penalties in this Act are directed.

Seamen.
I. Stat. 8 and 9. W. 3. cap. 23. All such persons who by virtue of the Act
made the last Session of this Parliament, For the Increase and Encouragement of
Seamen, (7 and 8. W. 3. cap. 21.) are Entitled to the Provisions and
Advantages in the Hospital in the said Act mentioned, and out of the Revenues
thereof, shall from time to time be placed in the said Hospital, upon
Certificates to be produced as by the said Act is directed, in succession as
the person registered shall be in Course and Order of time upon the Registry
Book, and the Widows and Children of the persons longest registered, before
others.

II. Every Seaman or Mariner who have Liberty, and shall be willing to register
themselves, as by the said Act directed, after the 10th of April next, bringing
such Certificate as the said Act directs, under the hand of any one Justice of
Peace of the County where he lives, may and shall be registered, and himself,
Wife, Widow and Children be Entitled to all Advantages given by the said Act,
as if the Certificate were under the hands of two Justices according to the
said Act. The Justice or Justices giving such Certificate are required
diligently to enquire into the truth of the same, and if occasion be to examine
the party upon Oath, and if any fraud or deceit appears, to certify the
Admiralty thereof.

III. Any persons already registered, or who shall hereafter be registered, and
who then were, or shall after be raised to the degree of a Masters Mate in any
of the Kings Ships, their Wives, Widows and Children, are declared and enabled
to enjoy all and every the Benefits and Advantages given to any other person so
registered, by the said recited Act.

IV. After the said 10th of April, all Seamen above the Age of 50 years, and
who shall appear by the Books of the Navy Office to have served on Board any of
the Kings Ships for seven years last past without wilful Disserting, shall upon
producing Certificates, as aforesaid, under the hands of one or more Justices
of Peace, be registered, and have and enjoy the several Privileges in the said
Act mentioned.

V. Provided that after the 10th day of April, 1699. No Seaman above the Age of
50 years shall be admitted to register himself, without giving such Reasons for
his omitting to do it during the time of such Service on Board, as shall be
approved by the Admiralty or Navy, or by the persons appointed for keeping the
said Register.

VI. It shall be Lawful for the Commissioners appointed for Registring Seamen,
by Warrant under their Hands and Seals, to cause all Masters and Commanders of
Ships, not in his Majesty's Service, to appear before them, and discover upon
Oath the Number, Rates, Salaries, Wages and Times of Service, of all and every
persons or person serving in such Ships or Vessels, and which by the foresaid
Act are obliged to pay 6 d. per mensem out of their Salaries and Wages. And if
any such Master or Commander shall, upon Summons, refuse to appear, or to give
a full discovery of the matter aforesaid, upon Oath, every such Offender shall
forfeit the Sum of 10 l. to the uses mentioned in the said Act, to be recovered
by Action of Debt, etc. in any of the Kings Courts at Westminster, with full
Costs; Provided such Masters be no Quakers.

VII. Every Master being a Quaker may be examined before the said
Commissioners, three or more of them, by their solemn Affirmation and
Declaration instead of their Oath, as is directed by the Act, 7 and 8. w. 3. (
cap. 34.) and such Quakers refusing to appear or Answer, as aforesaid, shall be
liable to the said penalties and forfeitures before mentioned for refusing to
Answer upon Oath.

VIII. Whatever person or persons so registered, as aforesaid, shall after the
10th of April next, directly or indirectly lend, or dispose of his or their
Certificate of being registered according to the foresaid Statute, to any
Waterman, Seaman, Fisherman, Lighterman, Keelman, Bargeman, or Seafaring Man,
whereby to keep such persons from being Impressed into his Majesty's Service,
such Offenders shall be struck out of the Register, and lose the benefit of the
foresaid Act, and be Compelled to Serve in his Majesty's Service Six Months
without any pay. And every person borrowing, or taking for themselves or other
persons such Certificates, or using the same for the purposes aforesaid, shall
suffer the like penalties, and to the same uses, as are provided by the said
Act, against such as vouch falsely persons to be Landmen who are Seamen, or
shall be compelled to serve the King at Sea for six Months without any Pay or
Wages.

IX. Such Certificates, as aforesaid, under the Hand and Seal of any one Mayor,
Deputy Mayor, Bailiff or Deputy Bailiff within the Jurisdiction of the
CinquePorts, shall be sufficient, where no Justice of Peace shall be residing
within three Miles of any Cinque-Port or Town, or Member thereof, on the Coast
of Kent and Sussex.

Ships and Shipping.
I. Stat. 9 and 10. W. 3. cap. 36. Enacted, That 2000 Acres, part of the Wast
Lands of the New Forest in the County of Southampton, shall be enclosed and
kept in severalty, for the Growth and Preservation of Timber for supply of his
Majesty's Navy Royal. The King, his Heirs and Successors may Enclose and
Improve within and out of the Wast Lands of the said New Forest (the whole
Containing by Estimation 85454 Acres) the quantity of 2000 Acres Statute
measure, to be set out by his Majesty's Commission directed to six or more
persons, whereof two to be Justices of the Peace for Hampshire (not being
Officers of the said Forest) out of such part of the said Forest, as shall be
found by three or more of the Commissioners most convenient to be Enclosed, and
most apt to produce Wood and Timber, and may be best spared from the Commoners
and Highways; whereof One thousand shall be forthwith Admeasured, Set out,
Enclosed, Butted and Bounded, and the Quantities, Buts and Boundaries returned
into the Exchequer, to remain on Record; and the remaining One thousand Acres,
immediately after the first Session of Parliament which shall be held after the
year 1699. shall in like manner be Admeasured, Enclosed, and the Boundaries
returned into the Exchequer. There may also be Enclosed 200 Acres more of the
Wast in the said Forest yearly for 20 years, after the several Enclosures of
the said 2000 Acres shall be completed. The said Enclosures to remain in
severalty in the actual possession of the Crown for ever, clear from all manner
of Right, Title or Pretense, and shall be kept a Nursery for Wood and Timber
only.

II. Any Six of the said Commissioners with one of the Purveyors of the Navy,
shall set out so many decayed Trees (not being Ship Timber) as shall be
necessary to make the said Enclosure.

III. When the Commissioners of the Treasury, the Lord Treasurer, or Chancellor
of the Exchequer, shall be satisfied, that the Woods and Trees growing on the
said 2000 Acres, or any part thereof, are out of danger of Brousing of Deer,
Cattle, or other prejudice, and shall thereupon lay the same open, then the
King, his Heirs and Successors, may enclose out of the said Forest, in lieu of
so much so laid open, the like quantity out of any other part of the said
Wastes, to be set out by like Commission and Admeasurement, as aforesaid, free
of all Herbage, Pannage, or other Rights, while enclosed, to be a Nursery, for
Timber, as aforesaid, instead of so much as shall be laid open. And when any
Wood or Timber is to be felled in any part of the said Forest, two or more of
the Verderers, and four or more of the Regarders of the said Forest, shall have
notice thereof, and shall not be felled till first viewed, and allowed to be
felled by a Commissioner, or Officer of the Navy: Nor shall any Coppice Woods
be cut, till the Surveyor of the Woods, or such Officer or Purveyor of the
Navy, shall have marked with a Broad-Arrow and Crown such Trees as are fit to
be reserved for Timber, and shall certify to the Lord Treasurer or
Commissioners of the Treasury, the Names of the places and number of Trees so
viewed and allowed to be felled, and so marked, to be preserved for the use of
the Navy. And if any persons shall fell any such Wood or Trees before view and
Allowance, or cut down any of the said marked Trees without good Warrant, they
shall forfeit for every Tree so felled 50 l. one Moiety to the King, the other
to them that will sue for the same.

IV. The said Enclosures shall not be plowed, or sowed with Corn, or fed with
Cattle, or kept for Underwood, but in such manner as shall be fit for raising
Timber for the Navy.

V. If any Forester, Keeper or Under-Keeper, or other Officer or person, or any
by their direction, shall Top, Lop or Browse any Oak or Beech-tree in the said
Forest, such Officer for every such Offense, shall forfeit 10 l. and be
incapable of any such Office: Nor shall any Collier, Keeper or Under-Keeper,
make or suffer any Coal-Fires, for making Charcoal within the said Forest (as
being contrary to Law) except in the Wast Ground of the said Forest
particularly appointed, and not within 1000 Paces of any Enclosure to be made
by this Act: Nor shall such Coal-Fires be fenced with Bushes, but with Heath or
Furze only; but every Collier making such Coal-Fires, and every Officer
permitting them, shall forfeit for every Offense 100 l. And the said
Under-Keeper or Foresters shall also forfeit 20 l. for every neglect in not
making the Drifts of the said Forest as directed by the Statute 32 H. 8.

VI. All persons who shall break down any of the said Enclosures, for raising
Nurseries of Wood and Timber (which Enclosures are to be kept up 20 years at
least from their making) or shall burn Heath or Fern, or destroy any of the
Covert, or steal any of the Wood, shall at the next Attachment or Swain-mote
Court be presented; And upon proof thereof made, two or more of the Verderers
shall Fine such persons for every such Offense not exceeding 5 l. and send the
Party to Goal for three Months, or till payment of the Fine to the High or
Under-Steward of the said Forest; one Moiety to the Informer, the other to be
accounted for as his Majesty shall think fit.

VII. All Persons punished by this Act, shall not be punished by any other Law,
for the same Offense.

VIII. This Act shall not alter the Forest Laws, except as before mentioned.

IX. All persons having any Right of Common of Pasture or Pannage, or any
Privileges within the said Forest, shall enjoy their Right of Pannage between
14 Sept. and 11 Nov. after Michaelmas, 1716. and not before, on forfeiture of
any Hogg, Pigg, or Swine, that after Michaelmas next, and before the time
aforesaid, shall be found in the Wastes of the said Forest: And their Common of
Pasture is continued to them in the said Wast Ground of the Forest, when not
Enclosed, except in the Fence month, viz. 15 days before and after Midsummer,
and in the Winter Heyning, viz. from 11 Nov. to 23 Apr. subject to the Forest
Laws, as they might have enjoyed the same before the making of this Act: Saving
also to the adjacent Inhabitants their ancient right of Fuel, provided they do
not sell or dispose of any part thereof, nor take the same in other manner than
they ought, nor by reason of any Claim not allowed according to the Forest Laws
before 27 Eliz.

X. If any persons take any Grant of the said Enclosures or Wastes, or any
Woods or Trees growing thereon, every such Grant shall be void, and the persons
incapable to hold the same, and shall forfeit treble the Value of such Grant,
to them which shall first sue for the same, and shall also be incapable of
holding any Office or Employment whatsoever.

XI. When any Sale of Wood shall be within the Forest, public notice thereof
shall be given by the proper Officers in the adjacent Market Towns, three weeks
at least before such Sale; and the proper Officers shall before the Sale, give
notice to two or more of the Verderers of the Valuation made; and the person
who shall offer most Money over and above the Valuation, making his Proposal in
Writing, and giving Security for payment of the Money, shall be the Purchaser.

XII. No Officer shall take any Fee or Gratuity for Felling Trees to be cut
down for the Enclosures, or upon Sale of the residue of such Trees, or of the
Lops, Tops, or Roots of the said Trees.

XIII. Any Officer offending in cutting down and disposing of Trees contrary to
this Act, shall forfeit his Office.

XIV. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 37. The Sum of 570000 l. having been
appropriated for the Building, and for the Guns, Rigging and Furnishing of 27
Ships of War, out of one third part of the Moneys arising by an Act made, 2 W.
and M. Entitled, An Act for Granting to their Majesty's several Additional
Duties of Excise upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors for Four years, from the
time that an Act for doubling the Duty of Excise upon Beer, Ale, and other
Liquors, during the space of One Year does expire, and by a preceding Act
therein mentioned; which Additional Duties were by several Clauses in an Act, 3
and 4 W. and M. Entitled, An Act for Raising Money by a Poll, payable
Quarterly for one year, for the carrying on a Vigorous War against France,
continued till 17 May, 1697. for the Uses directed by the former Act: And the
said 27 Ships having been built and furnished (except one Third Rate now
building at Chatham) and the Moneys appropriated being sufficient with an
Overplus; so much of the said Overplus as shall remain in the hands of the
Treasurers of the Navy, shall be applied to the use of his Majesty's Navy, and
so much as shall remain in the hands of the Treasurer, or Paymaster of the
Office of the Ordnance, shall be applied to the Service of that Office relating
to the Navy, and the said Treasurers shall be accountable for the same
accordingly. And all such Stores bought for the said Ships, as shall be more
than necessary for that purpose, shall be applied to the Service of his
Majesty's Navy and Ordnance, and the proper Officers shall be accountable for
the same.

I. Stat. 8 and 9 w. 3. cap. 13. The Act made 4 and 5 W. and M. Entitled, An
Act for Punishing Officers and Soldiers, who shall Mutiny or Desert their
Majesty's Service, and for Punishing False Musters, and for Payment of
Quarters, shall continue in Force from 10 Apr. 1697. to 10 Apr. School. and no
longer.

II. And the Act made in the Fifth and Sixth years of King William and Queen
Mary, Entitled, An Act for continuing the Act for punishing Officers and
Soldiers, who shall Mutiny or Desert their Majesty's Service, and for punishing
False Musters, and for payment of Quarters, for one Year longer, shall continue
in Force from the said 10 April, 1697. to 10 Apr. School. and no longer.

III. And the Act made in the Sixth and Seventh Years of the Reign of his
present Majesty King William, Entitled, An Act for continuing two former Acts
for punishing Officers and Soldiers, who shall Mutiny or Desert his Majesty's
Service, and for punishing false Musters, and for payment of Quarters, for one
Year longer; And also an Act made in the 7th and 8th Years of his said
Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for continuing several former Acts for
punishing Officers and Soldiers who shall Mutiny or Desert his Majesty's
Service, and for punishing False Musters, and for payment of Quarters, for one
Year longer, shall continue in force from 10 Apr. 1697. to 10 Apr School. and no
longer.

IV. Every Officer Commanding in Chief, shall within twenty four hours after
his coming into Quarters, make publication by Sound of Trumpet or Beat of Drum,
in the Marketplace, or other Public place, how much shall be allowed every
Soldier to be trusted above his Allowance for Diet, Hay and Straw; and how that
no Shopkeeper shall trust any private Soldier for Goods, without leave in
Writing from the Officer commanding in Chief, on pain of Forfeiting the Sum so
entrusted. And the Officer commanding in Chief, omitting to make such
Publications, to be liable to pay the Debts so contracted.

V. One or more Justices of the Peace, shall upon Complaint, regulate the
Quartering and Billetting of Soldiers.

VI. From 10 Apr. 1697 No Innholder, Victualler or other Person, shall be
obliged to provide Meat or other Victuals for any Soldiers, legally Quartered
on them (except in their March only) if they shall give or tender to each
Horseman 6 d per diem for his subsistence in Meat only, and to every Dragoon
and Foot Soldier 4 d. per diem for the same, besides Candle and the Use of his
Fire for dressing his Meat.

VII. Provided that each Innholder, Victualler or other person, shall furnish
for every Soldier lawfully Quartered on them, Lodging, Small Beer and Candle,
with the use of Fire to dress his Meat by, and Hay and Straw for their Horses
after the rates following, viz. for Small Beer, Fire, Candle, and Hay, and
Straw, for a Light Horseman and his Horse 6 d. per diem, and the like for a
Dragoon at 5 d. per diem.

VIII. The Officers and Soldiers of the Marine Regiments (being in his
Majesty's Service in the Army) shall be subject to all the Powers and
Punishments mentioned in this Act.

IX. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 20. Enacted, That Francis Colenbine and Ventris
Colenbine, Sons of Col. Ventris Colenbine and Barbara his Wife, Robert Wroth,
Son of Lieut. Col. Wroth, and Knightley his Wife, John Gysbert Farewell an
Infant, Son of Lieut. Col. John Farewell, and Elizabeth his Wife, Thomas Vthwat,
Son of Richard Vthwat, and Martha his Wife, and all other persons who since 13
Febr. 1688. or at any time since the beginning of the late War with France, and
before 25 Mar. School. were Born out of his Majesty's Dominions, and whose
Fathers or Mothers were Natural Born Subjects of this Realm, and were then
actually in the Service of his Majesty, or of his Majesty and the late Queen,
are declared to be Natural Born Subjects of this Kingdom, as if they had been
Born in England.

X. And that they shall be able to challenge and enjoy any Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and all other Privileges of Natural Born Subjects, and to make
their Resort or Pedigree, as Heir to their Ancestors, Lineal or Collateral; And
to have and enjoy Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, by Purchase or Gift, and
to prosecute all manner of Actions and things, as freely as if they had been
Born in England.

XI. Provided that no person expressly named in this Act, shall have benefit
thereby, if in 5 years after the Age of 14 Years, they neglect to Receive the
Sacrament, and take the Oaths appointed, Ann. 1. W. and M. in some of the
Courts of Record at Westminster.

XII. Provided also, That no person intended to be Naturalized by general
Words, shall have Benefit thereby, if in 5 years after the Age of 14 years,
they neglect to Receive the Sacrament, and take the Oaths aforesaid, and make
proof of their being Born out of the Realm, within the times beforementioned,
and that their Father or Mother was a Natural Born Subject, and actually in the
Kings, or King and Queens Service at their Birth.

XIII. Any person expressly named in this Act, may during the said 5 years,
after the Age of 14 Years, make proof upon Oath, in any the Courts of Record at
Westminster, that such Person did Receive the Sacrament and take the said
Oaths: And any persons intended to be Naturalized by the general Words, may
likewise during the said 5 years, after the Age of 14 years, make like proof in
such Court, as well of their Receiving the Sacrament, and taking the Oaths, as
of their being Born within the times limited, of a Father or Mother that was a
Natural Born Subject, and then in the Kings Service: All which Proofs being
made to the satisfaction of the said Court, shall be there Recorded, and a
Certificate thereof given, under the Seal of the said Court; upon showing
whereof, every such person shall have the full Benefit of this Law.

Squibs.
I. Stat. 9 and 10. W. 3. cap. 7. After 25 Mar. School. No persons of what Age,
Sex, Degree or Quality soever, shall Make, Sell or Utter, or expose to Sale any
Squibs, Rockets, Serpents or other Fireworks, or any Cases, Molds or other
Implements for the making of such Fireworks, or permit any such Fireworks to be
thrown or fired, out of or in their Houses or Lodgings, or any part or place
thereto adjoining, into any public Street, Highway, Road or Passage; nor
throw or fire, or be aiding in the throwing or firing of any such Fireworks, in
or into any public Street, House, Shop, River, Highway, Road or Passage, but
every such Offense shall be adjudged a Common Nuisance.

II. After the said 25 Mar. Any person, as aforesaid, who shall make, give,
sell or utter, or expose to sale any Squibs, Rockets, Serpents or other
Fireworks, or any Cases, Molds or other Implements for making thereof, and be
convicted thereof before one or more Justices of the Peace of the County or
Division, or chief Magistrate of the place where such offense shall be
committed, by Confession of the Party, or Oath of two Witnesses, shall for
every such offense forfeit 5 l. And any persons whatsoever who, after the said
25 Mar. shall permit or suffer any such Fireworks to be thrown or fired from,
out of, or in their Houses, Shops, Dwellings, Lodgings or Habitations, or any
part or place thereto belonging, into any public Street, Highway, Road or
Passage, or any other House or Place whatsoever, and shall be convicted
thereof, as aforesaid, shall for every such offense forfeit 20 s. the said
several forfeitures to be Levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels
of the Offender, by Warrant of the said Justices or Chief Magistrate; one half
to the use of the Poor of the Parish, and the other to the Prosecutor.

III. After the said 25 Mar. Any persons, as aforesaid, who shall throw or
fire, or assist in the throwing or firing, any such Fireworks, in or into any
public Street, House, Shop, River, Highway, Road or Passage, and be thereof
convicted, as aforesaid, shall for every such offense forfeit 20 s. to the uses
aforesaid, and pay the same immediately to the said Justices of chief
Magistrate, or be sent to the House of Correction, there to be kept to hard
Labor for any time, not exceeding one Month, unless such Offender sooner pay
such Forfeiture.

IV The Master, Lieutenant or Commissioners of the Ordnance, or any other
persons by them Authorized, may give Orders for the making any sorts of
Fireworks, to be used and fired according to the Orders and Directions of the
said Master, Lieutenant or Commissioners of the Ordnance, or other persons by
them Authorized for that purpose.

V. The Artillery Company of the City of London, or any other Artillery Company
or Society of persons, Lawfully met together for the use and exercise of Arms,
the Trained Bands and Militia of the Kingdom, may make and use any sorts of
Fireworks, in the Exercise of Arms and Warlike Exploits only, as they might
Lawfully have done before the making of this Act.

VI. Persons sued for putting this Act in Execution, may plead the general
Issue, and give the special matter in Evidence; And if the Plaintiff be
Nonsuit, or Discontinue, or a Verdict pass, or Judgment be given for the
Defendant, such Defendant shall have his full treble Costs.

Stores of War.
I. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 41. For preventing the Imbezlement of his
Majesty's Stores of War, etc. It is Enacted, That, after 24 June, School. none
but the Contractors with the Principal Officers or Commissioners of the Navy,
Ordnance or Victualling Office for his Majesty's use, shall make any Stores of
War or Naval Stores, with the Marks usually used to his Majesty's said Stores,
viz. Cordage of three Inches and upwards, with a white Thread laid the contrary
way; smaller Cordage from three Inches downwards, with a Twine in lieu of a
White Thread laid the contrary way; Canvis wrought or unwrought with a blue
streak in the middle; or any other Stores with the Broad Arrow, by Stamp, Brand
or otherwise, upon pain that every such person not being a Contractor, as
aforesaid, or Employed by such Contractor, shall for every such Offense forfeit
such Goods, and 200 l. with Costs of Suit, one moiety to the King, the other to
the Informer, to be Recovered in any the Courts of Record at Westminster.

II. Persons in whose Custody such Stores so Marked shall be found, not
Employed, as aforesaid, or who shall conceal such stores so marked, and be
convicted thereof, shall forfeit such Goods, and 200 l. with Costs of Suit, one
moiety to his Majesty, and the other to the Informer, and suffer Imprisonment
till payment thereof, unless such person upon his Trial, produce a Certificate
under the hand of three or more of the Commissioners of the Navy, Ordnance or
Victuallers, particularizing the Goods in question, and the reason of such
Goods coming into such persons hands.

III. Whereas diverse persons have personated Seamen who have served on Board
his Majesty's Ships, and thereby fraudulently received Moneys at the Pay
Office, or elsewhere, and have Forged Letters of Attorney or Bills of Sale,
Assignment or Last Wills, and have personated the Wives, Relations or Creditors
of such Seamen, and taken Letters of Administration to them, or Forged Letters
of Attorney, Bills of Sale, or other Authorities, in the Names of their
Executors or Administrators, for receipt of the Wages due to such Seamen; It is
Enacted, That the Persons, their Aiders or Abettors, that shall be convicted of
the said Crimes and Offenses committed after 24 Jun. School. shall, besides all
other penalties, forfeit 200 l. with costs of Suit, one moiety to the King, the
other to the Informer, to be recovered, as aforesaid, and suffer Imprisonment
till payment thereof.

IV. The said principal Officers or Commissioners may sell and dispose of any
the said Stores, so marked, as they might have done before the making of this
Act, and the Buyers may quietly keep and enjoy the same, upon producing a
Certificate, under the Hand and Seal of three or more of the said Principal
Officers or Commissioners, that they bought such Goods from them, or from some
person who bought them from the said Officers or Commissioners, before such
Stores were found in their Custody: Which Certificate shall express the
quantities of such Stores, and when and where bought of the said Commissioners.
Which Commissioners are to give such Certificates within 30 days after the sale
and delivery of such Stores so sold.

V. Persons sued for discovering or seizing any such Stores so marked, may
plead the general Issue, and give this Act and the special matter in Evidence;
And if the Defendants prove the Stores were so Marked, and the Plaintiffs do
not prove they were so Employed, or had such Certificate before such discovery
and seizure, and showed it to the Defendants before such Suit commenced, the
Defendants shall be acquitted, unless upon sight of such Certificate they did
not deliver back to the Plaintiffs such Stores so seized, in good Condition;
And upon such acquitting, or that the Plaintiffs discontinue, or be Nonsuit,
the Defendants shall recover Treble Costs.

VI. After the said 24 Jun. No Seamans Will contained in the same Instrument,
with a Warrant or Letter of Attorney, shall be good in Law.

VII. No Ecclesiastical Court, or any person shall take more than 1 s. for the
Seal, Writing or Suing forth any Administration granted to the Wife or Children
of any Seaman dying in pay of his Majesty's Navy, unless such Seamans Goods and
Chattels amount to 20 l. The persons offending to forfeit to the Party grieved
10 l.

VIII. The principal Officers and Commissioners of the Navy, or any chief
Commander of any his Majesty's Ships at Sea, may Lend any of his Majesty's
Stores to any Merchant Ship or Vessel in Distress or otherwise, in case such
Goods be restored with all possible Convenience; and provided the persons
Borrowing the same have such Certificate, as aforesaid, which the Lenders are
hereby required to give.

Suits.
I. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 11. After 25 of March, 1697. where several persons
shall be made Defendants to any Action of Trespass, Assault, false
Imprisonment, or Ejectione Firmae, and any one or more shall upon Trial be
Acquitted by Verdict, every person so Acquitted shall Recover his Costs of
Suit, unless the Judge shall immediately after the Trial in open Court,
certify upon the Record, that there was a reasonable Cause for making such
person or persons a Defendant or Defendants to such Action.

II. After the said 25 of March, if any person shall Commence in any Court of
Record, any Action or Suit, wherein upon Demurrer, Judgment shall be given
against the Plaintiff or Defendant; or if at any time after Judgment given for
the Defendant, the Plaintiff shall Sue a Writ of Error, and the said Judgment
shall be affirmed, or the said Writ discontinued, or the Plaintiff Nonsuit
therein, the Defendant shall have Judgment to Recover his Costs against such
Plaintiff, and Execution by Capias ad satisfaciendum, Fieri facias, or Elegit.

III. After the said 25 of March, in all Actions of Waste and Debt upon the
Statute for not setting forth of Tithes, where the Damage found by the Jury
shall not exceed Twenty Nobles, and in all Suits upon Writs of Scire facias,
and upon Prohibitions, the Plaintiff obtaining Judgment, or Award of Execution
after Plea Pleaded, or Demurrer joined therein, shall likewise Recover his
Costs of Suit; and if the Plaintiff become Nonsuit, or Discontinue, or a
Verdict pass against him, the Defendant shall have Costs, and Execution for the
same.

IV. In all Actions of Trespass Commenced after the said 25 of March, in any
Court of Record at Westminster, where it shall appear at the Trial, and be
certified by the Judge on the back of the Record, that the Trespass was wilful
and malicious, the Plaintiff shall Recover not only his Damages, but his full
Costs of Suit.

V. Provided nothing herein contained, shall alter the Laws in being as to
Executors and Administrators, in such Cases where they are not at present
liable to pay Costs of Suit.

VI. In all Actions commenced in any Court of Record after the said 25 of
March, if the Plaintiff dye after an Interlocutory Judgment, and before a final
Judgment, the said Action shall not abate, if the said Action might be
originally prosecuted by his Executors or Administrators; and if the Defendant
die after such Interlocutory Judgment, and before Final Judgment, the Action
shall not abate, if such Action might be originally Prosecuted against his
Executors or Administrators; and the Executors, or Administrators of such
Plaintiff after such Interlocutory Judgment, may have a Scire facias against
the Defendant, if Living, or if Dead, against his Executors or Administrators,
to show cause why Damages should not be Assest and Recovered against him or
them; and if he or they do not appear at the Return, and show sufficient Cause
to Arrest the Final Judgment, or being Returned Warned, or upon Two Writs of
Scire facias, it being Returned that the Defendant had nothing whereby to be
Summoned, or could not be found, a Writ of Enquiry of Damages shall be Awarded,
which being Executed and Returned, Judgment final shall be given for the said
Plaintiff, his Executors or Administrators.

VII. If there be Two or more Plaintiffs or Defendants, and one dye, if the
cause of Action survive to the surviving Plaintiff, or against the surviving
Defendant, the Writ or Action shall not abate, but such Death being suggested
upon the Record, the Action shall proceed.

VIII. In all Actions after the said 25 day of March, Prosecuted in any of the
Kings Courts of Record, upon any Bond or Penal Sum for Nonperformance of
Covenants, the Plaintiff may Assign as many Breaches as he shall think fit, and
the Jury at the Trial shall and may Assess Damages for such of the said
Breaches so Assigned as the Plaintiff at the Trial shall prove Broken, and the
like Judgment shall be Entered on such Verdict as has been usually done in such
Actions. And if Judgment be given for the Plaintiff, upon Demurrer, Confession,
or Nihil dicit, the Plaintiff upon the Roll may suggest as many Breaches as he
shall think fit, upon which shall Issue a Writ to Summon a Jury to Appear at
the Assizes of that respective County, to inquire of the truth of every one of
those Breaches, and to Assess Damages accordingly, and the Justices of Assize
shall make a Return thereof to the Court from whence the same Issued. In case
the Defendant after such Judgment Entered, and before Execution Executed, shall
pay into Court such Damages so Assessed, and Costs of Suit, a stay of Execution
shall be Entered upon Record. Or if by reason of Execution Executed, the
Plaintiff or his Executors or Administrators shall be fully paid all such
Damages, together with his Costs and reasonable Charges, the Body, Lands and
Goods of the Defendant shall be forthwith discharged, and the Satisfaction
entered upon Record: Yet shall such Judgment stand and be as a further Security
to Answer to the Plaintiff, his Executors, etc. such Damages as shall or may be
sustained for further Breach of any Covenant, in the same Deed or Writing
contained, upon which the Plaintiff, etc. may have a Scire facias upon the said
Judgment against the Defendant, his Heir, Terre-Tenants, Executors or
Administrators, suggesting other Breaches, and to Summon them to show Cause why
Execution shall not be Awarded upon the said Judgment, upon which there shall
be the like Proceedings, as aforesaid, and upon payment of Damages and Costs,
Proceedings to be again stayed, and so toties quoties, and the Defendant
discharged out of Execution.

Taxes.
I. STat. 8 W. 3. cap. 6. All persons of what estate, degree, age, sex or
condition soever, within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, not receiving Alms, shall pay unto his Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors, within the space of One Year from 25 Jan. 1696. the sum of 4 s.
4 d. by Monthly payments of 4 d. per Month, reckoning 28 days to each Month,
the first payment to be 22 Feb. 1696.

II. Over and above which Duty of 4 d. per Month, all Servants and Journeymen
(except Day-Labourers) having 4 l. per ann. Wages, or upwards, and not
exceeding 8 l. per ann. shall pay for the same 13 d. per l. for One Year, by
like Monthly payments of 1 d. per l. And for more than 8 l. per annum Wages,
and not exceeding 16 l. per ann. the sum of 2 s. 2 d. per l. by like Monthly
payment of 2 d. per l. And for more than 16 l. per ann Wages, the sum of 4 s. 4
d. per l. by like Monthly payments of 4 d. per l.

III. All persons having or claiming any Pension, Annuity, Stipend, or other
yearly payment out of the Exchequer, or any Branch of his Majesty's Revenue
(except Rents issuing out of Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, or charged
upon the same, and such Annuities as are or shall be exempted by Act of
Parliament) shall pay for the same 4 s. 4 d. per l. for One Year, by like
Monthly payments of 4 d. per l.

IV. All persons that have or are to have, receive or enjoy any Salary, Fee or
Wages, or any Perquisites, Allowances, Poundage, Gratuities, Rewards,
Emoluments, Income or Profits whatsoever, arising by any Commissions, Offices
or Employments, Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military, under his Majesty, his Heirs
or Successors, or under the Queen Dowager, the Prince or Princess of Denmark,
or under Lords of Manors, or any other persons, and all their Clerks, Deputies,
Assistants and Substitutes (except Military Officers in Muster in the Army,
Navy or Ordnance) shall pay for the same 4 s. 4 d. per l. for One Year, by like
Monthly payments of 4 d. per l.

V. All Sergeants at Law, Barristers, Attorneys, Sollicitors, Public Notaries,
Scriveners, Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials, Registers, Advocates,
Proctors, Apparitors, or practicing as such; Brokers to Merchants, Factors, and
other persons acting by Commission from Merchants: All Practicers in Physic
and Surgery, Apothecaries, and all other Professions, (not charged by the
last foregoing Clause) shall pay 4 s. 4 d. for One Year, for every 20 s arising
by their Practices or Professions, by like Monthly payments of 4 d. per l.

VI. All persons having any Estate in Ready Money or in Debts at Interest,
within or without the Realm, or owing upon Mortgages, Judgments, Statutes,
Recognizances, Bonds, Bills, Notes, or other Securities for Money at Interest
(except Loans and Debts from his Majesty, and Arrears of Rent) shall pay 25 s.
for One Year, for every such 100 l. by Twelve Monthly payments of 2 s. 1 d. for
every 100 l. and so proportionably for a greater or lesser Sum, a Farthing per
l. each Month; the first payment to be 25 Febr. 1696. And thenceforth the 25th
day of each Kalendary Month, deducting only such Debts as are really and bona
fide owing from such person or persons at Interest.

VII. All persons using or exercising any Trade, Mystery, Occupation or
business of Merchandising, Shopkeeping, or other Buying or Selling by wholesale
or Retail, shall pay 50 s. for One Year for every 100 l. value in Goods, Wares,
Merchandises, Commodities, Manufactures or Vendible Stock, and proportionably
for a greater or lesser Value, by Twelve like Kalendary Monthly payments of a
Halfpeny for every Pound value, or 4 s. 2 d. for every 100 l. value.

VIII. All persons having in their Tenure, Possession or Occupation, any Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, whereupon there shall be any Horses, Mares,
Geldings, Colts, Bulls, Oxen, Cows, Calves, Sheep, Lambs, Swine, or other
Cattle great or small, or other Quick Stock, whether the same belong to such
persons respectively, or to others, shall pay for one Year, after the Rate of
12 s. for every 100 l. of the true value thereof, by Twelve like Kalendary
Monthly payments of 12 d. for every 100 l. and so proportionably for a greater
or lesser value.

IX. A Proviso, That the Wives and Children under the Age of Sixteen Years of
such persons who are chargeable only with the first mentioned Duty of 4 d. per
Month, shall be Exempted from the said 4 d. per Month.

X. All Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Quarries, Mines, Iron-Works,
Salt-Works, and Allom-Works, Parks, Chaces, Warrens, Woods, Under-Woods,
Coppices, Fishings, Tithes and Tolls, Annuities, Rentscharge, and yearly
Profits whatsoever, shall be charged for one Year, with the Sum of 3 s. for
every 20 s. of the true and full yearly value, without respect to the present
Rents reserved, or to any other Rates or Taxes thereupon, or making any
Abatement for Reparations, or any other Charges; and shall be paid by Twelve
equal Monthly payments, the first payment to be made on the said 25 Febr. 1696.
and so on the 25th day of every subsequent Kalendary Month.

XI. The Owners of any of the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which
are liable to any Rent-charges, Annuities, Fee-farm Rents, Rents-Service, or
other Rents, may deduct 3 s. in the Pound thereout, and be allowed it by the
persons Entitled to the said Rents.

XII. His Majesty may appoint Commissioners under the Great Seal of England,
for the more effectual Execution of this Act, who shall Meet together at the
usual places, upon or before 20 Feb. 1696. and may then Subdivide themselves so
as there be Three or more to each Hundred or other Division: And shall then
give an Account in Writing to the Receiver General of the Commissioners
appointed for each Division: And the said Commissioners shall Issue their
Precepts to such as they think fit to be Presenters or Assessors, to appear
before them within Five days; and then to read the Rates, and Charge them with
the Execution of the Act: And the persons to whom any Precepts are directed,
absenting without Excuse, or refusing to Serve, shall Forfeit a Sum not
exceeding 5 l. nor less than 40 s.

XIII. The Commissioners shall appoint Two at the least of the most sufficient
Inhabitants of each Parish, etc. to be Assessors, who by a day prefixed shall
bring in Certificates of the Names of the persons within their Division,
containing in several Columes, The Tax payable by persons Chargeable with the 4
d. per Month: The value of the Wages to be Rated: The Pensions, Stipends or
other yearly payments: The Nature and Value of Offices, Employments and
Professions: The Ready Money and Debts at Interest: The Stock in Trade: The
Stock upon Land, and the Monthly Rates of the Premises respectively.

XIV. And the Assessors are Enjoined to Inform themselves of the full yearly
Value of all Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, above the Reserved
Rent, and to Assess the same at the Rate of 3 s. for every 20 s. of the full
yearly Value; and to Describe the Lands, etc. in their Books, so as may best
Ascertain the Rates intended by the Act to be Imposed.

XV. The Assessors shall be the Collectors of the Moneys payable by this Act,
and the Parish, etc. to be answerable for their paying it to the Head
Collectors: And if any Assessor refuse to Serve, or make Default, (without a
Lawful Excuse) he shall Forfeit a Sum not exceeding 20 l. nor less than 10 l.

XVI. Every Assessor shall before the Execution of the said Employment take the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and an Oath for the faithful Execution of
his Duty as an Assessor; And shall make the Assessments, and return the
Certificates thereof to the Commissioners by the Fifth Day of March, 1696. who
may then Examine the same, or within Twenty days after; And if the
Commissioners suspect any of the Lands, etc. to be under Charged, they may
examine the Owners thereof, who for neglecting to appear (without Lawful
Excuse) shall Forfeit double the Sum Chargeable thereupon.

XVII. The Commissioners shall Inform themselves upon Oath of any Omissions or
Under Assessments, and set such Rates as shall be according to the Meaning of
the Act; And deliver back Duplicates of the Assessments to Collect by, and to
the Receivers General and their Head Collectors; And return Extracts of the
said Assessments into the Exchequer, on or before the Tenth of March, 1696. or
within Forty days after. And the Kings Remembrancer is, within Three Months
after the Duplicates of the last payment returned, to transmit Copies to the
Auditor of the Receipt.

XVIII. The Assessments shall be Collected Monthly, or within Fourteen days
after they become due; and Collectors are to pay what they receive to the Head
Collectors, within Fourteen days after the times prefixed for Demanding the same.

XIX. The Commissioners may appoint other Collectors in the Rooms of such as
dye, are sick, fail or are overburdened.

XX. The Head Collectors shall hasten the Subcollectors, and in case of neglect
or failure shall Distrain upon the Subcollectors; And the Head Collector shall
make payment to the Receiver General within Seven days after the time for
payment by the Subcollectors: And the Receiver General is to hasten the Head
Collectors, and to pay what he receives from the Head Collector into the
Exchequer, within Seven days after the times prefixed for payment by the Head
Collector; And all persons concerned in the Execution of this Act are to use
Diligence.

XXI. The Head Collectors Receipt shall be a Discharge to the Subcollector;
Which Subcollector is to have 4 d. in the Pound for what he Receives, and not
forced to Travel above Ten Miles.

XXII. The Head Collector is to be appointed by the Receiver General, who is to
be answerable for the Money so Collected or Received, and whose Acquittance
shall be a Discharge to the Head Collector; Which Receiver General is to have 2
d. in the Pound for what he shall pay into the Exchequer; And the Commissioners
Clerks to have 3 Halfpence in the Pound for Writing the Warrants,
Certificates, Estreats and Duplicates.

XXIII. In case of Non-payment, the Subcollectors to Distrain, and the Distress
having been kept Four days at the Owners Charge, then to be Appraised and Sold,
and the Overplus returned.

XXIV. It shall be lawful to break open Houses in the day time, and by Warrant
from the Commissioners any Chest, etc. Calling to Assistance the Constables,
etc. And where no Distress can be found, the person to be Imprisoned till
payment

XXV. Parents or Guardians are to pay the Rates Imposed on Infants, and to be
allowed the same on their Accounts, Servants or Journeymen making Default of
payment, their Masters and Mistresses are to be Chargeable therewith, and to
deduct the same out of their Wages; And Tenants to pay the Rates on the Houses,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments which they hold, and to deduct the same out
of the Rents.

XXVI. All persons Taxable for Wages, Ready Money or Debts, are to be Assessed
where Resident at the time of Execution of this Act; Annuities, Stipends or
yearly payments at the Exchequer, or out of any Branch of the Revenue, to be
Assessed where payable; And all other Pensions or yearly payments (not Charged
on Land) are to be Assessed where the persons Entitled thereto do Reside

XXVII. And all Offices, Employments and Professions are to be Rated where they
are Exercised: And all persons not being Householders are to be Taxed at the
place where they Reside at the time of Executing the Act.

XXVIII. The Rates on Pensions, Salaries or other Allowances or Profits payable
at the Exchequer, or by the Cofferer, or out of any other public Office, or by
any of his Majesty's Receivers or Paymasters are (in case of Non-payment) to be
stopped out of the same.

XXIX. Stock in Trade and Quick Stock upon Land is to be Rated in such County
or Place where it is at the time of the Execution of the Act; And all persons
having any such Stock in their Custody for the use of others are to pay for the
same, and to be allowed it upon their Accounts, or be satisfied out of the
Goods.

XXX. Persons out of the Realm, Taxable by this Act, are to be Assessed in the
place of their last Abode in the Realm; And persons Ratable for any Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, are to be Assessed in the places where the
Premises lie, and not elsewhere.

XXXI. A Proviso, That any person who in respect of several Places of Residence
is doubly Charged, shall, upon Certificate by two or more Commissioners, and
Oath thereof before one Justice of Peace where the Certificate is made, be
Discharged for so much.

XXXII. All persons who by changing their Residence, or by shifting their Goods
or Stock, or altering the Securities of Money, or by other Frauds shall escape
being fully Taxed, shall, upon proof thereof, be doubly Charged.

XXXIII. All Householders shall give an Account of their Lodgers and Servants,
and their full Wages respectively, under the Penalty of 5 l.

XXXIV. The Officers of the Exchequer and other Public Officers are to deliver
to the Assessors Lists of all Pensions, Fees and Allowances payable by them.

XXXV. All persons having any Moneys at Interest are to deliver to the
Assessors (before they return their Certificates) a Note of the Gross Sum of
Principal Money owing to them, which the Assessors are to Tax according to the
said Notes: But if no Notes be delivered, or that there be sufficient Ground to
believe they do not contain all the persons Money at Interest, then the
Assessors are to Tax such persons according to the best of their Judgment.

XXXVI. And all persons entitled to Debts at Interest are to deliver to the
Commissioners (before they deliver their Estreats to the Subcollectors) a
Specification or particular in Writing of the said Debts Signed; And also of
the persons, or some of them, who borrowed or are liable to the same, or of
something engaged for the said Debts, or the nature of the Securities, with the
Dates thereof, and the Names of the Witnesses thereunto. Whereupon the
Commissioners shall deliver back to the Parties, Copies of such Specifications
under their Hands and Seals, attested by two or more Witnesses, to justify
their being duly Charged; Which Copies shall be allowed as Evidence in all
Courts: And upon neglect or refusal to give in such Specifications, to Forfeit
(over and above the Duties intended to be Charged) twice as much, to be Sued
for at any time before 25 Mar. 1699. Whereof one moiety to the King, the other
to the Prosecutor; And the Debts not contained in the said Specifications shall
not be Recoverable, nor the Securities for the same Pleadable in any Courts of
Law or Equity, before the said 25 Mar. 1699. Unless the said Duty and Penalty
be first satisfied, viz. If no Action be Commenced by any Informer, then the
Duty and Penalty shall be paid to the King; But if an Action be depending, then
the Duty and one moiety of the Penalty shall go to the King, and the other
moiety to the Informer.

XXXVII. The Assessors are to Enter and View upon the Places where any Stock
upon Land shall be, and to Value and Charge the same according to the Act; And
if upon such View the Assessors find any Fraud has been used to avoid the
Taxation, they are to give Notice to the Commissioners, to the end the persons
may be doubly Taxed: And the persons refusing to permit such View, shall
Forfeit 10 l. one moiety to the King, the other to the Prosecutor.

XXXVIII. All Traders shall deliver to the Assessors, within ten days after the
Commissioners Issue their Warrant to the Assessors, a Particular in Writing
Signed, of the Quantities, Kinds and Value of their Stocks, as the same are
then Worth, bona fide, to be sold. And the Assessors are Empowered (where they
shall think it necessary for their Information) to Enter in the day time into
any Shops, Warehouses, etc. to View and Value the Goods: And the persons
refusing such Entrance, shall Forfeit 40 l. one moiety to the King, the other
to the Prosecutor: And if the Assessors are satisfied in the truth of the
Particulars delivered to them, they are to Assess the same accordingly; But if
the particulars are not delivered to them within the time prefixed, or if they
suspect the said Particulars to be fraudulent, then they are to Assess such
Stock in Trade, according to the best of their judgment.

XXXIX. All which Assessments shall nevertheless be subject to the Examination
of the Commissioners, who may allow, abate or increase the same, as they see
cause, upon Information or Appeals.

XL. And if any Steward, Bailiff or Tenant of Houses, Lands or Hereditaments do
not discover to the Assessors, when required, the true Rents payable for the
same, he shall Forfeit so much as such Rent bona fide shall amount unto for Two
Years.

XLI. Any persons Assessed, finding themselves agrieved, may Appeal within the
days after the Money demanded, and any three or more of the Commissioners, who
Signed the Rate, shall, within ten days after such Appeal, Examine the person
upon Oath, and abate or increase the Assessment; and to that end shall meet
together for Determining Appeals, and shall Express the time and place in their
Warrants to the Collectors; and upon Complaints shall Summon the Assessors to
attend; and such Appeals being once heard are to be final.

XLII. Assessor, Collector, or Receiver wilfully neglecting or refusing to do
his Duty, may be Fined, not exceeding 30 l. nor under 15 l. for every Offense,
which Fines shall not be taken off or discharged but by Consent of the majority
of the Commissioners who Imposed the same; but shall be Levied by Distress or
Sale of the Offenders Goods; and in default of Goods, the Offenders shall be
Imprisoned till payment of the Fines.

XLIII. The Collectors not paying the Money they Collect, according to the
direction of the Act, are to be Imprisoned, and their Estates Seized; Whereupon
the Commissioners are to appoint a General Meeting, of which Six days Notice at
least is to be given, and then to Sell what shall be so Seized, or any part
thereof.

XLIV. At the Expiration of the time for the full payment of all the said
Monthly payments, the Commissioners are to examine into the full payment of the
Sums Charged, and in case of failure, to cause the same to be forthwith Levied
and Paid.

XLV. If any Controversy arise concerning the Assessing the Commissioners, the
Commissioners concerned shall withdraw during the Debate, and in default
thereof shall be Fined, not exceeding 20 l. And all Questions and Differences
are to be determined by the Commissioners without Suit in Law.

XLVI. A Proviso against Charging any Colleges or Halls in the Universities, or
the Colleges of Windsor, Eaton, Winchester or Westminster, The Corporation of
Clergymens Sons, Bromley College, or the Settlement in Trust of Tobias Rustat
on Jesus College, or any Almshouses or Free-Schools, or any Master, Fellow or
Scholar of any College or Free School, or any Reader, Officer or Minister of
the Universities, or the Masters or Ushers of any Schools, or Alms Men of any
Hospital or Almshouse for their Stipends; or the Houses or Lands of Christ's
Hospital, St. Bartholomews, Bridewell, St. Thomas and Bethlehem Hospital; or
the Poor of any Hospital, whose Annual Maintenance does not exceed 20 l.
Provided that the Tenants of such Hospitals, etc. shall be Rated for what the
Lands are worth above the Rents reserved.

XLVII. All places are to be Assessed in such County, Division or Place where
usually Assessed. Provided that West Barnfield Hundred in Kent may be Assessed
in the Lathe of Scray; Northmore Tything in Oxfordfordshire in the Hundred of
Bampton; The Tythings of Charlbury, Faller and Finstock in the Hundred of
Chadlington; The Town and Parish of Leeds in Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Seyrack.

XLVIII. A Proviso that this Act shall not make void any Contracts between
Landlords and Tenants, or any others, touching Taxes.

XLIX. If any Action be Commenced or Prosecuted for any thing done in pursuance
of this Act, the Defendant may plead the general Issue, and this Act, and the
Special Matter in Evidence; and if the Plaintiff be Nonsuit or Verdict pass
against him, the Defendant shall recover Treble Costs.

L. The Receivers General shall give the Head Collectors Acquittances gratis,
and so shall the Head Collectors to the Subcollectors.

LI. The Subcollectors shall deliver Schedules to the Head Collectors, of those
that make default of Payment, where there is no Distress; which Schedules are
to be delivered to the Receivers General to be returned into the Exchequer: And
where Land or Houses are unoccupied, and no Distress, nor the person of the
Owner to be found within the County, such persons Name is to be Certified into
the Exchequer, and Process thereupon is to issue against the Body, Land and
Goods.

LII. In case of Non-payment for Woodlands, and no Distress to be had, so much
of the Wood (Timber Trees excepted) may be Felled and Sold as will pay the
Assessment. And in case of Non-payment of Tithes, Tolls, Profits of Markets,
Fairs, Fisheries or other Annual Profits, not Distrainable, so much thereof may
be seized and Sold as the Tax amounts unto.

LIII. Receivers General returning any into the Exchequer, who have paid their
Tax, are to Forfeit treble Damage to the Party agrieved, and to his Majesty
double the Sum unjustly certified.

LIVE. The Commissioners are to Assess each other within their Division, and are
also to Assess the Assessors.

LV. All persons having any share in the New-River, Thames, Hide-Park, Marybone
or Hampsted Waters, or any Profits arising thereby, or any Stock in the Office
for Insuring of Houses, or in the Unequal or other Lights, or in the Kings
Printing House, shall pay 3 s. in the Pound, of the full yearly Value: and
these Stocks or Shares, and all Companies of Merchants in London, are to be
Assessed by Three or more of the Commissioners appointed for the City of
London, and the Sums to be paid by the respective Governors, Treasurers or
Receivers.

LVI. The Commissioners are to require an Account from time to time of the
Moneys Received by the Receivers General, and of the Payments thereof into the
Exchequer, and in case of failure, to cause the same to be forthwith Levied.

LVII. No Letters Patents or Privileges shall exempt any from Payment of the
Rates in this Act.

LVIII. Provided that no person be compelled to be an Assessor or Collector out
of the Limits of the City, Borough or Town Corporate where he lives.

LIX. And provided that the Assessments on Houses where Foreign Ministers shall
be resident, shall be paid by the Landlord or Owner.

LX. In all Privileged and extraparochial Places, the Commissioners are to
Nominate two persons, in or near the said places, to be Assessors.

LXI. A Proviso that no Commissioner shall be liable to the Penalties in the
Act of 25 Car. 2. touching Popish Recusants; nor be capable to Act before he
has taken the Oaths in the Act 1 W. and M. For Abrogating the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and also the Oath hereby appointed; which Oaths any
Two of the Commissioners are to Administer.

LXII. Every Papist or reputed Papist, of the Age of Sixteen Years or upwards,
not having taken the Oaths in the said Act of 1 W. and M. is to pay double,
unless he or she take the Oaths within Ten Days after the first meeting of the
Commissioners.

LXIII. Every person of Sixteen years of Age or upwards, who shall not have
taken the Oaths before the time of the Execution of the Act, and being Summoned
shall refuse to take the Oaths, or neglect to appear before the Commissioners
in order thereto, shall pay double.

LXIV. Every Gentleman, or so reputed, or being above that Quality, who by the
Act 3 W. and M. for the Quarterly Poll, did or ought to have paid double, and
shall not voluntarily take the Oaths before Two or more Commissioners, within
Ten days after their first meeting, shall pay double.

LXV. And the Commissioners, upon Information or Suspicion, are to Summon the
person suspected, to appear and take the Oaths. Quakers, instead of the Oaths,
may Make and Subscribe the Declaration of Fidelity 1 W. and M. and so doing
shall not be liable to double Rates.

LXVI. Provided that where the Owners of Lands are liable to double Rates, such
Owner only shall pay the double Rate, and not the Tenant, notwithstanding any
Covenant for payment of Taxes.

LXVII. A Proviso that no person be liable to the Pound Rate, whose Lands, etc.
are not of the Yearly Value of 20 s. in the whole.

LXVIII. A Proviso that the Chancery Officers within the Liberty of the Rolls
shall be there Assessed.

LXIX. Collectors keeping any Moneys in their Hands, or not paying the same as
the Act directs, are to forfeit 10 l. and the Head Collectors for the like
offense 40 l.

LXX. If after the Assessment any Persons remove to a Place where they were not
Rated, the Commissioners are to Summon such Persons before them, and cause them
to be duly Rated, and to pay the same, or such part as shall be unpaid, unless
the party produces a Certificate that he has been Rated and Paid elsewhere.

LXXI. The Kings Bench Prison, with the Lands, etc. and the Rents and Profits
of the Marshal thereof; and the Prison House, Lands, etc. of the Marshalsea
Prison, and Offices and Perquisites of the Marshals Court, shall be Assessed in
the Parish of St. George in Southwark.

LXXII. Any person acting as a Commissioner, before he has taken the Oaths,
forfeits 500 l. to the King.

LXXIII. The Waterworks in Southwark are to be Rated by the Commissioners and
Assessors of Surrey; and those in Westminster by the Commissioners and
Affessors for Westminsler.

LXXIV. Receivers General neglecting or refusing to return Duplicates of the
Assessments into the Exchequer by the times prefixed, shall forfeit 50 l. and be
incapable of any Trust from his Majesty.

LXXV. All Auditors and Receivers are to allow 3 s. in the Pound out of any Fee
Farm or other Chief Rents payable to his Majesty or the Queen Dowager, or any
others by Grant or Purchase from the Crown, under the Penalty of 10 l.

LXXVI. A Proviso that Rectories, Vicaridges or Curacies under 40 l. per Annum,
shall not be Taxed, if the Rector, Vicar or Curate resides upon the Place, or
personally serves the Cure.

LXXVII. No Tenant of Houses or Lands belonging to Colleges, Halls, Hospitals,
Almshouses or Schools, who by their Contracts are obliged to pay all Taxes,
shall be Discharged.

LXXVIII. The Allowance of Three Halfpence in the Pound to the Commissioners
Clerks is not to be paid till they have transmitted the Duplicates into the
Remembrancers Office, and have a Certificate thereof.

LXXIX. Members of Parliament are to be Assessed for their Personal Tax of 4 d.
per Month, and for their ready Money and Debts where they usually reside in the
Intervals of Palriament. Provided that if their usual Residence be not within
the Cities of London and Westminster, or 20 Miles of the same, they shall not
be Assessed for their Money, Debts, Stock in Trade or upon Lands until 20 Days
after the rising of the Parliament. And Servants attending the said Members are
not to be Assessed for their Wages until the time aforesaid.

LXXX. A Proviso, That upon Oath before the Commissioners, that any Debts
contained in the Specifications required by this Act are desperate, the
Commissioners are to inform themselves, and to Charge or Discharge the same as
they see cause; which Discharge is to be noted upon the said Specification and
Duplicates thereof.

LXXXI. Persons giving an Account in their Specifications of the Money they owe
at Interest, the Commissioners, being satisfied therewith, by Oath or
otherwise, shall make a proportionable Allowance or Deduction out of the Tax.

LXXXII. Provided, That where Lands, etc. are, and from 29 Sept. 1696. have
been in the actual possession of any Person for Debts, to which the same were
liable, such Debts are not to be charged by this Act.

LXXXIII. All or any part of the Monthly payments in this Act, may be paid for
the whole year, or any Months thereof, before hand in Hammered Silver Money at
5 s. 8 d. per oz. at any time before 1 June, 1697.

LXXXIV. If the Assessors neglect, the Commissioners are to take care, That
Papists and persons not taking the Oaths be doubly charged.

LXXXV. Persons beyond Sea and Minors having Moneys at Interest in this
Kingdom, their Trustees or Guardians are to pay the Duties.

LXXXVI. Receivers General are to keep a distinct Account of the 3 s. in the
Pound upon Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, etc. And every such Receiver
General or his Deputy misapplying any part of the Moneys arising by the said
Pound Rate of 3 s. in the Pound, shall Forfeit 500 l.

LXXXVII. The Commissioners of the Treasury, or Lord Treasurer are not to
direct any Warrant for payment of any Moneys arising by the said Pound Rate of
3 s. otherwise than into the Exchequer; nor to the Officers of the Exchequer
for striking any Talleys of Pro or Anticipation upon the same; nor shall any
Teller charge himself with any of the said Moneys till he has actually received
it.

LXXXVIII. No stay of Process shall be made for any of the Penalties by this
Act inflicted.

LXXXIX. Loans on Credit of Contributions for Annuities pursuant to an Act 7 W.
3. remaining unsatisfied, to be in the first place Transferred to the Register
appointed for the Tax of 3 s. in the Pound. And in the next place, all Moneys
lent upon Credit of the Exchequer in general, between 1 July, 1696. and 1 Febr.
1696. which Transferred Orders of Loan shall be Assignable.

XC. Any persons, Natives or Foreigners, may lend his Majesty any Sums not
exceeding 1500000 l. (including the Sums Transferred) at the rate of 8 l. per
Cent. on Credit of the Tax of 3 s. in the Pound, and the Moneys so lent on this
Act are not to be Taxed.

XCI. A distinct Register is to be kept in the Exchequer of the produce of the
3 s in the Pound: And the Interest for Moneys lent thereon shall be paid in
course every three Months, without any undue preference by the Officers of the
Exchequer, as they will avoid the Penalties inflicted by the Act.

XCII. Orders of Loan, by Virtue of this Act, being Entered, are made assignable.

XCIII. The Commissioners of the Treasury, or High Treasurer, may issue Bills
at the Exchequer, for any Sums not exceeding 1500000 l. for the use of the War;
Which Bills shall be Current in all Payments for any Aids or Supplies for the
War for the year 1697, except in the 3 s. in the Pound.

XCIV. And the Receivers and Collectors, out of the Milled Money or Gold in
their Hands, are to pay such Bills as shall be brought to them, under Penalty
of forfeiting double the Sum. Which Receivers, upon Payment of any of the said
Bills into the Exchequer, are to have Talleys for their Discharge; And the
Bills so paid in to be immediately Cancelled.

XCV. And the Money paid into the Exchequer for any Supplies for the Year,
1697. (Except for the 3 s. Aid) shall be applied to the taking up and
cancelling such Bills: But if the Supplies for the Year 1697. (Except for the 3
s. Aid) be Deficient of 1500000 l. Authorized to be Issued in Bills, such
Deficiency is to be in the first place made Good out of any Moneys that shall
be Raised by any Act of next Session of Parliament.

XCVI. Every Receiver General is to Enter in Books all the Sums he receives,
the Names of each Collector, the days when, and Sums paid, how much in
Hammered, and how much in Milled Money or Gold, and all Bills by him paid in
pursuance of this Act. Which Books are to lie constantly open at one certain
place within his Receipt, to which all persons are to have access. And every
Receiver neglecting to keep such Book, or to Enter his Receipts by the space of
three days, or refusing any person to inspect the same, shall forfeit 100 l.

XCVII. A Proviso, That 200000 l. out of the first Bills to be issued, or the
first Moneys arising by this Act (Except the 3 s. Aid, and Loans thereupon)
shall be Appropriated for payment of Soldiers Quarters in England, between 1
Jan. 1694. and 1 Jan. 1696 not otherwise satisfied before 1 Feb. 1696. if the
said Quarters amount to so much. It shall be Felony to Counterfeit the said
Exchequer Bills without Benefit of Clergy.

XCVIII. A Proviso, That this Act shall not Charge the 50000 l. per An. Granted
in Trust for the Prince and Princess of Denmark, with the Duty of 4 s. 4 d. per
Pound.

XCIX. Persons not Charged (over and above the 4 d. per Month) with the Duties
on Wages, Pensions, Salaries, Offices or Employments of the yearly Value of 8
l. or for their own Lands or Tenements of the yearly Value of 40 s. or for
Money or Stock of the Value of 5 l. shall not be Charged with the 4 d. per
Month for their Children, under the Age of Sixteen Years.

C. Also Poor Housekeepers, who by reason of their poverty do not contribute to
Church or Poor, shall not be charged by this Act; Nor shall it extend to charge
Houses not covered or made habitable.

CI. A Proviso, That Hammered Money shall be Current at 5 s. 2 d. per oz. after
1 Feb. 1696. in all payments, except where it is directed to be Received at a
greater value.

CII. Stat. 8 and 9. W. 3. cap. 7. During the term of two years, from 1 March,
1696 a Duty of 20 per Cent. of the true value for all Paper, Vellum and
Parchment, of what kind soever, made within this Kingdom, shall be paid by the
Makers thereof; And for all Paper, Pastboard, Vellum and Parchment, either in
Rolls, Reams, Quires, Books printed or not printed, or otherwise, Imported
during the said Term, 25 per Cent. over and above all Customs and Duties
already payable for the same.

CIII. Which Duties on Importations shall be paid by the Importers upon making
their Entries of the same, or shall be secured to be paid within three Months
after such Entry, with a Discount of 10 per Cent. per Ann. for payment in ready
Money, with a Clause of forfeiture upon Landing any such Imported Commodities
before Entry be made thereof.

CIV. The said Duties on Importations to be Collected by the Officers of the
Customs, according to the true value, to be esteemed upon the Oath of the
Importer: And the Duties upon the said Commodities made within the Realm shall
be ascertained by Commissioners thereunto appointed, their Substitutes or
Deputies, under the direction of the Commissioners of the Treasury.

CV. In case of Controversy, the value of such Goods made within the Realm
shall be esteemed by Affidavit of the Makers thereof in Writing, with Liberty
to his Majesty's Officers to take such Goods at the value specified in the said
Affidavits, paying down ready Money for the same.

CVI. The makers of the said Manufactures shall before 25 Mar. 1697. give
notice in Writing of the place where such Manufactures are usually made or
intended to be made, and the Names and places of abode of the makers thereof,
under the penalty of 20 l. And shall not make the same but in such common
places, whereof they shall first have given Notice; and shall permit the
respective Officers of the said Duties, to take notice of the stock of
Materials for making the same: And shall within five days after such
Commodities are made, so as to be fit for use, and before the removal thereof,
make true Entries of the same with his Majesty's Officers; and shall then, or
within six Months after, pay the said Duties, and thereupon shall have a
permission gratis for carrying the same away, with an Allowance of 10 per Cent.
per An for prompt payment.

CVII. It shall be Lawful for the said Officers to search and see what
quantities of the said Commodities are making, who are not to be refused
Entrance, under the penalty of 10 l. And if any persons shall endeavor to
Defraud his Majesty of his just Dues for the same, they shall Forfeit 50 l. and
the Commodities, concealed, not entered, or unlawfully removed, shall be also
forfeited.

CVIII. All Merchants, Stationers, Wholesale-sellers, Retailers, Paper-makers
and others having, on 1 Mar. (1696.) any stock of Paper, Parchment, Vellum or
Pastboard for sale, shall pay a Duty of 17 l. 10 s. per Cent. of the true value
thereof within ten days after the said 1 Mar. 1696.

CIX. The persons aforesaid shall deliver to the proper Officer a Particular in
Writing Signed, of the Quantities, Kinds and Values of the said Goods, which
Officers are Empowered to take an Account of, and view the said Goods, and shall
be permitted so to do under the penalty of 20 l. And if the said Duties be not
paid by 11 Mar. 1696. nor secured to be paid within three Months, the said
Officers may Levy the same by Distress of the Goods and Chattels of the persons
liable thereunto.

CX. Provided that the persons paying the said Duties by 11 Mar. 1696. shall be
allowed 10 per Cent per An. for prompt payment; And the valuation of the said
Stock shall be esteemed by the Oath of the Owner taken in Writing, with liberty
to the Kings Officer to take such Goods at the value specified in the said
Affidavit, paying down ready Money for the same.

CXI. Upon neglect to give in such particulars before 5 Mar. 1696. or not
giving in the full of the said Stock, or carrying away or concealing any part
thereof, before the Duty shall be paid or secured, to forfeit 50 l. and the
Goods so not given in, or carried away or concealed, shall be forseited.

CXII. In case of Seizure and Information or Complaint thereupon within eight
days, two of the next Justices of the Peace are to hear and determine the
matter; and upon Appeals the Justices of the next Quarter Sessions are to hear
and determine the same finally.

CXIII. All Entries, Accounts and Permissions aforesaid are to be made gratis.

CXIV. Provided that upon Exportations beyond the Seas, the Duties so paid or
secured, shall be repaid or discharged.

CXV. Any persons may Lend on the Credit of this Act 125000 l. at 8 per Cent.
Interest, free from Taxes, to be paid every three Months, till repayment of
their Principal, which shall be repaid in course, and the Money not diverted to
any other Use; And the Orders for repayment of Loans to be Assignable.

CXVI. All Hammered Moneys brought into any of the Mints, not being Base or
Counterfeit, (such being to be cut in pieces and returned) shall be Received at
5 s. 4 d. per oz. and duly Entered, and a Receipt thereof given in Writing, and
shall be Recoin'd into Milled Money; and the Produce thereof, with the help of
such Moneys as shall be Raised or Imprested by this Act (Charges deducted)
shall be paid back to the bringers in of such Hammered Moneys.

CXVII. All such Hammered Moneys brought in upon Taxes at 5 s. 8 d. per oz.
shall in like manner be Received, Entered, Specified. Essayed and New Coined;
and (Charges deducted) delivered back to the respective Receivers and
Collectors who brought in the same, to be by them paid into the Exchequer, with
an Allowance of the Deficiency in Recoining.

CXVIII. The Moneys so brought in at 5 s 4 d. per oz. or for Taxes or Revenues,
shall be repaid in course, and not diverted or misapplied, under the penalty
of loss of Place to the Officer so offending, and forfeiting treble Damages to
the party grieved.

CXIX. The clear Moneys arising by this Act, shall be applied to the making
good the said Allowance of 5 s. 4 d. per oz. for Hammered Moneys, and the
deficiencies of the said Loans made in Hammered Moneys, and the Encouragement
for bringing in Wrought Plate to be Coined, and the Charge of Recoining, and
shall not be diverted to any other Use.

CXX. Provided, That if this Act raise more than 125000 l. clear, then the
Overplus shall be brought into the Exchequer, and not disposed of but by
Authority of Parliament.

CXXI. After 25 Mar. 1697. no persons shall use any White Linen Rags, for
making of Brown or Course Paper, but only for Writing or Printing Paper, under
the penalty of 5 l.

CXXII. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 20. Enacted, That the Subsidy of Tunnage and
Poundage, etc. granted anno 12. Car. 2. to the said King for Life, and
continued anno 6 W. 3. for Five Years, from 26 December. 1694. be continued to 1
Aug. 1706. And that the Acts made anno 12 and 14 Car. 2. relating to the
Customs; and the Act ann. 22. Car. 2. relating to Tillage and Breed of Cattle;
and the Acts anno 25 Car. 2. for taking off Aliens Duties, and relating to the
Greenland, Eastland and Plantation Trades; and the Act anno 1 Jac. 2. for
improvement of Tillage, and all the Clauses therein, or in the Act anno 6 W. 3.
relating to the Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, be of full Force and Effect
till the said 1 Aug. 1706.

CXXIII. That the Duties upon Wines and Vinegar, granted 1 Jam. 2. for Eight
Years, and since continued by several Acts to 29 September. 1701. be further
continued till 1 Aug. 1706.

CXXIV. That the Duties on Tobacco, granted anno 1 Jac. 2. for eight Years, and
since continued by several Acts to 29 September. 1701. be further continued till
the said 1 Aug. 1706. under the Rules and Directions relating thereunto, in the
Act anno 7 and 8 W. 3.

CXXV. That the Additional Impositions upon East India and other Goods, granted
anno 2 W. and M. and since continued by several Acts to 29 Sep. 1701. be
further continued till the said 1 Aug. 1706. under the Directions of the said
Act, ann. 2 W. and M. not otherwise altered or provided for by any subsequent
Acts now in being.

CXXVI. That the Additional Impositions on several Goods and Merchandises
granted ann. 4 and 5 W. and M. for four years, be continued to the said 1 Aug.
1706. under the Rules of the said Act, subject to the Exceptions and Provisions
in this present Act, viz. That the Additional Duty of 20 s. per Tun for Lapis
Calaminaris exported, be only 2 s. And that Barr-Iron unwrought, or Slit or
Hammered Rod-Iron, imported from Ireland (other than Swedish or Foreign Iron)
be discharged of the Impositions laid on the same by this or the said Act, 4
and 5 W. and M. And that the Alterations made by any other Acts in being,
touching the said Impositions, be observed.

CXXVII. That the Duties on Vellum, Parchment and Paper, Granted ann. 5. and 6
W. and M. for four years, from 28 Jun. 1694. be continued till 1 Aug. 1706.
under the Rules of the said Act, except where altered by any other Act.

CXXVIII. That the Duties on Marriages, Births and Burials, etc. granted ann. 6
and 7 W. 3. for 5 years, from 1 May, 1695. be continued till the said 1 Aug.
1706. under the Rules of the said Act.

CXXIX. And that the Duties on Houses, granted 7 and 8 W. 3. for seven years,
from 25 March, 1696. be continued till the said 1 Aug. 1706. under the Rules of
the said Act.

CXXX. His Majesty may constitute Surveyors or Inspectors of the said Duties on
Marriages, Births and Burials, and upon Houses and Windows, who shall certify
the Neglects or Failures in the Assessments of those Duties to the
Commissioners, that so all persons may be duly Assessed accordingly.

CXXXI. That the Duties on Batchelors and Widowers, who are Servants in
Husbandry, be paid by the Master or Mistress, and deducted out of their Wages.
That Houses inhabited by two or more Families, be charged as if Inhabited by
one Family only. That every Edifice in the Inns of Court or Chancery, be
charged as an entire House, according to their several Tenures or Occupations.
And that every House left to the care of any Person or Servant, be charged as
an Inhabited House.

CXXXII. And for restoring of Credit, etc. Enacted, That the present Stock of
the Bank of England be enlarged by new Subscriptions of Natives. Foreigners or
others: But that before such Enlargement, and before the Twenty fourth of July,
1697. the said Stock shall be computed by seven of the present Members, and
seven of the new Subscribers, or in Default thereof by the Lord Keeper, at any
time before 24 Aug. 1697. And if the clear Stock amount not to 1200000 l. the
old Members to make it up in Talleys, Orders, Bank Bills or Notes; but if it
exceed 1200000 l. then the Surplus to be divided among the said old Members.

CXXXIII. Seven or more of the Commissioners appointed by his Majesty for that
purpose, shall take such new Subscriptions before 24 Jun. 1697. in Books to be
provided before 2 Apr. 1697. and in such convenient House or Houses in London
and Westminster, as they shall provide, and give public notice of.

CXXXIV. Four Fifths of each particular Subscription, shall be at the time of
Subscribing answered by Talleys or Orders upon the first, third or fourth Aids
of 4 s. per pound; the Quarterly Poll; three fourths of the Customs; the Salt
Act; two thirds of the Additional Excise; the Additional Impositions; the
Parchment Act; the 300000 l. per ann. on Tunnage and Poundage; the Duties on
Marriages, Births and Burials, etc. on Wines, Vinegar and Tobacco, etc. on
Joint. Stocks, etc. on Low Wines, etc. on the 6000 l. per Week out of the
Excise, or the 600 l. per Week out of the Post Office; and the other fifth part
in Bank Bills or Notes.

CXXXV. After 24 Jun. 1697. Interest of Eight per Cent. per Ann. shall be
allowed for the Talleys and Orders so subscribed, out of the Funds or
Provisions granted by this Act.

CXXXVI. The Interest payable to the Bank upon so many Talleys or Orders as the
Bank is already possessed of, whereof the principal shall be equal to the said
Fifth part subscribed in Bank Bills or Notes, shall be likewise augmented to
Eight per Cent. per ann. after the said 24 June.

CXXXVII. And the said new Subscribers shall after the said 24 June, be Members
of, and united to the present Bank of England, by the Name of the Governor and
Company of the Bank of England, with perpetual Succession, and a Common Seal,
etc.

CXXXVIII. Provided, That upon twelve months notice after 1 Aug. 1710. upon
repayment by Parliament to the said Bank, the 1200000 l. mentioned in the Act
for granting several Rates upon Tunnage, etc. and all Arrears of the 100000 l.
per ann. and all the Principal and Interest which shall be due to the said Bank
upon Talleys, etc. then the said Bank to cease and determine. But that during
the continuance of this Bank, no other Bank shall be crected or permitted by
Act of Parliament.

CXXXIX. The Interest due on Talleys and Orders subscribed into the Bank, shall
be accepted as so much Principal Money.

CXL. The said Bank may borrow or give security for by Bills (over and above
the 1200000 l. to which they were at first limited) any Sum, not exceeding the
Sum subscribed, under an Obligation of paying the said Bills in Money upon
demand; and in default thereof, the said Bills to be paid at the Exchequer out
of the first Money due unto the Bank, other than the Fund of 100000 l. per ann.
But that these Bills shall be distinguished from the Debts contained within the
said 1200000 l.

CXLI. The Capital Stock and Fund of the said Bank, shall be exempt from Taxes.

CXLII. After the completing of the said Subscriptions, the Interest of all
Talleys and Orders subscribed, together with the said 100000 l. per ann. shall
be applied to the use of the Bank, proportionably to each Members Share therein.

CXLIII. After 25 Mar. 1697 the Stock of the said Bank shall be accounted a
Personal and not a Real Estate, and descend accordingly: And no Bank Stock
shall be sold without Registring the Contract thereof at the Bank within seven
days, and actually transferring it within fourteen days.

CXLIV. No Act of the Bank shall forfeit the Stock thereof, provided they pay
their Debts And it shall be Felony to counterfeit the common Seal of the said
Bank, or any sealed Bank Bill, or any Bank Note, or alter or erase such Bills
or Notes.

CXLV. The Office of the Exchequer shall keep distinct Accounts of all Moneys
appropriated or due to the said Bank, either upon the Fund of 100000 l. per
Annum, or any other Parliamentary Funds, or for Talleys belonging to the said
Bank; and shall duly Direct, Record and make Payment thereof, under Penalty of
loss of Place, etc.

CXLVI. The Moneys arising by the continuation of the Subsidy of Tunnage and
Poundage, etc. by Wines, Vinegar and Tobacco, etc. by the Additional
Impositions on Goods and Merchandises, by Vellum, Parchment and Paper, by
Marriages, Births and Burials, etc. and by the Duties on Houses, from the times
the said Duties are severally continued, as aforesaid, till 1 Aug. 1706. And by
the surplus of the said Duties on Wine, Vinegar and Tobacco, etc. over and
above the 1500000 l. Credit given thereupon, and the Interest thereof arising
by the Act continued till the said 29 Sept. 1701. And also on Houses, (after
the repayment of 7382 l. 11 s. 4 d. borrowed thereon, and the Interest thereof;
And after that, the Bills Signed at the Mints for 6 d. per oz. upon Plate
brought in between 4 May, 1696. and 4 Nov. 1696) arising by the Act granted for
seven years from 25 Mar. 1696. And upon Salt, Glass-Wares, etc. (after the
repayment of 1724000 l. borrowed thereon, and the Interest thereof) arising by
the Act Anno 7 and 8 W. 3. shall be the General Fund for making good the
particular Funds or Deficiencies in this Act expressed, and shall be
appropriated and applied accordingly.

CXLVII And the Moneys arising by the said General Fund, before 28 Jun. School.
as well for the Duties on Houses (after the said 7382 l. 11 s. 4 d. and the
Interest thereof, and the 6 d. per oz. for Silver is satisfied) as for the said
Additional Duties on Goods and Merchandises continued from ult. Febr. 1696.
shall be applied toward Interest due to the Bank of England, or others, for
Loans upon the First, Third and Fourth 4 s. Aids; the Quarterly Poll; three
Fourths of the Customs; and two Thirds of the Additional Excise, and upon the
Additional Impositions, ending 1 Mar. 1696. And out of the same Moneys the Bank
shall receive so much as will make their part of the Interest 8 l. per Cent.
for all their Talleys and Orders.

CXLVIII. Provided, That if the said Money fall short, a proportionable part,
so far as it will extend, shall be applied to the Interest upon each of those
Funds: And if there be an Overplus, the same to go toward the principal Moneys
upon each of those Funds proportionably.

CXLIX. And the Moneys arising by the said General Fund after 28 Jun. School. as
well by the said Duties on Houses, and Additional Impositions, as at any time
or times for the said Duties on Vellum, Parchment and Paper, continued from 28
Jun. School. to 1 Aug. 1706. And for Tunnage and Poundage, etc. continued from 25
Dec. 1699 to 1 Aug. 1706. And for Marriages, Births and Burials, etc. continued
from 1 May, 1700. to 1 Aug. 1706. And for Wines, Vinegar and Tobacco, etc.
continued from 28 Sept. 1701. to 1 Aug. 1706. And by the said surplus on Wines,
Vinegar and Tobacco, etc. and on Salt, Glass Wares, etc. shall be applied
toward Principal and Interest of the said First, Third and Fourth Aids of 4 s.
per pound; the Quarterly Poll; the three Fourths of the Customs; the Duties on
Salt, etc. the two Thirds of the Additional Excise; the Additional Impositions;
the Duties on Vellum, Paper and Parchment; on Marriages, Births and Burials,
etc. on Wines, Vinegar and Tobacco, etc. and the 300000 l. per Annum, out of
Tunnage and Poundage, in proportion to the respective Deficiencies, as computed
in this Act.

CL. And by 26 July, School. and thenceforth every Twenty eight days, an account
shall be made up at the Treasury, of all the Moneys brought in, applicable to
the said deficient Funds, which shall be applied proportionably as aforesaid,
as well to the Bank of England, as other persons entitled to Principal and
Interest thereon: And that out of the said General Fund, the Interest due to
the Bank shall be made up 8 l. per Cent.

CLI. Provided, That where any Revenue is already appropriated by Parliament
for repayments in course, the same shall be paid accordingly; But that the new
Funds in this Act shall be applied as hereby prescribed.

CLII. And in case of Judgment of Forfeiture given against the said Bank, the
yearly Payments out of the Exchequer, and all the Estate belonging to the said
Bank, shall be vested for three Years in twenty four persons, or Trustees,
chosen by the Bank, who shall have full power to receive the Moneys due unto
the said Bank, as if no such Judgment had been given, and to pay and discharge
the Debts due at the time of such Judgment: After which the surplus shall be
divided amongst the several Members: And then the said yearly payments shall be
vested in the particular Members, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
in proportion to a List thereof to be made up by the said Trustees, and shall
be Assignable.

CLIII. The said Bank may employ a Clerk to take Docquets of any Extents,
Judgments, etc. in any the Offices of Record at Westminster, paying as for a
Search only.

CLIV. No Member of the said bank, shall be adjudged a Bankrupt by reason of
his Stock in the said Bank, nor the said Stock be subject to any Foreign
Attachment.

CLV. The Moneys received out of the Exchequer for the said Bank, shall once in
every four Months be divided among the Members proportionably, for their
particular use and behoof only.

CLVI. Provided, That the Debts of the said Bank shall never exceed their
Capital Stock, under Penalty of subjecting the Overplus of their particular
Shares and Dividends so received, to satisfy the said Debts.

CLVII. If at the end of one year after 24 Jun. 1697. the said Funds for
Interest shall appear insufficient, they shall be made up out of such Aids,
etc. as shall be granted the then next Session of Parliament, and so in any
succeeding Year.

CLVIII. And if upon 1 Aug. 1706. or within three Months after, the Produce of
the several Aids, etc. shall not be sufficient to discharge the Principal and
Interest intended to be discharged by this Act, then the same shall be supplied
out of such Aids, etc. as shall be granted the then next Session of Parliament.

CLIX. The present Governor, Deputy Governor and Directors of the Bank, shall
continue till 24 June, 1697. and till others be chosen, which shall be before
24 July, 1697. And those new Chosen to continue till 25 Mar. School. But in that
and all future Elections, not above Two Thirds of the Directors of the
preceding Year to be chosen.

CLX. After 25 Mar. 1697. and till 25 Dec. 1699. there shall be paid for Salt,
over and above all other Duties already payable, the Rates following, viz. for
every Gallon of Salt imported 2 d. And for every Gallon of Salt or Rock Salt
made at the Salt-Works, 1 d. to be Collected and Answered, pursuant to the
Rules and Directions of the Act, An 5 and 6 W. and M. touching the Duty upon
Salt; and the Act, An. 7 and 8 W. 3. for continuing the said Duty. But with an
Allowance upon Exportation for every Cask of Pilchards or Scads of 50 Gallons,
8 s every Barrel of White Herrings 20 d. of Red Herrings 16 d. of Salmon 3 s. 4
d. and every hundred of Cod-fish, Ling or Hake 10 s. over and above all former
Allowances, with a Drawback of the Duty for all Exported Salt.

CLXI. This Duty upon Salt, shall be appropriated (with the said other Duties)
to payment of Interest due before 25 December. 1699. to the Bank or others, upon
the deficient Funds, and the overplus toward the Principal.

CLXII. For Five Years, after 10 June 1697. or before the end of the then next
Session of Parliament, no person shall give or take directly or indirectly, for
any Talley or Order above Six per Cent. more than the Interest thereof, under
Penalty of treble the value of the Principal, and to suffer as an Extortioner.

CLXIII. And after the said 10 June, 1697. no Orders or Talleys shall be
Transferred but by Writing Signed and Registered, and Affidavit made (if payable
by Order at the Exchequer) before the Auditor of the Exchequer or Clerk of the
Pells; or if payable by Talley of Pro at the Excise Office, Post Office, or
other Public Office, then before one or more Commissioners of Excise, or
Postmasters General, or other Chief Officers in such Public Office; that no
Allowance whatsoever exceeding the Interest and Six per Cent. as aforesaid,
has been taken or agreed to be taken for such Assignment: Which Assignments
and Affidavits shall be Made, Registered, Administered and Noted gratis.

CLXIV. And every Broker or Solicitor who shall after the said 10 June take
above 2 s. 6 d. for the Brokage of One hundred pounds, shall forfeit Twenty
pounds; and contracting for any Praemium contrary to this Act, shall forfeit
Five hundred pounds, and suffer as an Extortioner

CLXV. But persons having actually bought Orders of Loan or Talleys before the
said 10 June, and shall make Oath thereof, shall not be obliged to take the
Oath touching Praemium.

CLXVI. The Bills of Credit authorized to be issued this present Session of
Parliament, shall be received and taken, not only by the Receivers or
Collectors of Taxes granted, or to be granted for the War this Year 1697. but
be Current to the Commissioners, Receivers or Collectors of any Tax or Supply
granted, or to be granted this present Session, and also at the Exchequer: And
that there shall be an Allowance upon the said Bills of 5 d. a day for every
hundred pounds till payment thereof; at which time the person so answering the
same to his Majesty, shall put to his Name and Day of the Month.

CLXVII. And the said Bills are not to be Cancelled, except by the Tellers of
the Exchequer, but as they are issued out, are to be Signed and Dated toties
quoties.

CLXVIII. And in case any of the said Bills should be refused, the
Commissioners of the Treasury may Contract with any persons to advance ready
Money for Exchanging and Circulating the said Bills, upon such Security as
shall be agreed on, and a further Reward, not exceeding Ten per Cent. per Ann.
And the Interest Money shall be paid to such Contractors out of the Supplies
granted for the War for Ann. 1697.

CLXIX. Provided, That till the said Bills for 1500000 l. can be exchanged for
Ready Money, they shall be current only for the Taxes granted for the War for
Ann. 1697. exclusive of the 3 s. Aid; but afterward for all Taxes or other
Payments to his Majesty.

CLXX. All the present Governors of any English Plantations, shall before 25
March, School. (and the future Governors within six months after their Entrance
upon their Governments) take the Oath appointed in the Act, An. 7 and 8 W. 3.
to do their utmost that the Acts relating to Shipping, Navigation, Trade and
the Plantations, made An 12 and 15 Car. 2. and 7 and 8 W. 3. be punctually
observed.

CLXXI. The Sum of 3280 l. 8 s. 9 d. Received in Hammered Money by Ralph
Williamson, Receiver General of the 4 s. Aid in the Counties of York, Durham
and Northumberland, and by him deposited in the Exchequer, shall be received by
the Tellers there, and a Discharge passed for the same.

CLXXII. After 1 May, 1697. any Tobacco Pipe Maker, upon Drawing his Tobacco
Pipes, finding then unfit for Sale, may (on Notice to the Officer in that
behalf) reburn the same, and then pay the Duty thereon Established by the Act,
An. 7 and 8 W. 3.

CLXXIII. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3 cap. 21. For three years from 20 Apr. 1697. there
shall be paid to his Majesty for all Leather Tanned, Tawed, Dressed or Made in
this Kingdom, or Imported (over and above all Duties already payable) a Duty of
15 l. per Cent. of the true value of such Leather, made of any Hides, Skins, or
pieces of Hides or Skins of any Beasts or Creatures whatsoever; to be answered
by the Tanners, Makers, Dressers or Importers.

CLXXIV. The Duties on Foreign Imported Leather, Hides, etc. Manufactured or
not, shall be paid by the Importers in ready Money, at the Entry, and before
the Landing of the same, under penalty of forfeiting such Leather, etc. or the
value thereof.

CLXXV. The said Duty shall be under the Management of the Commissioners of the
Customs, and the Moneys arising thereby, shall be paid into the Exchequer
distinct from all other Moneys. The value of such Leather or Commodities shall
be esteemed upon the Oath of the Merchant or Importer, in such manner as in
Goods ad valorem.

CLXXVI. All chief Magistrates of Cities and Towns, Lords of Liberties, Fairs
and Markets, Masters and Wardens of Companies concerned, and all Tanners,
Curriers, Shoemakers and other Artificers and persons concerned in the Act,
Anno 1 Jac. 1. touching the true and well Tanning, Currying and Working of
Leather, and the buying and selling the same, etc. shall duly execute the said
Statute under the penalties thereof.

CLXXVII. His Majesty, or the Treasury, may appoint Commissioners or Surveyors
for the said Duties, who may substitute Deputies or Inferior Officers under
them.

CLXXVIII. The value of all Imported Leather shall be so much as the same is
worth to be sold for in London, without any Allowance for the Duties charged
thereupon.

CLXXIX. And the value of all Leather Tanned, Tawed, Made or Dressed, shall be
what the same is worth to be sold for at the next Market, without respect to
the Duty.

CLXXX. All Tanners, Bazil-Tanners, Curriers, Tawers, Makers or Dressers of
Leather, shall before 20 May, 1697. give Notice in Writing to the proper
Officer at the next Market Town, of every Tan-house, Workhouse or Place by them
used, and the Number of Pits or Fats therein; And from time to time, during the
continuance of this Act, shall give like Notice of their respective Names and
Places of Abode, Yards and Workhouses, used or intended to be used by them,
before they make use thereof, under penalty of 50 l.

CLXXXI. And no place is to be made use of for Drying of Leather, or making it
fit for Sale, but such as shall have been so notified to the proper Officer to
be the usual place for the same.

CLXXXII. And the said Officers are to be permitted to take an Account of the
Number and Quality of all Hides, Skins or Pieces, which after 20 Apr. 1697.
shall be taken out of the Wooze, Mill or Liquor, to be Dried, etc. And the
Tanners, etc. are within three days after the taking out thereof, and before
the carrying away of the same from the place of Drying, to make a true Entry
thereof with the proper Officer, and shall not carry the same away without a
Permission in Writing from such Officer, or giving him three days Notice: Which
Permission to be gratis, and such Notice not to be sent further than to the
next Market.

CLXXXIII. The proper Officers are Empowered at seasonable times to enter into
any Tan-yard, Workhouse, Warehouse, etc. to take Notice of the quantities of
Leather taken out of the Woozes, etc. and not to be refused such entrance under
penalty of 5 l.

CLXXXIV. If any Tanner, etc. endeavor to defraud his Majesty of any of the
said Duty, by using any private Tan-yard, etc. or not making due Entries, or
carrying away without such Permission or Notice, or shall fraudulently hide or
conceal any Leather, etc. he shall forfeit 20 l. and the Leather so concealed,
not entered, or unlawfully carried away, shall be forfeited also: But no Fee or
Reward shall be taken for such Entries, Accounts, Permissions or Certificates.

CLXXXV. After 20 Apr. 1697. No Leather, for which the Duty ought to be paid,
shall be sold, exchanged, or parted with, but in some open Fair or Market,
where the same shall be Entered particularly, and the true value thereof, with
the proper Officer, before its Delivery.

CLXXXVI. And the Duty shall thereupon be paid in ready Money to the Collector,
who shall deliver back a Copy of such Entry, with an Acquittance for the Moneys
so received.

CLXXXVII. Upon controversy touching the value of any such Leather, etc. so
sold or agreed for, The said Officer, if he think his Majesty apparently
defrauded in the value, so Registered, may take it at the Price for his
Majesty's Use, paying down ready Money, and 2 s. per l. over.

CLXXXVIII. No Buyer or Contractor for such Leather, shall carry away the same,
before it be so Entered and the Duties paid.

CLXXXIX. If any Tanner, etc. shall sell, exchange or part with any Leather,
otherwise than according to this Act, or if any Buyer or Contractor shall carry
away the same, before the value be Registered, and the Duty satisfied, they
shall forfeit 40 l. respectively, and the said Leather shall be also forfeited
and seized.

CXC. In case of Seizing any such Leather, and an Information Laid, or
Complaint made within Fifteen days, before two of the Justices of the Peace,
such Justices may hear and determine the same upon Oath, Reserving an Appeal to
the Justices at the next General Quarter Sessions, to hear and determine the
same finally.

CXCI. Every Tanner, etc. shall once in three Months Account with the proper
Officer, for all the Hides, etc. taken out of the Wooze, etc. according to the
Entries thereof, and Discharge the same by Leather sold and paid for, or by
Leather remaining not carried out, or by Leather carried to Market by
Permission and unsold; Which Account every such Tanner, etc. is to make upon
Demand, under penalty of 20 l. subject to the examination of the proper
Officer, and the penalties of defrauding.

CXCII. Provided that Foreign Raw Hides or Skins (of Negro Dress) shall not pay
the Duty till Tanned, Tawed, Dressed or Made into Leather.

CXCIII. All Collarmakers, Glovers, Bridlecutters and others, who Taw or Make
Leather in oil, Allom or Salt, and Cut and Make the same into Wares, are
Accounted Tawers or Makers of Leather within this Act. But shall not be obliged
to carry such Wares to Market, but forthwith to enter such Leather, with the
proper Officer, before it be made into Wares, and to make Oath of the value
thereof, and pay the Duty for the same.

CXCIV. But if they shall make such Leather into Wares before Entry thereof,
and the Duty paid, or Sell any such Leather, and not first make the same into
Wares, they shall forfeit for every such Offense 5 l.

CXCV. Every Tanner, Leather Dresser, Currier, Leatherseller, Shoemaker,
Coachmaker, Collarmaker, Bridlecutter, Sadler, and other Maker, Dresser,
Merchant, Dealer or Worker in Leather, shall pay 12 l. 10 s. per Cent. for the
Stock of Leather in their Possession, or elsewhere to their Use, the said 20
April, not made into Wares, to be answered within Three Months after the said
20 April.

CXCVI. And to that end shall deliver a Particular of the same in Writing
Signed to the proper Officer; who may enter into any Shops, Warehouses, etc. to
take an Account thereof, and view the same; and shall be permitted so to do,
under penalty of 20 l. And the Officer being satisfied of the quantity and
value of such Stock not made into Wares, is to Collect the said Duty
accordingly, giving Acquittances gratis; But if the said Duty be not paid
within three Months, nor in that time Secured to be paid within three Months
after, then to Levy the same by Distress.

CXCVII. Provided that if such Duty be paid within three Months, an Allowance
be made for Prompt Payment, after the Rate of 10 per Cent. per Annum; And upon
controversy, such Stock to be valued by the Oath of the Owner, made in Writing
before a Justice of Peace, and delivered to the Officer, who (if he thinks the
King apparently defrauded) may take the same to his Masesties Use at the value
specified, paying down ready Money.

CXCVIII. Every person neglecting to give in such a Particular by the 1 May,
1697. or fraudulently omitting or carrying away any of the said Stock, before
the Duty be paid or secured, shall forfeit 20 l. and the said Stock not given
in, or fraudulently omitted or concealed, or carried away, shall be also
forfeited and seized.

CXCIX. Upon Exporting any such Leather, Boots or Shoes, or other made Ware,
and Giving Security not to Reland the same in this Kingdom, the Customer or
Collector shall give the Exporter a Certificate thereof.

CC. And upon producing such Certificate for any Hides, Backs or Buts of
Leather to the Collector who Received the said Duties, and proving upon Oath
that such Goods so Exported, are the same for which the said Duties were paid;
the Collector or Commissioners for the said Duty on Leather, shall repay the
Exporter two thirds of the said Duty.

CCI. And upon a like Certificate for any Boots, Shoes, or other made Ware
Exported, and like proof of payment of the Duty for the Leather so converted
into Boots, Shoes, etc. the Exporter to be repaid 5 per Cent. ad Valorem, to be
affirmed by the Oath of the Exporter.

CCII. But upon Relanding any of the said Goods in England, so Shipped for
Exportation, the same and Treble the value thereof shall be forfeited.

CCIII. For Discharging the Sum of 140000 l. for making good the Annuities
charged upon the late Duties of Tunnage, and a further Sum of 140000 l. for
making good the Annuities charged on the Duties on Salt, any persons, Natives
or Foreigners, having an Estate for one Life in an Annuity of 14 l. per Annum,
Purchased for 100 l upon the Acts mentioned in the Act for Annuities, Anno 6
and 7 W. 3. may before 24 June, 1697. pay Four Years Purchase, or Fifty six
Pounds more for changing or converting such single Life, into a certain Term,
for the Residue of 96 Years, from 25 Jan. 1695. or for a further Interest in
the said 96 Years, after the single Life, and in the same proportion for higher
or larger Annuities.

CCIV. And if the persons Entitled to such Annuities for Life, do not before
the said 24 June, change the same into a Term certain, or for a future
Interest, then any other persons may before 29 Sept. 1697. Purchase the
Remaining Term, after the Life in being, at the same rate of Four Years
Purchase, or Fifty six Pounds for each 14 l. per Annum.

CCV. Provided, That such persons as are Entitled to any Arrears, between 17
May, 1696. and 17 May, 1697. upon the Annuities charged on the said Duties on
Tunnage or Salt, and shall upon their Orders, Talleys or Lottery Tickets for
such Arrears, Discharge his Majesty so much as will Purchase such further
Interest or Term, as aforesaid, shall thereupon be Entitled to such Annuities,
so Purchased.

CCVI. And the Directions of the said former Act, for the Establishing any
matter relating to such Annuities, shall be Revived and Observed.

CCVII. The Moneys arising by the Purchase of such further Estates in the said
Annuities, shall go to the payment of the Arrears of Annuities, charged on the
Five Sevenths and Two Sevenths of the Tunnage Duties, and on the Salt Duties,
Incurred between 17 May, 1696. and 17 May, 1697. proportionably.

CCVIII. All the clear Moneys arising by the said Duties on Leather, shall be
Appropriated to pay off the Remainder of 564700 l. yet unpaid, Lent on Credit
of the Act, Anno 6 and 7 W. 3. for Granting certain Duties on Glass Wares,
Stone and Earthen Bottles, Coals and Culm, and the Interest thereof; and shall
be Weekly brought into the Exchequer for that purpose, and not Diverted to any
other Use.

CCIX. And so much of the said Sum of 564700 l. and Interest, as the said
Duties on Leather for Three Years, shall fall short of, shall be paid to the
Lenders thereof, out of any the next Aids which shall be Granted in Parliament,
after the said Three Years; and so much of the 280000 l. as the said
Contributions for Annuities shall fall short of, shall be paid unto the
respective Proprietors out of the First Aids to be Granted in Parliament, after
29 Sept. 1697.

CCX. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap 25. Enacted, That from the 24th of June, 1697.
until the 25th of June, School. there shall be paid to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, by every Hawker, Pedlar, Petty Chapman, or other Trading Person
going from Town to Town, or to other Men's Houses within England, Wales, or Town
of Berwick, carrying to sell or exposing to sale any Goods, Wares or
Merchandises, a Duty of 4 l. and every person so Traveling with a Horse, Ass,
or Mule, or other Beast bearing or drawing Burden, shall pay the Sum of 4 l.
during the foresaid time, for every Horse, Ass, or Beast he or she shall Travel
with, over and above the first mentioned 4 l.

CCXI. Every Pedlar, Hawker, or other Traveling person so Traveling, as
aforesaid, shall, before the 24th of June, 1697. deliver to the Commissioners
for Transportation, or to the persons deputed by them, a Note in Writing under
his or her Hand, or under the Hand of some person by him or her Authorized, in
what manner he or she will Travel, and Trade, whether on foot, or with one or
more Horse, Ass, etc. for which the Party shall pay to the said Commissioners,
or Deputies, one moiety of the Duty by this Act payable for the same, and give
Security by Bond, with one or more Sureties, to be taken in his Majesty's Name,
for the payment of the other Moiety, at the end of Six Calendar Months, unless
the Party shall choose to pay it down, in which case 2 s. in the Pound shall be
allowed for Prompt Payment, and thereupon a License shall be Granted to him or
her so to Travel or Trade, by two or more of the said Commissioners for
Transportation.

CCXII. If any such Hawker, etc. after the 24th of June, 1697. be found
Trading, as aforesaid, without, or contrary to such License, such person shall,
for every such Offense, Forfeit 12 l. one moiety to the Informer, the other to
the Poor of the Parish where such Offender shall be discovered. And every
person so Trading, who, upon demand, shall refuse to show to any Justice of the
Peace, Mayor, Constable or other Officer of the Peace, his or her License for
so Trading, shall Forfeit 5 l. to the Churchwardens for the Poor of the Parish
where such demand shall be made, and for Non-payment, shall suffer as a Common
Vagrant, and be committed to the House of Correction.

CCXIII. The said Commissioners, or any two of them, upon the Terms, and
Receipt, and Security given, as aforesaid, shall grant a License to every
Hawker, etc. for him or her self alone, or with one or more Horses, Asses, etc.
as the case shall require, for which License they shall take 1 s. unless such
Hawker, etc. travels with Horse, Ass, etc. and then 2 s. and no more. The said
Commissioners shall keep a distinct Account of the Duties arising by this Act,
and pay the same into the Exchequer Weekly on the Wednesday (unless a Holiday)
under the penalties which the Officers of the Exchequer herein after mentioned,
shall be liable unto. Which Money so paid in shall be applied to the paying the
Interest of the 330769 l. 10 s. 7 d. in such manner as by the Act 6 and 7 W. 3.
( cap. 7.) is appointed.

CCXIV. Whoever shall Forge or Counterfeit any License, or Travel with such,
shall Forfeit 50 l. one moiety to the King, the other to the Prosecutor, to be
Recovered by Action of Debt, etc. in any of the Kings Courts of Record at
Westminster, in which no Essoin, etc. to be allowed, and to be subject besides
to the Pains and Penalty of Forgery.

CCXV. Persons sued or troubled for putting this Act in Execution, may plead
the General Issue and give the Special Matter in Evidence, and if the Plaintiff
shall be Nonsuited, or Judgment be given against him, the Defendant shall have
Treble Costs.

CCXVI. Constables or other Officers refusing or neglecting upon due Notice, to
Aid or Assist in the Execution of this Act, every such Officer, being thereof
Convicted before any Justice of Peace, shall Forfeit 40 s. to be levied by
Distress and Sale of Goods, One moiety to the poor of the Parish, the other to
the Informer.

CCXVII. Any person may seize and detain any Hawker, etc. till such time as he
or she shall produce a License, if they have any, if not, till they give Notice
to the Constable, or some other Parish Officer, who shall carry such Offender
before a Justice of Peace, who upon Confession or due Proof of Trading, and no
License produced, shall by Warrant under his Hand and Seal, cause the said Sum
of 12 l. to be levied out of the Offenders Goods and Wares, with reasonable
Charges for taking the Distress.

CCXVIII. This Act shall not extend to prohibit any person from selling Acts of
Parliament, Forms of Prayer, Proclamations, Gazettes, Licensed Almanacks, or
other Licensed Papers, or Fish, Fruit or Victuals, or hinder the Makers of any
Goods or Wares in England, Wales, or Town of Berwick, their Children, Servants
or Agents, from carrying abroad and selling the same in any public Fair or
Market, or elsewhere, nor any Tinker, Cooper, Glasier, Plummer, Harnessmenders,
or other person Trading in mending household Goods, from going about and
Carrying with them proper Materials for mending the same.

CCXIX. There shall be kept in the Office of the Auditor of the Receipts in the
Exchequer, one Book, in which all Moneys paid in, by virtue of this Act, shall
be entered apart.

CCXX. If any Officer of the Exchequer shall divert or misapply any Moneys
given by this Act, he shall Forfeit his Office, be incapable of any place of
Trust, and pay the treble value of any Sum so misapplied, to the Party grieved,
his Executors, etc. who will sue for the same by Action of Debt, etc. wherein
no Essoin, etc. And all Orders and Warrants for payment of Money, contrary to
the intent and meaning of this Act, shall be Void.

CCXXI. Nothing herein contained shall extend to hinder any Persons from
selling any sorts of Goods in any public Market or Fair, in England, Wales, or
Town of Berwick, but that they may do therein as they lawfully might have done
before the making of this Act.

CCXXII. On or before the first of August, 1697. the several Owners of the
Ships mentioned in the foresaid Act (6 and 7 W. 3. cap 7.) or such persons who
have parts and shares in the same, shall deliver in to the Commissioners for
Transportation, an Account of what Share, Part, or Interest in each Ship, he or
they, under whom they Claim, are possessed of, and if the same be not in the
first Proprietor, then the person claiming to give an Account, how and by what
means he came to the same, and so from time to time upon the Death or
Assignment of any person Entitled unto any part or Interest of the Money
intended to be raised by this or the foresaid Act, an Account shall be given
thereof to the said Commissioners.

CCXXIII. A Register of every persons Claim and Interest shall be made, and
kept in a Book to be provided by the said Commissioners; and for Registring
each persons Title a Fee of 1 s. shall be paid to the Clerk, and no more; and
no person shall receive any Moneys to be raised by this or the foresaid Act,
till he has delivered in to the said Commissioners, an Account of his Share
and Interest, which Register shall at all times be viewed without Fee.

CCXXIV. In case it happen that the Duties Granted upon Coffee, Tea, Chocolate
and Spice, by the foresaid Act, with the Duties to be raised by this Act, shall
amount to more than sufficient to pay the Interest at 5 per Cent. for the said
Principal Sum of 330769 l. 10 s. 7 d. then the Surplus shall remain in the
Exchequer, and not be disposed of otherwise than by Act of Parliament.

CCXXV. The Commissioners of the Treasury or Lord Treasurer for the time being,
may, out of the Money so raised, pay to the said Commissioners, their Clerks or
other persons, such Moneys as they shall reasonably deserve for their Service
in relation to this or the foresaid Act.

CCXXVI. This Act shall not extend or be construed to give any Power to any
Hawker, etc. to sell or expose any Wares or Merchandises in any City, Town
Corporate or Market Town within this Realm, otherwise than might have been done
before the making of this Act.

CCXXVII. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 8. All the Duties which have been, or
hereafter shall be paid into the Exchequer, by virtue of the Act made the last
Sessions of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for Granting to His Majesty certain
Duties upon Malt, Mum, Sweets, Cider and Perry, as well toward Carrying on the
War against France, as for the necessary Expenses of His Majesty's Household,
shall be applied to the Payment of the Loan of 200000 l. Borrowed thereupon,
with Interest for the same, or so much as remains due and unpaid thereof, and
to the Discharge of certain Bills and Tickets issued thereupon, with Interest
in the first Place, in such Course and Order as the said Act directs, and to no
other use whatsoever, until the said Loan and the said Bills and Tickets, with
Interest, shall be fully paid.

CCXXVIII. The Rules and Directions in an Act made 1 W. and M. Entitled, An
Act for a Grant to their Majesty's of an Aid of Two Shillings in the Pound for
One year, for the speedy Payment of Moneys thereby Granted, into the Exchequer,
by the Collectors and Receivers thereof, and for the Distribution and
Application thereof, and keeping distinct Accounts of the same, and the
Penalties, in case of Diversion of any Money thereby Appropriated, are hereby
revived, touching the Distribution of the Duties hereby Appropriated.

CCXXIX. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 10. Enacted, That the Sum of One Million
four hundred eighty four thousand and fifteen Pounds One Shilling Eleven Pence
three Farthings, be Levied and Paid to his Majesty, within the space of One
Year from 2 Febr. 1697. according to the Proportions on the several Cities,
Towns and Counties in the Act mentioned.

CCXXX. Toward the raising whereof, all persons having any Estate in ready
Money or Debts, Wares, Merchandises or other Chattels, except such Debts as
they do bona fide owe, and desperate Debts owing to them, and except Stock upon
Land and Household Goods, and Loans to his Majesty, shall pay 3 s. in the Pound
of the true yearly value for One year, that is to say, For every Hundred
Pounds, the Sum of 18 s. and so for a greater or lesser Sum.

CCXXXI. All persons having any public Office or Employment of Profit
(Military Officers in Muster or Pay in his Majesty's Guards, Garrisons or Navy
excepted) and their Agents, Clerks and Inferior Ministers, shall pay 3 s. in
the Pound for One year, out of the Fees or Profits of their Offices or
Employments.

CCXXXII. All Manors, Messuages, Lands and Tenements, and all Quarries, Mines,
Iron-works, Salt-works, Allom-works, all Parks, Chaces, Warrens, Woods,
Under-woods, Coppices, all Fishings, Tithes, Tolls, Annuities and other yearly
Profits and Hereditaments, and all Persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate,
Guilds and Fraternities, having any such Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments,
shall be Charged with as much equality as possible toward the Sums by this Act
imposed; which shall be Paid into the Exchequer by Four Quarterly Payments, the
first whereof to be upon 2 May, School.

CCXXXIII. The Landlords, Owners and Proprietors of such Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, may abate out of every Fee-farm Rent or other Annual Rent or
Payment, so much as the same shall by a just proportion amount unto.

CCXXXIV. For the more effectual putting this Act in execution, the several
Persons in the Act named shall be Commissioners; who shall meet together in
their several Districts, on or before 20 April, School. and afterward as often
as shall be necessary: and shall set down in Writing the Proportions to be paid
by every Division for making up the whole Sum; and may subdivide themselves so
as Two or more be appointed for each Division; but not to restrain the
Commissioners from Acting in any other part of the County or Place for which
they are nominated Commissioners.

CCXXXV. Which Commissioners at their General Meeting, shall give Lists to the
Receiver General, of those who are to act in each Division; which Commissioners
in their several Divisions shall cause the Proportions to be equally Assessed,
and shall direct their Precepts to such Inhabitants, etc. as they shall think
convenient to be Presenters and Assessors, requiring them to appear at a place
and time not exceeding Ten days, and shall then charge them with the Execution
of this Act: And if any persons, to whom such Precept is directed, shall absent
themselves, without lawful Excuse, or shall refuse to serve, they shall forfeit
a Sum not exceeding 5 l.

CCXXXVI. The Commissioners shall appoint Two or more of the most sufficient
Inhabitants of each Parish, etc. to be Assessors, and shall prefix them a day
and place to bring in their Assessments, who are to Assess the full Sum given
them in Charge, and bring in a Certificate thereof, with the Names of Two or
more able persons, living within the respective limits, to be Collectors, for
whom the Parish or Place shall be answerable.

CCXXXVII. Every Assessor, before he acts, shall take the Oaths appointed 1 W.
and M. to be Administered to them by Two or more of the Commissioners, and shall
deliver one Copy of their Assessment to the Commissioners, who shall Sign and
Seal Two Duplicates thereof, one to be delivered to the Collectors, the other
(in Parchment) to the Receiver General, containing the full Sum Assessed on
each Parish or Place; and shall transmit a like Duplicate to the Kings
Remembrancers Office, on or before 24 June, School. or within 20 days after, all
Appeals being first determined.

CCXXXVIII. The Collectors shall Levy the Rates so Assessed, and shall demand
the same of the Parties themselves, or at the place of their last abode, or
upon the premises charged, and shall pay the same to the Receiver General or
his Deputy, at such time and place as the Commissioners shall appoint, so as
the whole Sum for each Quarterly Payment be made according to the Act.

CCXXXIX. And the Receiver General is to give Notice of his Deputies to the
Commissioners within Ten days after the first General Meeting, and so within
Ten days after the death or removal of any Deputy; and the Receipt of such
Receiver General or his Deputies, shall be a Discharge to the Collectors, who
shall not be obliged to travel above Ten Miles from their Habitations.

CCXL. The Sum of 371003 l. 15 s. 6 d. for the first Quarterly Payment shall be
paid to the Receivers General on or before 2 May, School. And the like Sum for
the second Quarterly Payment on or before 2 Aug. School. The like Sum for the
third Quarterly Payment, on or before 2 Nov. School. And the Sum of 371003 l. 15
s. 5 d. three Farthings for the last Quarterly Payment, on or before 2 Feb.
School.

CCXLI. Every Receiver General within a Month after he shall have received the
full Sum charged on any Division for each particular Payment, shall give the
Commissioners a Receipt; which shall be a full Discharge for such particular
Payment; Which Receivers General shall within Twenty days after their Receipt,
pay the same into the Exchequer, and shall be Allowed 2 d. in the Pound for
what they shall so pay in.

CCXLII. The Collectors shall have 3 d. in the Pound for what they Collect and
Pay pursuant to the Act; And the Commissioners Clerks shall be allowed Three
Halfpence in the Pound for Writing the Assessments, Duplicates, etc.

CCXLIII. Persons refusing or neglecting to pay, the Collectors are to Levy the
Sum Assess'd by Distress; and having kept the same Four Days at the Owners
Charge, then to be Appraised and Sold, and the Overplus returned. And it shall
be Lawful to break open Houses in the day time, and by Warrant from Two
Commissioners, any Chest, etc. calling to assistance the Constables, etc. and
all Questions concerning Distresses shall be Determined by the Commissioners.

CCXLIV. Persons refusing to pay their Assessment by the space of four days
after demand, or conveying away their Goods (except a Peer or Peeress) shall be
committed to Goal, till Payment be made.

CCXLV. The Tenants are to pay the Tax, and deduct the same out of their Rents;
which the Landlords are required to allow.

CCXLVI. Tenants paying the Assessments, shall be discharged for so much; and
the Commissioners shall have power to settle Differences between Landlord and
Tenant, or others concerning the Tax.

CCXLVII. Persons over-rated, complaining to the Commissioners within six days
after Demand, may be relieved within ten days after Demand of the said
Assesment; and Appeals once determined to be final.

CCXLVIII. In case the Proportions set by this Act on any County, etc. shall
not be duly answered as first laid, the Commissioners are to cause new
Assessments to be made.

CCXLIX. Any person neglecting or refusing to do his Duty in the execution of
the Act, may be fined as the Commissioners shall think fit, not exceeding 20 l.
which Fine shall not be taken off but by consent of the Commissioners who
Imposed the same, but shall be paid into the Exchequer, and inserted in the
Duplicates.

CCL. Collectors not paying the Money they receive as the Act directs, are to
be imprisoned, and their Estates Real and Personal seized and sold for
satisfaction.

CCLI. The Commissioners are to examine, whether the Money Assess'd be duly
Collected and Returned to the Receivers General, and by them paid into the
Exchequer, and in case of failure, to cause the same to be forthwith levied and
paid.

CCLII. In case any Controversy arise about the Assesments which concerns any
Commissioners, the Commissioners concerned are to withdraw during the Debate,
and in default, the Commissioners present may set a Fine, not exceeding 20 l.

CCLIII. No Privileged Place or person, shall be Exempt from the Assessment;
but they and also all Fee-Farm, and other Rents and Payments issuing out of
Land, shall be Taxed and paid by the Tenants, who shall thereupon be kept
harmless.

CCLIV. This Act shall not extend to charge any College or Hall in the
Universities, the Colleges of Windsor, Eaton, Winton and Westminster; the
Corporation of Clergymens Sons, Bromley College, or any Hospital for the Sites
thereof, nor any Master, Fellow, Scholar, Reader, Officer or Minister of the
Universities, etc. nor Masters or Ushers of Schools for their Stipends, nor the
Houses or Lands of Christ's Hospital, St. Bartholomews, Bridewell, St. Thomas or
Bethlehem Hospital; or Mr. Asks Hospital at Hoxton, or the Charity of
Zechariah Jepson at Rippon, or of the said Corporation of Clergymens Sons, or
Bromley College, nor any other Hospital or Alms house, in respect only of Rents
for the immediate relief of the Poor therein.

CCLV. Nevertheless the Tenants of Lands or Houses belonging to Hospitals,
shall be rated for what such Houses and Lands are worth above the Rents
reserved; and the Tenants to Colleges, etc who by their Leases or Contracts are
to pay Taxes, shall not be discharged.

CCLVI. All Auditors and Receivers of Rents due to the King or Queen Dowager,
shall allow a Rate to be abated in proportion to the Tax on the Lands, etc. out
of which they are payable.

CCLVII. Persons inhabiting in London, or any other City or Town Corporate,
shall be Taxed in the Parish, or ward where they dwell.

CCLVIII. No Clause or Proviso in this Act, shall lessen the Sum appointed to
be levied by the Act. Nothing in this Act shall make void any Contracts between
Landlord or Tenant, or others, touching payment of Taxes.

CCLIX. All places shall be Assess'd in such County, Division or Place where
usually assess'd. Provided that West-Barnfeild Hundred, shall be Assess'd in
the Lath of Scray in Kent, Northmore Tything in the Hundred of Bampton in
Oxfordshire, Charthbury, Faller, and Finstock Tythings in the Hundred of
Chadlington, the Town and Parish of Leeds in Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Skyrack, and the Forest of Chute, where the same was Assess'd to the first 4 s.
Aid.

CCLX. If any Action be brought for any thing done in pursuance of this Act,
the Defendant may plead the General Issue, and give this Act, and the special
Matter in Evidence, and if the Plaintiff be Nonsuit, etc. the Defendant shall
recover treble Costs.

CCLXI. Where Lands or Houses are unoccupied, and no Distress found, Distress
may be made at any time after by the Collectors, Constable, or Tything Man, and
unless redeemed in four days, may be sold, rendering the Overplus to the Owner,
and distributed proportionably to the Parties who contributed to the Tax of the
said unoccupied Lands.

CCLXII. Where Wood-Lands are Assess'd, and no Distress can be had, the
Collectors, etc. by Warrant from the Commissioners, (at seasonable times of the
year) may cut down and sell so much Wood (Timber Trees excepted) as will pay
the Assessment.

CCLXIII. Where Tithes, Tolls, Profits of Markets, etc. are Taxed, and the same
not paid in fifteen days after demand, the Collectors, etc. by Warrant of the
Commissioners, may seize so much of the said Tithes, etc. as will pay the Tax.

CCLXIV. Receivers General returning any Persons into the Exchequer who have
paid the Tax, shall forfeit treble Damages to the Party grieved, and to his
Majesty double the Sum returned.

CCLXV. The Commissioners shall Assess each other for personal Estates, and
Offices, so as such personal Estate, and Office be within the limits of the
Commissioners who Tax the same: And the Commissioners shall also Assess the
Assessors.

CCLXVI. No person in any City, Borough, or Town Corporate, shall be compelled
to be an Assessor or Collector out of the limits thereof.

CCLXVII. The Tax on Houses where Foreign Ministers reside, shall be paid by
the Owner.

CCLXVIII. In all Extra-Parochial and Privileged places, the Commissioners
shall nominate Two persons in or near the said places to be Assessors, and
shall appoint one or more Collectors.

CCLXIX. The Commissioners shall not be liable to the Penalties in an Act 25
Car. 2. touching Popish Recusants.

CCLXX. No Commissioner shall act (unless it be in Administering Oaths) before
he take the Oaths, 1 W. and M. (chapter 6.) which any two of them may Administer to
any other Commissioner.

CCLXXI. Any Commissioner acting before he has taken the Oaths, shall forfeit
200 ^. to the King.

CCLXXII. Offices shall be rated and paid for, where the same are executed.

CCLXXIII. Offices in Chancery within the liberty of the Rolls, shall be there
Assessed.

CCLXXIV. Persons for personal Estates, and persons not being Householders,
shall be rated where resident at the execution of the Act; and persons out of
the Realm, shall be rated for personal Estate, where last resident within this
Realm.

CCLXXV. Any persons having Goods, etc. in any County (other than where he
lives) shall be rated in the County where the Goods are; and persons for Lands,
Tenements, etc. shall be rated where the said Lands, etc. lie.

CCLXXVI. Any persons in respect of several places of Residence, being doubly
Charged for Personal Estate, shall, upon Certificate and Oath thereof, be
discharged for so much as is so Certified

CCLXXVII. This Act shall not extend to Personal Estates in Scotland, Ireland,
Jersey or Guernsey.

CCLXXVIII. If any person by changing his Residence, or other Fraud, escape
being Taxed for Personal Estate, upon proof thereof he shall be Charged Treble.

CCLXXIX. Every Householder shall, upon demand, give an Account of his Lodgers
to the Assessors, under penalty of 5 l.

CCLXXX. Shares in the New-River-Water, Thames, Marybone or Hampsted Waters,
Offices of Insurance from Fire, Unequal or other Lights, and Stock in the
Kings-Printing-House, shall be Taxed 3 s. in the Pound; And the said Shares,
and all Companies of Merchants in London, shall be Assessed by the
Commissioners for London, and paid by the Governors, and the respective
Treasurers or Receivers.

CCLXXXI. Every Papist of the Age of 16 years or upwards, who shall not have
taken the Oaths required An. 1 W. and M. shall pay double Taxes, unless such
Papist within 10 days aster the first Meeting of the Commissioners do take the
same before two Commissioners.

CCLXXXII. Every person of the Age of 16 years or upward, refusing to take the
said Oaths, or neglecting to appear before the Commissioners, in Order to take
the same when Summoned, shall likewise pay double.

CCLXXXIII. Every Gentleman, or so reputed, who by the Act for the Quarterly
Poll, 3 W. and M. did or ought to have paid double, and does not voluntarily
appear before the Commissioners, within ten days after the first Meeting, and
take the said Oaths, shall likewise pay double.

CCLXXXIV. The Commissioners upon Information or Suspicion, shall Summon every
person Suspected, to Appear and take the said Oaths.

CCLXXXV. But Quakers instead of the Oaths, may make and subscribe the
Declaration of Fidelity, 1 W. and M. Where the Assessors neglect to make double
Assessments on Papists or others, for not taking the Oaths the Commissioners
shall cause it to be done.

CCLXXXVI. Where the Owners of Lands etc. are liable to be double charged, such
Owners only shall be so charged, and the Tenants Discharged, notwithstanding
any Covenant for Payment of Taxes.

CCLXXXVII. The Kings Bench-Prison, with its Lands, and the Rents and
Perquisites of the Marshal thereof; and also the Marshalsea-Prison, and Office,
and Perquisites of the Marshalsea-Court, shall be Assessed in the Parish of St.
George in Seuthwark.

CCLXXXVIII. The Waterworks in Southwark shall be Assessed by the
Commissioners and Assessors of Surrey; and the Water works in Westminster, by
the Commissioners and Assessors of Westminster.

CCLXXXIX. All persons, concerned are to use their utmost Endeavors for the
due Execution of the Act.

CCXC. No person shall be liable to the pound Rate, whose Lands, etc. are not
20 s. per Annum in the whole.

CCXCI. If any Collector shall keep the Money in his hands, or Pay any part
thereof, other than to the Receiver General or his Deputy, he shall Forfeit 20
l. And the Receiver General or his Deputy not Paying the same, as the Act
directs, he shall forfeit 500 l.

CCXCII. The Commissioners of the Treasury, etc. shall not divert the Payment
of the said Moneys into the Exchequer, nor shall the Officers of the Exchequer
strike any Talley of Pro, or Anticipation on the same, or any Teller, charge
himself therewith till actually received.

CCXCIII. No noli prosequi or other stay of Prosecution, shall be allowed in
any Suit against Offenders herein.

CCXCIV. The Commissioners are empowered to lessen the Assessment, on Proof
that the Lands, etc. are charged above 3 s. in the pound, and the Money so
abated, shall be Reassessed as they shall judge most equal, either on the whole
Hundred or Division, or on such part thereof, as shall appear to be
undercharged,

CCXCV. The Receivers General shall be answerable for their Deputies, and shall
nominate so many of them, that no Subcollector may be forced to Travel above
Ten Miles for Payment of the Moneys by him Collected; And in default of such
Nomination, to Forfeit 100 l. one Moiety to his Majesty, the other to the
Prosecutor.

CCXCVI. In case there be not a sufficient number of Commissioners, capable of
Acting for any City, etc. any of the Commissioners for the County at large, may
Act for such City, etc.

CCXCVII. Members of Parliament Abiding in or about London and Westminster,
shall be Assessed for any Tax to be laid on their Persons, or Personal Estates,
during this Session, where their Mansion-Houses are, or where they usually
Reside in the Intervals of Parliament.

CCXCVIII. The first General Meeting of the Commissioners for the West Riding
of Yorkshire, shall be at Pontefract, for the North Riding at Thirske, and for
the East Riding at Kilham.

CCXCIX. A Register shall be kept by the Auditor of the Exchequer, of all the
Moneys arising by this Act, and one other Register of all Orders for Moneys
payable thereout.

CCC. The Principal Sums lent between 8 Oct. 1697. and 4 Apr. School. not
exceeding 850000 l. shall be in the first place Transferred and paid in due
course out of the Moneys arising by this Act, with Interest at 8 per Gent.
Payable every Three Months; and the Orders for the same may be Assignable.

CCCI. And in the next place, so much as on 11 Apr. School. shall not be Raised
of the 255663 l. 5 s. 8 d. for paying of several Annuities, Incurred between 17
May, 1696. and 17 May, 1697. on the late Duty of Tunnage on Ships, and the
Duties on Salt, shall be Transferred and paid out of this Act, without Interest.

CCCII. The Orders for the said Annuities shall be Registered in the name of the
Pay-masters thereof, that are or shall be appointed by the Commissioners of the
Treasury.

CCCIII. Any Persons, Natives or Foreigners, may lend his Majesty on the Credit
of this Act, any Sums, which together with the Transferrences aforesaid, shall
not exceed 1400000 l. (of which 250000 l. shall be applied toward Disbanding
the Army) with Interest, at 8 per Cent. per An. and the Money so lent on this
Act shall not be Taxed, and the Orders upon such Loans shall be Registered, and
paid in course.

CCCIV. And the Moneys arising by this Act, shall be applied to the Paying off
the said Loans, and not to be diverted to any other use.

CCCV. No Fee shall be taken for Entering any such Orders, or for Searches, on
pain of treble Damages, nor any undue Preserence, on pain of paying the value
of the Debt, with Damages and Costs, and loss of place.

CCCVI. All Orders for Loans on this Act may be Assigned.

CCCVII. The Loans upon this Act, may be made either in Money, or in
Exchequer-Bills, which Bills (except so much as shall be sufficient to complete
250000 l. for the Disbanding of the Army) shall be immediately cancelled.

CCCVIII. If any Loans be made in Money, the Commissioners of the Treasury
shall dispose thereof in buying Exchequer Bills, and shall cause the Bills so
purchased, to be forthwith Caucelled.

CCCIX. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 13. That for five years, from 15 May, School.
there shall be levied and paid to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, for
all Coal and Culm (except Charcoal made of Wood, and Cinders made of Pitcoal)
the Duties aster mentioned, over and above what are already payable for the
same, viz.

CCCX. For all Coals Imported into this Kingdom from Scotland, or any part
beyond Sea, (usually Sold by Weight) 5 s per Tun, each Tun being 20 Hundred,
and each Hundred 112 Pounds Averdupois; and after that Rate for a greater or
lesser Quantity; And for the like Imported Coals (usually Sold by measure) the
Sum of 7 s. 6 d. per Chalder, each Chalder being 36 Bushels Winchester Measure;
and after that Rate for a greater or lesser quantity; to be paid by the
Importer.

CCCXI. For all Coals Shipped, or Water-born in order to be Shipped, or laid on
Board any Ship or Vessel, to be carried by Sea, and which shall be so carried
by Sea from any Port of this Kingdom to any other Port thereof, the Sum of 5 s.
per Chalder, if usually sold by Measure, and 3 s. 4 d per Tun, if usually sold
by Weight, to be paid at the Importation or Landing, by the Owner, Master or
other Person, having the charge of the Ship or Vessel, or of the Coals so
Imported.

CCCXII For all Culm Water-born in order to be Shipped within this Kingdom, or
brought into the same, the Sum of 1 s. per Chalder, to be paid where Imported
by the Owner or Master, as aforesaid.

CCCXIII. The Duties upon the said Coals and Culm so Imported or Water-born,
shall be under the Management of the Commissioners of the Customs, and shall be
collected and paid into the Exchequer, distinct from all other Moneys, the
necessary charges of Management only excepted.

CCCXIV. The said Duties shall be paid to His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors,
or to such Collector or Person as His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, or the
Commissioners of the Customs, or any four or more of them shall Appoint under
their Hands and Seals, before Bulk of the Ship or Vessel shall be broken, or
any the Coals or Culm unladen, measured or weighed: And due Entries shall be
made of all such Imported Coals and Culm, at the Custom-house where they are so
Imported (if any be there) or else in the Custom-house of the next Port to the
place of Importation. And if any such Coals or Culm be unshipped before the
said Duties be paid or secured, the said Coals and Culm, and the Ship or
Vessel, with all her Guns, Tackle, Furniture and Ammunition shall be forfeited,
one Moiety to the King, the other to the Seizer, Prosecutor or Informer.

CCCXV. His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, or any four or more of the
Commissioners of the Customs, under their Hands and Seals, may Appoint in every
Port within this Kingdom Meeters, Weighers or Measurers of the said Coals and
Culm; who upon the Unlading of any such Ship or Vessel, shall deliver a
Certificate to the Collector of the said Duties, of the Sorts and Quantity of
Coals and Culm Measured or Weighed, and Delivered from any such Ship or Vessel,
under the Penalty of 100 l.

CCCXVI. And in case there was on Board a greater number of Chalders or Tuns of
Coals and Culm, than for which the Duty had been answered and paid, There shall
be paid for every Chalder or Tun so concealed, over and above the Duty, the Sum
of 10 s. under Penalty of Attaching and Detaining such Ship or Vessel till
payment thereof, and of selling the said Ship or Vessel, in case all the said
Duties for such concealed Coals and Culm be not paid, with costs and charges
for such Attaching or Selling, Rendering the Overplus.

CCCXVII. Provided, That if the Importer shall within six days after the
delivery of such Ship or Vessel, and before her departure out of Port, give in
his Post Entry, and pay the whole Duty for the Surplusage, the said Penalty
shall be Discharged.

CCCXVIII. The Officers for Receiving the said Duties, and for Weighing and
Measuring such Coals and Culm, shall in every such Port and Place. Enter down
in Books an Account of the Duties so paid or received, and of the Payments and
Disbursements of the same, and the number of Chalders and Tuns so Imported,
Landed and Unladen.

CCCXIX. There shall be allowed to every Master or Owner of any such Ship or
Vessel Three months time for payment of the said Duty, giving such Security for
the same as the Collector or Chief Officer of the Port or Place shall approve
of, with an allowance after the Rate of 10 per Cent. per An. for prompt
Payment. And if any of the Coals or Culm for which the Duty shall be once paid
or secured, be again Exported to any other place of this Kingdom, there shall
be no further Duty paid for the same: And if any of the Coals for which the
Duty shall be so once paid or secured, be afterward carried beyond Sea, an
allowance out of the Over sea Duties or Repayment shall be made of so much as
was before paid for the same Coals and Culm.

CCCXX. Provided, That if any Person be Prosecuted for any thing done in
Execution of this Act, he may plead the general Issue, and give this Act in
Evidence; And if a Verdict pass for the Defendant, or the Plaintiff be Nonsuit,
or forbear Prosecution, the Defendant shall have treble costs.

CCCXXI. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 14. That the Additional and other Duties and
Impositions upon the several sorts of Goods and Merchandises Imported into this
Kingdom, and from thence Exported, Expressed and Granted in and by an Act, An.
6 and 7. W. 3. Entitled, An Act for Granting to His Majesty several Additional
Duties upon Coffce, Tea, Chocolate and Spices, toward Satisfaction of the
Debts due for Transport Service for the Reduction of Ireland, shall be
Continued from 1 May, School. and be levied and paid to His Majesty, His Heirs
and Successors till 1 May, 1701. And that the said Act, and all Powers,
Articles and Clauses therein contained, shall continue in Force till the said 1
May, 1701, and shall be practiced and executed for levying and paying the said
Additional and other Duties and Impofitions hereby contioned, for paying
interest for the Debt due for the said Transport Service.

CCCXXII. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 25. After 1 Aug. School. there shall be paid
to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors for ever, over and above all other
Duties, the Sums following, viz. For every Skin or Piece of Velum or Parchment,
or Sheet or Piece of Paper, on which there shall be Engrossed or Written.

CCCXXIII. Any Grant under the Great Seal or Duchy of Lancaster, of any
Honor, Dignity, Promotion, Franchise, Liberty or Privilege, or Exemplification
of the same (Except Commissions of Rebellion in Process) 40 s.

CCCXXIV. Any Pardon (Except the General Circuits and Newgate Pardon) Wairant
of Reprieve. Relaxation from Fines, Corporal Punishments or Forfeitures, 40 s.

CCCXXV. Any Grant of Money above 100 l. under the Great or Privy Seal only,
any Grant of Office or Employment above 50 l. per Ann. any Grant of Lands in
Fee, or Leases for Years, or other Grant of Prosit under the Great Seal,
Exchequer, Duchy of Lancaster or Privy Seal only, 40 s. each.

CCCXXVI. Any Presentation or Donation, Collation, Dignity or Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Promotion of 10 l. per Annum, or above in the Kings Books, 40 s.

CCCXXVII. Any Dispensation for two Ecclesiastical Dignities or Benefices, or
other Dispensation or Faculty, 40 s.

CCCXXVIII. Any admittance of a Fellow of the College of Physicians, or of any
Attorney, Clerk, Advocate, Proctor, Notary, or other Officer in any Court, 40 s.

CCCXXIX. But not to extend to any annual Officer in a Corporation or Inferior
Court, whose Office is under 10 l. per Annum in the whole.

CCCXXX. Any appeal from the Court of Admiralty, Arches or Prerogative of
Canterbury or York, 40 s.

CCCXXXI. Any Exemplification under the Seal of any Court, 5 s.

CCCXXXII. Any Decree or Dismission in Chancery, Exchequer, Duchy of
Lancaster, Palatine of Chester, Durham or other Court of Equity, 6 d.

CCCXXXIII. Any Institution or License under the Seal of an Archbishop, Bishop,
Chancellor, Ordinary or Eeclesiastical Court, 5 s.

CCCXXXIV. Any Writ of Error, Certiorari or Appeal (except to the Delegates) 5
s.

CCCXXXV. Any Significavit pro Corp' deliberat' 5 s.

CCCXXXVI. Any Sentence, Attachment or Relaxation in the Admi ralty or Cinque
Ports, 5 s.

CCCXXXVII. Any Letter of Mart, 5 s.

CCCXXXVIII. Any Probate of a Will or Administration above 20 l. value, 5 s.

CCCXXXIX. Any Recognizance, Statute Staple or Statute Merchant, 5 s.

CCCXL. Any Record of Nisi prius or postea, 2 s. 6 d.

CCCXLI. Any Judgment Sigu'd by any Officer of the Courts at Westminster 2 s. 6
d.

CCCXLII. Any Commission out of Ecclesiastical Courts, 2 s. 6 d.

CCCXLIII. Any Warrant. Monition, or Personal Decree in the Courts of Admiralty
or Cinque Ports, or Beneficial Warrant or Order, under the Sign Manual (except
for the Navy, Army and Ordinance) 2 s. 6 d.

CCCXLIV. Any Special Ball or Appearance, 1 s.

CCCXLV. Any Bill, Answer, Replication, Rejoinder, Interrogatories,
Depositions, or other Pleadings in Chancery, Exchequer, Duchy and Palatine
Courts, and other Courts of Equity, 1 s.

CCCXLVI. Any Admission into a Corporation or Company, the Universities, Inns
of Court and Chancery, 1 s.

CCCXLVII. Any Affidavit (except for Burying in Woollen, or before the Officers
of the Customs, Justices of Peace, or Commissioners for Taxes ex officie) 6 d.

CCCXLVIII. Any Copy of such Affidavit, 6 d.

CCCXLIX. Any Indenture, Lease or Deed, Poll (except for binding poor Parish
Children Apprentices) 6 d.

CCCL. Any Original Writ (except where Capias Issues) Subpaena, Bill of
Middlesex, Latitat, Writ of Capias, Quo minus, Ded. potestatem, and other
Writs, Processes or Mandates, where the Debt, Damage or Demand is of 40 s. or
above (except for levying Fines, suffering Common Recoveries and Habeas Corpus
Writs) 6 d.

CCCLI Any Entry of Actions in London, and other Corporations and Courts, of 40
s. or above, 6 d.

CCCLII. Any Common Bail and Appearance 6 d. Which is to be Entered or Filed in
eight days after the Process is Returnable, on Penalty of 5 l. to the Plaintiff.

CCCLIII. Any Rule or Order of Court at Westminster, 6 d.

CCCLIV. Any Copy of such Rules or Orders, or other Records or Proceedings, 6 d.

CCCLV. Any Citation, Monition, Libel, Allegation, Deposition, Answer,
Sentence, Final Decree or Inventory in Ecclesiastical courts, Admiralty or
Cinque Ports, or Copies thereof, 6 d.

CCCLVI. Any Charter-Party, Policy of Assurance, Passport, Bond, Release,
Contract, Obligatory Instrument, Protest, Procuration, Letter of Attorney, or
other Notarial Act, 6 d.

CCCLVII. Any Declaration, Plea, Replication, Rejoinder, Demurrer, or other
Pleadings in Courts of Law, 1 d. and Copies thereof, 1 d.

CCCLVIII. Any Depositions (except the Draughts thereof before they are
Engrossed) Copies of Bills, Answers, Pleas, Demurrers, Replications,
Rejoynders, Interrogatories, Depositions or other Proceedings in Courts of
Equity, and Copies of Wills, 1 d.

CCCLIX. After 1 Aug. School. Every Officer or Clerk in the Courts at
Westminster, shall set down the day and year of his Signing any Writ of Arrest
upon such Writ, and duly enter the same, on Penalty of 10 l.

CCCLX. This Act shall not extend to Bills of Exchange, Accounts, Bills of
Parcel, Bills of Fees, or Bills or Notes (not Sealed, for payment of Money at
sight, or demand, or at the end of certain days of payment.

CCCLXI. Nor to the Probate of Wills or Letters of Administration of Common
Seamen or Soldiers, dying in the Kings Service, a Certificate thereof being
produced, and Oath thereupon made before the proper Judge.

CCCLXII. Nor to any Warrant or Recognizance before a Justice of Peace, or the
Surrender of any Copyhold Estate, or Copies of such Estate, or Court Marshal
Proceedings for Trial of a Common Soldier, or proceedings before Commissioners
of Sewers, or in the Court of Stanneries.

CCCLXIII. Sea Officers shall pay the same Stamp Duty, as Land Officers pay by
this Act only.

CCCLXIV. The Duties by this Act granted shall be liable to such Redemption by
Parliament as shall be declared this Session.

CCCLXV. The King or Commissioners of the Treasury shall appoint Commissioners
for managing these Duties, who shall keep their Head Office in London or
Westminster, for Stamping of Velum, etc. and Collecting the Duties; and
providing proper Marks or Stamps accordingly.

CCCLXVI. For applying the Duties on this and the former Acts as they are
severally appropriated, all Velum, Parchment and Paper, where the Duties are
doubled, till 1 Aug. 1706. shall after 1 Aug. School. be Stamped with two Marks,
to denote both the Duties, except such things as by the former Acts still
remain liable to the single Duty only, namely every Skin, etc. on which there
shall be Engrossed or Written.

CCCLXVII. Any general Circuit or Newgate Pardon 40 s. only.

CCCLXVIII. Any Register, Entry, Testimonial or Certificate of Degrees, in the
Universities or Inns of Court, (Bachelor of Arts excepted) 40 s. only.

CCCLXIX. Any Conveyance, Surrender of Grants or Offices, Release or other Deed
Enrolled 5 s. only.

CCCLXX. Any License or Certificate for Marriage 5 s. only.

CCCLXXI. Any Writy for Levying Fines or Suffering Recoveries, or Habeat
Corpus, 5 s. only.

CCCLXXII All which till 1 Aug. 1706. shall be Stamped with one mark only
according to the former Acts.

CCCLXXIII. All things herein before charged, shall after the last of July
1706. before the Engrossing or Writing thereof, be brought to the head Office
to be Stamped with one Mark.

CCCLXXIV. The Commissioners for the said Duties are impow- and required to
Stamp any Quantities of Velum, etc. for any persons paying the Duties: And if
any person Ingross or Write any thing as aforesaid, before it be so Stamped, or
Stamped with a Lower Duty than is payable by this and the former Acts, he shall
forfeit 10 l. and any Clerk, Officer or Person in public Office, who shall
Make, Ingross or Write any Records, Deeds, Instruments or Writings, charged, as
aforesaid, without being Stamped, or with a counterfeit Stamp, or Stamped with a
lower duty, shall besides the 10 l. forfeit his Office; and if an Attorney, he
shall be disabled to Practice; and any other person offending therein, shall
forfeit for every such Deed or Writing 10 l. over and above the Duty: And no
such Record, etc. shall be pleaded or given in Evidence, till the Duty and
Penalty be paid, and then to be Stamped with the proper Marks.

CCCLXXV. Any person who shall Counterfeit any of the said Stamps or Marks, or
the impression of the same, or shall vend any Velum, etc. with such Counterfeit
Marks, shall be guilty of Felony, without benefit of Clergy, and suffer Death
accordingly.

CCCLXXVI. The Commissioners may appoint a person in any Court to take notice
of the things Stamped; and the Judges of Courts shall make such Orders for
securing the Duties, as the Commissioners shall reasonably desire.

CCCLXXVII. Every of the Commissioners and persons employed under them, for
Stamping of Velum, etc. shall take the Oath prescribed for the faithful
Execution of their Trust, etc.

CCCLXXVIII. The Commissioners and their Officers shall observe the directions
of the Commissioners of the Treasury, and shall take care that the several
parts of the Kingdom be sufficiently furnished with Stamped Velum, etc. That all
persons at their Election, may buy the same at the usual Rates above the Duty.

CCCLXXIX. Persons admitted to sue or defend in Forma Pauperis, shall not be
liable to the said Duties.

CCCLXXX. All things whatsoever hereby charged shall be Engrossed and Written
as usually.

CCCLXXXI. Upon altering or renewing the said Stamps, all things Stamped and not
Written, may within 60 days after Proclamation of such renewing or altering, be
sent to the Head Office to be changed, without any further charge, on the
penalty of 100 l. But not being so sent, to be void, and subject to the like
Penalties, if Engrossed or Written upon, as if not Stamped.

CCCLXXXII. Provided that the King or Commissioners of the Treasury, may on
Stamped Parchment or Paper, order payment of the Salaries and Incident Charges
in managing this Duty, out of the said Duties.

CCCLXXXIII. Provided that within 20 days after alteration of the said Stamps,
the Proclamation aforesaid; shall be sent to the chief Magistrates of Cities,
Boroughs and Market Towns, throughout England, to be published the next market
day or Sunday, on penalty of 200 l.

CCCLXXXIV. The Commissioners of the Treasury shall once every year set the
prices, that all Stamped Velum, Parchment or Paper shall be sold at, which shall
be Stamped upon the same accordingly; and an allowance shall be made for every
10 l. after 6 per Cent. per Ann. for three Months, for Prompt payment, over and
above the like allowance on the former Acts.

CCCLXXXV. This Act shall not extend to charge any Letters Patents for
Collecting Charitable Briefs, nor shall such Briefs be doubly Stamped.

CCCLXXXVI. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 27. The Act made 8 and 9 W. 3. Entitled,
An Act for Licensing Hawkers and Pedlars for a further provision of Interest
for the Transport Debt for Reducing of Ireland, being to continue only to 24
June School. It is Enacted, That from the said 24 June School. to 24 June 1701.
There shall be paid to his Majesty by every Hawker, Pedlar, Petry-Chapman or
other trading person going from Town to Town, or to other Men's Houses, and
Traveling either on Foot or with Horse, Horses or otherwise, within this
Kingdom (except as herein excepted) carrying to Sell, or exposing to Sale any
Goods, Wares or Merchandises, a Duty of 4 l. for each year: And that every
Person so Traveling with a Horse, Ass or Mule, or other Beast bearing or
drawing burden, shall over and above pay 4 l. for each year.

CCCLXXXVII. Every Pedlar, etc. so Traveling as aforesaid, upon receiving a
License, shall pay to the Commissioners for Licensing Hawkers, etc. One Moiety
of the said Duty, and give Bond for the true payment, of the other Moiety, at
the end of 6 Calendar Months, with an allowance of 2 s. in the pound for Prompt
payment of the last Moiety.

CCCLXXXVIII. Such Hawker, etc. As after the said 24 Jun. School. shall be sound
Trading as aforesaid, without or contrary to such License, shall for every such
offense forfeit 12 l. one Moiety to the Informer, and the other to the poor of
the Parish, wherein such offender shall be discovered: And if any persons so
Trading, upon demand made by any Justice of Peace, Mayor, Constable or other
Officer of the Peace, refuse to show their License they shall forfeit 5 l. to
the use of the poor of the Parish where such demand shall be made, and for
Non-payment shall suffer as a Common Vagrant, and be sent so the House of
Correction.

CCCLXXXIX. The said Commissioners upon the Terms aforesaid are to grant a
License to be by them subscribed, to every Hawker, etc. for him or herself, for
which there shall be taken only one shilling, unless such Hawker, etc. Travel
with a Beast of Burden, and then there shall be paid for such License only 2
s. over and above the Duties aforesaid: The said Commissioners shall keep a
distinct account of the Duties granted by this Act, and pay the Money arising
thereby into the Exchequer on Wednesday in every Week (unless a Holiday, and
then the day after) and upon neglect or refusal, shall incur the penalties,
etc. as other the Officers of the Exchequer herein mentioned shall be liable
unto, which Money so paid in shall be applied to pay Interest for the said
Transport Debt, after 5 per Cent. per Ann.

CCCXC. Persons Forging or Counterfeiting such Licenses, or Traveling with
Forged or Counterfeited Licenses, shall forfeit 50 l. one Moiety to the King,
the other to the Prosecutor, to be recovered in any the Courts of Record at
Westminster, and be subject to the penalties for Forgery.

CCCXCI. Persons sued for putting this Act in Execution, may plead the general
Issue, and give the special matter in Evidence; And if the Plaintiffs be
Nonsuited, or suffer Judgment on Demurrer, or a Verdict pass for the
Defendants, the Defendant shall have treble Costs.

CCCXCII. If any Constable, or other Officer refuse or neglect to be assisting
in the Execution of this Act, being thereunto required, such Officer being
thereof convicted upon Oath before a Justice of Peace, shall forfeit for every
such offense 40 s. to be levied by Distress and Sale of Goods, one Moiety to
the Poor of the Parish, the other to the Prosecutor, rendering the overplus.

CCCXCIII. Any persons may seize and detain such Hawkers, etc. till they
produce a License, or if Trading without a License, till such time as notice be
given to the Constable, or some other Parish officer, who are to carry such
persons before a Justice of Peace, who upon confession of the party, or due
proof upon Oath, that the person had so Traded, and no License produced, shall
by Warrant under his Hand and Seal levy the said Sum of 12 l. by Distress and
Sale of the Offenders Goods or Wares, rendering the overplus, after deduction of
the charge for distraining, and out of the said Sale to pay the said penalties
and forfeitures.

CCCXCIV. This Act shall not prohibit persons from selling Acts of Parliament,
Forms of Prayer, Proclamations, Gazetts licensed Almanacks, or other printed
Papers licensed by Authority, or any Fish, Fruits or Victuals; nor hinder the
makers of any Goods or Wares within this Kingdom or their Children,
Apprentices, Agents or Servants from selling the Goods and Wares of their own
making, in any Mart, Fairs, Markets or elsewhere, nor any Tinkers, Coopers,
Glasiers, Plummers, Harness-menders or other persons, trading in mending
Kettles, Tubs, Household Goods or Harness, from going about, and carrying with
them proper materials for mending the same.

CCCXCV. There shall be kept in the Office of the Auditor of the Exchequer a
Register of all Moneys paid in by virtue of this Act, distinct from all other
Moneys.

CCCXCVI. If any Officer in the Exchequer shall divert any of the Moneys paid
in by virtue of this Act, he shall forfeit his Office, be incapable of any
place of Trust, and shall pay treble the value of the sums so diverted, to the
persons grieved, who will sue for the same in any the Courts of Record at
Westminster. And all orders for disposing the Moneys to be raised by this Act,
contrary to the meaning thereof shall be void.

CCCXCVII. This Act shall not hinder any persons from selling any sorts of
Goods or Merchandises, in any public Mart, Market or Fair within this Kingdom.

CCCXCVIII. If the several Duties and Impositions, granted to his Majesty by
several Acts of Parliament, toward payment of Interest of the said Transport
Debt, together with the Duties to be raised by this Act, shall amount to more
than sufficient for payment of interest at 5 per Cent. for the said Transport
Debt, according to the several Debentures made, and to be made out; then such
surplus shall remain in the Exchequer, and not be disposed of but by Act of
Parliament.

CCCXCIX. The Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury, or the Lord High
Treasurer, out of the Moneys raised by this or the said recited Acts, may pay
to the said Commissioners, to be appointed pursuant to this Act, their Clerks
and others, such sums as they may reasonably deserve for their service, or may
have expended in or about this or the said recited Acts.

CCCC. This Act shall not give power for the Licensing any Hawker, Pedlar or
Petty-chapman to sell or expose to sale any Wares or Merchandises, in any City,
Borough, Town Corporate or Market Town within this Realm, otherwise than might
have been done before the making of this Act.

CCCCI Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 34. After 15 May School. The Money coming into
the Exchequer for the Duties of Excise, granted by an Act of 5 and 6 W.M.
Entitled, An Act for Granting to their Majesty's certain Rates and Duties upon
Salt, and upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors, for securing certain Recompenses
and Advantages in the said Act mentioned, to such Persons as shall voluntarily
advance the sum of Ten hundred thousand pounds toward carrying on the War
against France, shall in the first place be applied to pay such of the
Annuities, lately payable out of the Tunnage Duties, and the tickets for the
same, which became due at Lady day 1696, or within 20 days after, and are yet
unsatisfied. And in the second place to pay such of the said Annuities as
became due at Michaelmas 1697, or within 20 days after, and are yet
unsatisfied: And in the third place, to pay such of the said Annuities as
became due 25 Mar. School, or within 20 days after, and not otherwise; And the
said Arrears being first discharged, or Money reserved for payment thereof, the
growing produce shall be applied to pay the said half yearly and yearly
Annuities in course; And no Officer shall pay any half yearly, or yearly
payments of the said Annuities, till the preceding half year or year be fully
paid, or the Money reserved, for which public notice in Writing shall be hung
up in the said Office, under penalty of forfeiting his Office, and for every
such offense 100 l. to the persons who shall sue for the same in any the Courts
of Record at Westminster, where the Plaintiff upon Recovery shall have treble
Costs.

CCCCII. The Tickets, commonly called Benefit Tickets, which became due at Lady
day School, or within 20 days after, shall be paid as they are numbered, beginning
at number one, and ending with number 2500. And the Tickets for 20 s. a piece
commonly called blank Tickets, being due at Michaelmas School, or within 20 days
after, shall also be paid as they are numbered, beginning with number One, and
ending with the number 97500. And in the year next following, the Benefit
Tickets shall be paid in an Arithmetical Progression descending, beginning with
number 2500, and ending with number One; and the Blank Tickets from number
97500 inclusive, to number one inclusive, and so onwards in every subsequent
year alternately.

CCCCIII. It shall be no undue preference to pay subsequent Tickets, when
brought and demanded before such Tickets as were not brought in course,
provided there be Money reserved to satisfy such preceding Tickets.

CCCCIV. The additional Duties of Excise granted by the said Act, and which
ought to come weekly into the Exchequer, (the Officers Salaries and incident
Charges not exceeding 2500 l. per Ann. only excepted) are hereby appropriated
during the whole term of 16 years, thereby granted to the payment of the said
Annuities and Tickets for the same.

CCCCV. After 15 May School. No Officer appointed to pay the Annuities, for one
two or three Lives, purchased for the respective Considerations mentioned in
the Act of 5 and 6 W. and M. Entitled, An Act for Granting to their Majesty's
several Rates and Duties upon Tunnage of Ships and Vessels, and upon Beer, Ale
and other Liquors, for securing certain Recompenses and Advantages in the said
Act mentioned, to such persons as shall voluntarily advance the Sum of 1500000
l. toward carrying on the War against France, payable quarterly out of two
seventh parts of the several Duties thereby granted, and the Reversions of the
said Annuities or some of them, or further interest therein purchased by
several subsequent Acts, shall pay off any quarterly payment of the said
Annuities, till the preceedent quarter be paid off, or the Money ready in the
Office for payment thereof, whereof public notice in Writing shall be affixed
in the said Office, under Penalty of forfeiting his place, and 100 l. for every
such offense, to the Persons who shall Sue for the same, to be recovered with
costs of Suit as aforesaid.

CCCCVI. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 35. Enacted. That all the Clauses in the
Acts of the sixth, seventh and eighth years of his Majesty's Reign, in relation
to the Duties on Marriages, Births, Burials, Batchelors and Widowers, (not
otherwise hereby altered or explained) shall be duly observed under the
Penalties in the said Acts.

CCCCVII. The Commissioners for the Aid to his Majesty of 1484015 l. 1 s. 11 d.
3 f. shall be Commissioners for the said Acts for Marriages, Births and
Burials, till 24 Jun. 1699. who with the Justices of Peace, or a Quorum of
them, appointed by the former Acts, shall have full power to Act in all things
relating to the said Duties; and after the 24 Jan. 1699. the Justices as
aforesaid, shall be the Commissioners.

CCCCVIII. All persons required by the former Acts to keep a Register, shall
with the name of every person Married, Buried, Christened or Born, express the
Degree and Quality, according to which the Duty ought to be paid; and upon
Burials, the names of the Heirs, Executors, Administrators, Fathers, Mothers,
Guardians, Churchwardens, Overseers, or others who are to pay for the same, and
where they dwell: And in case of Births, the names of the Fathers, Mothers,
Guardians or Curators of such Children, and where they live: And in case of
Marriages, the Husbands abode, under penalty of 20 l. one moiety to the King,
the other to the Informer. And every person who ought to pay the said Duties,
shall give the Minister who performs the Office of such Marriage, Burial or
Christening, a true relation of the Degree and Quality, according to which the
Duty ought to be paid, and where the person lives, who ought to pay the same,
to be inserted in the Register, under penalty of 20 l.

CCCCIX. The words Ecclesiastical Persons in this Act, and Persons in Holy
Orders in the former Acts, are to comprehend Bishops, where Marriages,
Christenings or Burials are performed by them.

CCCCX. Upon any Persons removal, or going away without payment of the Duties,
any two of the Commissioners certifying such default under their Hands and
Seals, the like number of Commissioners in any other place where the person
shall be sound, shall cause the said Duties to be paid, and upon default may
Levy the same by Distress and Sale of Goods.

CCCCXI. All Penalties in this and the former Acts touching the said Duties
(except the Penalty of 100 l. for not duly keeping a Register) shall be
determined by two or more Justices, or Commissioners near the place, upon Oath,
and levied by distress and sole of Goods, and for want of Distress, the
Offender to be Committed to Prison; But the Commissioners may mitigate such
Penalty, so that it be not less than double the Duty.

CCCCXII. The Commissioners in the respective Divisions shall meet together on
or before the first of August School. and so once or oftener every three Months,
for the Execution of this and the former Acts; and they or any two of them, are
to warn the Assessors, Collectors, Surveyors, Inspectors and Receivers General,
and if need be any Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Parish-Clerks, and others,
concerned in the said Duties, to bring in their Assessments, Accounts and
Registers, and upon default, may Fine the Offenders, not exceeding 5 l.

CCCCXIII. And shall Examine the said Assessments, Accounts and Registers, and
cause the persons omitted, or not fully charged, to be duly taxed, and
thereupon to sign the Assessments, and cause Duplicates of the gross Sums to be
Transmitted into the Exchequer.

CCCCXIV. The Collectors shall render their Accounts upon Oath, and in default
thereof may be fined by the Commissioners, not exceeding 20 l.

CCCCXV. Every Collector duly discharging himself, shall (besides the 3 d. in
the pound in the former Acts) be allowed 2 d. in the pound for what he shall
pay to the Receiver General, and the Commissioners Clerks shall have an
Additional allowance of 1 d. in the pound.

CCCCXVI. After 1 Aug. School. every person who ought to pay any of the said
Duties, shall pay or tender the same to the proper Collector; within twenty
days after it shall become due, on pain of paying double the said Duties.

CCCCXVII. The Clause in the former Act An. 6. W. 3. for the Collectors
delivering a Copy of the Assessment to the Minister of the place, under penalty
of 5 l. and for the Ministers reading the same in the Church, under the like
penalty, is hereby Repealed.

CCCCXVIII. The ten days allowed by the said former Act for Appealing, shall be
reckoned from the time of the Collectors demand.

CCCCXIX. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 38. Enacted, That every person of what Age,
Sex or Condition soever in England and Wales, shall pay to his Majesty, one
shilling on 24 Aug. School. one shilling 24 November. School. one shilling 24 Febr.
School. and one shilling 24 May 1699. Except such as receive Alms of the Parish,
and their Children under the age of 16 years, and all poor House keepers, not
contributing to Church or Poor, and their Children under 16 years; and except
all Children under 16 years of Day Laborers and Servants in Husbandry; and of
such who have 4 Children or more, and are not worth in Lands, Goods and
Chattels 50 l.

CCCCXX. Every Gentleman or so Reputed, having an Estate real or personal, or
in both of 300 l. or more; and every person above that quality (and not a Peer
of this Realm) and all Widows having a Dower or Jointure of 100 l. per Ann. or
more, or being worth 1000 l. and all unmarried Women worth 1000 l. shall pay 20
s. quarterly for one year, at the days before mentioned; but no persons not
having such Estates, and thereof making Oath, before two or more of the
Commissioners, shall be charged with the said quarterly Sum of 20 s.

CCCCXXI. Every Cursitor, Philizer, Attorney, Solicitor, Clerk in Chancery or
Exchequer, or other Courts of Law or Equity, or Scrivener, or practicing as
such, and every Chancellor, Commissary, Official, Register, and every Advocate,
Proctor, Apparitor and public Notary, or practicing as such, and all other
Officers in any Court, and all Merchants, Brokers to Merchants, and Pawn
Brokers, shall pay 20 s. quarterly at the days before mentioned; and none of
the persons so charged to be further charged as a Gentleman.

CCCCXXII. Every Clergyman (not being a Lord Spiritual) having by any
Benefice, Benefices, Contribution or otherwise, 60 l. per An. or upwards, and
every Preacher or Teacher in any Congregation, not in Orders according to the
Church of England, having in Gratuities, Contributions, Rewards or Bounties 60
l. per An. or upwards, shall pay 20 s. quarterly at the days before mentioned,
and then not to be further charged as a Gentleman; every such Dissenting
Preacher or Teacher, having by any Contribution or otherwise, 150 l. per An. or
upwards, shall pay double the said Sum of 20 s. quarterly, at the several days
before mentioned: And every Clergy man having, in several Benefices or
Ecclesiastical Promotions, 150 l. per An. or upwards, shall pay double the Sums
charged upon other Clergymen.

CCCCXXIII. Every Tradesman, Shopkeeper and Vintner worth 300 l. and upwards,
shall over and above the foresaid quarterly Sums of 1 s. pay the Sum of 10 s.
quarterly, on the days before mentioned.

CCCCXXIV Every person who by reason of his or her Estate, is, or would be
chargeable (if such person was no Officer in the Militia) to find a Horse in
the Militia, shall for each Horse so chargeable, over and above all other Sums,
pay 20 s. quarterly, on the days before mentioned, and so proportionably for
contributing toward a Horse or Horses.

CCCCXXV. Every person, not finding or contributing to a Militia Horse, who
keeps a Coach, Chariot or Calash, shall over and above all other Sums, pay 20
s. quarterly, on the days before mentioned; except for Stage Coaches and
Hackney Coaches.

CCCCXXVI. Every Lord Spiritual or Temporal of this Realm, shall, over and
above any Sum chargeable by this Act, pay 10 l. quarterly, on the days before
mentioned.

CCCCXXVII. Every Gentleman or so Reputed, or being above that Quality, and
under the Degree of a Peer of this Realm, worth 300 l. and being 16 years of
age or upwards, and within the Realm, who has not taken the Oaths, and shall
not voluntarily take them before two or more of the Commissioners, shall pay
double the Sums he ought to be charged with.

CCCCXXVIII. Provided that Quakers making and subscribing the Declaration of
Fidelity before any two or more of the Commissioners, shall not be charged
double.

CCCCXXIX. All the persons named and appointed Commissioners in an Act of this
present Session, For Granting to his Majesty the Sum of One Million for hundred
eighty four thousand and fifteen Pounds, One Shilling Eleven Pence Three
Farthings, for Disbanding Forces, Paying Seamen, and other Uses therein
mentioned, shall be Commissioners for putting in Execution this present Act, in
all the Places for which they are appointed Commissioners by the said Act.

CCCCXXX. Which Commissioners in their respective Counties, Divisions and
Places, shall meet together, at the most usual place of meeting, on 20 July.
School. and may divide themselves as they shall see expedient; and shall direct
their precepts to such Inhabitants, Officers and Ministers, as they shall think
convenient to be Presenters and Assessors, Requiring them to appear before the
Commissioners within eight days; and shall then openly declare the Effects of
their charge unto them, and how they ought to make their Certificates, and
prefix another day for bringing in their Certificates of the Names and
Sirnames, Qualities, Degrees, Titles, Estates, Professions, Employments and
Trades, of all Persons within their respective Limits, with the Assessment of
the respective Rates hereby imposed, without Favor or Malice, upon forfeiture
of a sum not exceeding ten pounds: And shall then return two or more sufficient
persons, within the said Limits respectively, to be Collectors; For whose
paying to the Receivers General, the Moneys they shall be Charged withal, the
Parish or Place shall be answerable; which Assessments shall be returned to the
Commissioners by 12 August, School. who shall thereupon Issue their Warrants to
the Collectors for levying the same; and the Collectors shall thereupon make
their demands within four days after, and pay in the first of the said
quarterly payments, on or before 1 September, School. The second payment on or
before 1 December School. The third on or before 1 March, School. And the fourth on
or before 1 June 1699. And the Receivers are to hasten the Collectors to the
said quarterly payments, and in default thereof to levy by Warrant of two or
more of the Commissioners upon the Collectors, by Distress, the Moneys by them
received and not paid in.

CCCCXXXI. A Duplicate of the whole sum charged on each Division or Place,
without naming the persons, shall be returned into the Exchequer, before 10
September School. (All Appeals being first determined) and so within thirty days
after every other quarterly payment; and like Duplicates to be delivered to the
Receivers General. And the said quarterly Sums to be paid into the Exchequer,
on or before 20 September, School. 20 December, School. 20 March. School. and 20
June, 1699.

CCCCXXXII. Upon return of the Certificates, the Commissioners may examine the
same, and if then, or within twelve days after, they shall know or suspect any
persons to be omitted, or not duly charged, they may warn such persons before
them, to be examined thereupon, who neglecting to appear, not having a
reasonable excuse, shall pay double; and the Commissioners may by any lawful
ways or means, inquire into all things chargeable by this Act, and set such
Rates as shall be according to the true meaning thereof.

CCCCXXXIII. The Receiver General shall have an allowance of 2 d. in the pound
for all Moneys paid by him into the Exchequer; and every Collector 3 d. in the
pound for what he shall pay to the Receiver General; and the Commissioners
Clerks three halfpence in the pound, of what shall be received by virtue of the
Warrants and Estreats by them made out.

CCCCXXXIV. Persons refusing or neglecting to pay the sums charged, upon
demand, the Collector is to Distrain their Goods and Chattels, and if the Money
be not paid within four days after, then such Distress is to be appraised and
sold, and the Overplus Restored to the Owners.

CCCCXXXV. Persons refusing or neglecting to pay the Assessment in ten days
after demand; where no sufficient Distress can be found, three of the
Commissioners may commit such Persons to Gaol till payment be made.

CCCCXXXVI. Persons agrieved and complaining to the Commissioners within six
days after demand, the Commissioners, or three of them (whereof two who signed
the Rate) may within eight days after examine the Complainant upon Oath, and
thereupon abate or increase the same; and the Commissioners are required to
meet together for determining such Complaints and Appeals accordingly.

CCCCXXXVII. All Persons shall be rated where Resident with their Families at
the Execution of the Act; and Persons not Householders, nor having a certain
place of abode, and all Servants shall be Taxed where Resident at the time; The
Tax on Servants to be paid by the Master or Mistress, and Deducted out of their
Wages.

CCCCXXXVIII. Persons doubly charged for several Mansion Houses, or Places of
Residence, upon Certificate of two of the Commissioners of their Personal
Residence, and of the Sums charged, and Oath made of such Certificate, before a
Justice of Peace, shall (for so much as shall be certified) be discharged in
every other place.

CCCCXXXIX. Persons at the time of the assessing being out of the Realm, shall
be rated where last abiding in the Realm.

CCCCXL. Persons escaping Taxation by Fraud, or changing their Residence, upon
proof thereof before two of the Commissioners or Justices of the Peace, shall
at any time within twelve Months after be charged double.

CCCCXLI. The Commissioners shall Tax one another, and shall Assess the
Assessors.

CCCCXLII. Assessors, Collectors, Receivers, or other persons wilfully
neglecting or refusing to perform their Dury, the Commissioners or two of them,
may Fine them not exceeding 20 l.

CCCCXLIII. The Commissioners or two of them, shall call for an Account from
the Receivers General, of the Moneys received by them, and paid into the
Exchequer; and in case of failure, to cause the same to be forthwith levied.

CCCCXLIV. Upon any Controversy between the Commissioners about the said
Rates, the Commissioners concerned are to withdraw, under penalty of a Sum not
exceeding 20 l.

CCCCXLV. All differences touching any of the said Rates, and the Collecting
thereof, shall be finally determined by three or more Commissioners, without
further trouble.

CCCCXLVI. The Receivers General shall give Acquittances to the Collectors
gratis; and the Collectors shall deliver to the Receivers General, a Schedule
in Parchment under their hands and seals, signed by two or more Commissioners,
of the names and places of abode of every person making default of payment, to
be returned into the Exchequer; from whence Precess shall be Issued against
them for the same.

CCCCXLVII. No Letters Patents shall exempt any persons or places from the
Charge Granted by this Act.

CCCCXLVIII. All Constables, Headboroughs, Tything-men and other Officers,
shall be Aiding in the Execution of this Act, and obey such Precepts, as shall
be directed to them by the Commissioners or any Two of them.

CCCCXLIX. Persons Prosecuted for Acting in pursuance of this Act, may plead
the General Issue, and give this Act and the special matter in Evidence, and
upon a Nonsuit, Discontinuance or Verdict against the Prosecutor, the Defendant
shall recover Treble Costs.

CCCCL. The Parents, Guardians and Tutors of Persons, under the Age of 21
Years, shall upon Default, pay the Duties for such Persons.

CCCCLI. All Moneys payable by this Act, shall be paid by the Collectors, to
the Receivers General Appointed by his Majesty, or to their Deputies, whereof
notice shall be given to the Commissioners within Ten days after their General
Meeting, and so within Ten days after the Death or Removal of any Deputy, and
their Receipts shall be a Discharge to the Collectors.

CCCCLII. The Collectors shall not be Obliged to travel above Ten Miles for
payment of any Sums to the Receivers General.

CCCCLIII. Every Receiver General, within one Month after the Receipt of the
whole Sum charged on any Hundred or Division, for each Quarterly payment, shall
give the Commissioners of the Division a Receipt for the same, under his Hand
and Seal, which shall be a full Discharge to such Hundred or Division.

CCCCLIV. If any Receiver General Certify into the Exchequer, any Money in
Arrear or Unpaid, after the same has been Received, or cause any Person to be
unjustly set Insuper, he shall Forfeit to the Person Molested or Damaged
thereby, Treble Damages, and to the King double the Sum so Unjustly Certified
or set Insuper.

CCCCLV. No Commissioner shall be Liable for his Execution of this Act, to the
Penalties in the Act Anno 25 Car. 2. For Preventing Dangers which may happen
from Popish Recusants.

CCCCLVI. All Penalties Incurred by this Act, shall be Levied (if not otherwise
Prescribed) by Warrant of Two or more of the Commissioners, where the Offense
was Committed, by Distress and Sale of Goods.

CCCCLVII. The Commissioners at a General Meeting (All Appeals being first
Determined) shall cause Duplicates of the whole Sum Charged on each Division or
Place, Written in Parchment, without Naming the persons, and Signed by Three or
more of the Commissioners, to be Jointly Delivered to the Sheriff of the
County, to be Transmitted to the Exchequer by 20 September School.

CCCCLVIII. No Person shall Act as a Commissioner before he Take the Oaths
appointed, 1 W. and M. which any Two Commissioners may Administer, under the
Penalty of 200 l. Forfeiture to his Majesty:

CCCCLIX. Persons chargeable to the Finding or Contributing to a Militia Horse,
shall be Assessed in such places where they ought so to Find or Contribute; And
if such Assessment be not Paid within the time Limited, and no Goods or
Chattels of the Parties sufficient to be found, then it shall be Lawful, in
case the Tenant of the Lands pay not the Assessment within Ten Days, to Levy
the same by Distress and Sale of the Tenants Goods, which shall be allowed the
Tenant on payment of his Rent.

CCCCLX. Sergeants Inn in Fleet Street, and Serjeants-Inn in Chancery Lane, the
four Inns of Court, and the Inns of Chancery, shall be Rated according to the
proportion Imposed by this Act.

CCCCLXI. Persons coming to reside in any Division within London or
Westminster, or Five Miles thereof, and not there Taxed, shall be Summoned
before the Commissioners, and Assessed, unless they produce Certificates of
their being Assessed, and having paid the preceding Quarterly payments.

CCCCLXII. Every Householder shall give the Assessors an Account of the Names
and Qualities of their Lodgers under penalty of 5 l.

CCCCLXIII. Persons may pay all or any of the Quarterly payments to the
Collectors beforehand, for which the Collectors Acquittance shall be a good
Discharge.

CCCCLXIV. Members of Parliament shall be Assessed where their usual Residence
is in the Intervals of Parliament.

CCCCLXV. Out of the Moneys paid into the Exchequer upon the Act of this
present Session for Granting to His Majesty several Duties upon Coals and Culm,
250000 l. shall be Appropriated for payment of Seamen that have or shall serve
in the Navy Royal; And out of the first Moneys arising, by this Act, 250000 l.
shall be Appropriated for payment of Quarters due from the Land Forces in
England since 1 Jan. 1696.

CCCCLXVI. The Rules and Directions in the Act 1 W. and M. For a Grant to Their
Majesty's of an Aid of Two shillings in the Pound for One Year, for the speedy
payment of the Money thereby Granted, and Application thereof, and all other
Provisions therein, are hereby Revived, touching the Distribution and
Application of the Sums hereby Appropriated.

CCCCLXVII. Any Persons, Natives or Foreigners, Bodies Politic or Corporate,
may Advance and Lend upon the Security of this Act, any Sums of Money not
exceeding 500000 l. at 7 per Cent. per Ann. Interest for the first 250000 l.
and 8 per Cent. per Ann. for the Remaining 250000 l.

CCCCLXVIII. And may also Lend upon the Security of the Moneys arising upon
Coals and Culm, after 24 Jun. School. any Sum not exceeding 500000 l. at 7 per
Cent. per Ann. Interest for the first 100000 l. and 8 per Cent. per Ann. for
the remaining 400000 l. And no Money so lent or advanced shall be Assessed.

CCCCLXIX. There shall be kept in the Exchequer, in the Auditors Office, Two
Books for Registring all Moneys that shall be paid in upon the Quarterly Poll
hereby granted, and on Coals and Culm, distinct from all other Money: And all
persons lending Money thereon shall have a Talley and Order for Repayment with
Interest, payable every Three Months; which Orders shall be Registered and paid
in Course, without preference of one before another, and without taking any Fee
or Reward for such Registers, Entries, Views or Search, under Penalty of double
Damages to the Party agrieved, with costs of Suit, and (if it be by the Officer
himself) loss of place also; And under Penalty of paying the value of the Debt,
Damages and Costs, and loss of place, in case of undue preference.

CCCCLXX. Provided, That it shall be no undue preference, where several Orders
are brought to the Auditor the same day, which of those he Enters first; Nor
shall it be any undue preference, if the Auditor Direct, the Clerk of the Pells
Record, and the Tellers pay Subsequent Orders, where persons demand not their
Money in Course, provided so much Money be reserved as will satisfy precedent
Orders, Interest ceasing from the time of such reservation.

CCCCLXXI. All which Orders being Entered, may by Indorsement and Entry thereof
in the said Register Book, be Assigned and Tranferred toties quoties.

CCCCLXXII. His Majesty may make use of any Sums (not exceeding 600000 l. in
the whole) arising by any the Aids or Supplies granted or to be granted this
Session of Parliament, and not particularly Appropriated, toward discharging
the Talleys of Pro or Assignment, or other Talleys remaining unsatisfied on the
Hereditary and Temporary Excise, or on the Weekly Sum of 6000 l. issuing out of
the same, or on the Post Office, and Weekly Sum of 600 l. issuing out of the
same, and for other His Majesty's necessary Occasions, or for satisfying such
Moneys as have been or shall be borrowed to supply the same.

CCCCLXXIII. All Auditors, Reeves, or Receivers, and their Deputies, shall upon
the Act of this present Session for granting to His Majesty 1484015 l. 1 s. 11
d. 3 q. For Disbanding Forces, paying Seamen, and other Uses therein mentioned,
allow 3 s. for every Pound Rent due for any Fee farm Rent, or other chief Rents
due to His Majesty or the Queen Dowager, or to any person or persons Claiming
by any Grant or Purchase from or under the Crown, and proportionably for any
greater or lesser Sum, to the parties so paying the same, without Fee, upon
Penalty of 20 l. And if any such Auditor, or his Deputy, set insuper any
Tenant, or other person, or make their Estate liable to Distress or Vexation,
for any Money which ought to be allowed after the said Rate of 3 s. in the
Pound, or refuse or neglect to allow the same, he shall forfeit 100 l. to the
Party grieved, and be incapable of his Office or Place, or any other Office or
Place of Trust or Profit under His Majesty or the Queen Dowager.

CCCCLXXIV. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 45. Enacted, That after 1 Aug. School. One
half of the several Rates and Duties, Charged by several Acts, made in 6 and 7
W. 3. on Glass, and Glass wares, and the whole Duties charged by the said Acts,
on Stone and Earthen Bottles, Stone and Earthen Wares, and on Tobacco Pipes
shall cease, and be no longer payable.

CCCCLXXV. And that in lieu thereof from 10 July School. there shall be paid to
his Majesty for 8 years, for all Whale-Fins, and Scotch Linens Imported into
England, Wales or Barwick, (over and above all Duties already payable) the
further Rates following, viz.

CCCCLXXVI. For all Whale-Fins, caught and Imported in any Ships belonging to
the Greenland Company, 3 d. per pound weight. And for all Whale Fins Caught or
Imported by Foreigners, or by Ships not belonging to the said Company, 6 d. per
pound Weight, to be paid by the Importers.

CCCCLXXVII. For all Linen of the Manufacture of Scotland, called Twill,
Imported or Brought in as aforesaid, Ten shillings for every hundred,
containing 120 Else. And for all Scotch Linen, called Ticking, Six shillings 8
d. per hundred containing 120 Else, to be paid by the Importers.

CCCCLXXVIII. The Importer giving Security at the Custom-House, shall have 12
Months to pay the Duty by 4 equal quarterly payments; And in case he pays Ready
Money, shall be abated after 10 per Cent. per Ann. If the Goods aforementioned,
after the Duties paid or secured be again Exported by any English Merchant
within 12 Months, or by Strangers in 9 Months, the said Duty to be wholly
Repaid, or the Security vacated for what shall be so exported.

CCCCLXXIX. Provided, That this Act shall not make void any payments of Money
due to his Majesty for any Glass Wares, Stone or Earthen Wares, or Tobacco
Pipes, actually made before the said 1 Aug. And that all matters and things
contained in the said two former Acts, for Securing to His Majesty the Duties
on Glass Wares, shall be applied for securing the moiety of the said Duty on
Glass Wares, (not hereby taken away.)

CCCCLXXX. And for all Glass Wares which shall be Exported before 1 December.
School. for which the whole Duties have been paid or secured, the same shall be
repaid, or the security vacated; And for all Glass Wares exported after the
said 1 December. School. only one Moiety of the said former Duties shall be drawn
back.

CCCCLXXXI. No Makers of Glass or Glass Wares after the said 1 Aug. School. shall
draw or remove from their Kins or Surrores, any Glass or Glass-Wares, unless
the Officer appointed to attend such Glass-house be present, or have Notice of
it, on Forfeiture of 10 l. one Moiety to the King, the other to the Prosecutor.

CCCCLXXXII. All Bottles and Glass Vessels imported, although filled with
Liquor, shall pay one Moiety of the Duties charged thereon by the former Acts.

CCCCLXXXIII. Upon the Importation of any Whale Fins, Scotch Linen or Tickings,
as aforesaid, Entry thereof shall be made in the Custom-house where imported;
And in case of Landing any such Goods before due Entry made, and the Duties
secured, or without a Warrant from the Commissioners, or proper Officers of the
Customs for Landing the same, such Goods shall be forfeited or the value
thereof, and be recovered of the importer or proprietor, one Moiety to the
King, the other to the Seiser or Prosecutor.

CCCCLXXXIV. The said Duties payable for Whale Fins and Scotch Linen as
aforesaid, shall be managed by the Commissioners of the Customs; And the
Receivers General of the Customs shall bring the Produce thereof (necessary
charges only excepted) into the Receipt of the Exchequer; And the Officers of
the Exchequer shall apply the said Duties, as also the half Duties on Glass
Ways for the payment of such Principal and Interest Moneys, whereunto the
whole Duties on Glass and Earthen Wares and Tobacco Pipes ought to have been
applied in the same Order, and under the like Penalties and Forfeitures as in
the said former Acts are prescribed.

Trade.
I. Stat. 8 and 9 W. 3. cap. 36. Enacted, That whosoever shall Import any
Foreign Alamodes or Lustrings into England, Wales or Town of Berwick, without
paying the Customs and Rates due for the same at such Importation, or shall
Import any Alamodes or Lustrings prohibited by Law, or undertake or agree to
deliver, or shall deliver any such Goods or Merchandise, or shall pay any
Money, Praemium, or Reward for Insuring or Conveying any such Goods, or
knowingly receive or take the same into his or her House, Custody or
Possession, such Person may be prosecuted for the same in any Action, Suit, or
Information; and thereupon a Capias specifying the Sum of the Penalties shall
Issue, and the Party obliged to give sufficient Bail to the Officer to appear
in Court, and shall at the time of appearance give sufficient Bail to pay the
penalties for such Offenses, in case of Conviction or yield his Body to Prison.

II. It shall be lawful for any Person to Sue for, and Recover the penalty of
500 l. imposed by the Stat. 4 and 5 W. and M. upon Insuring to Import
Prohibited Goods or Goods without paying Custom, ( cap. 15 Customs 166.) by
Action of Debt, etc. in any of the Kings Courts of Record at Westminster,
wherein no Essoign, etc. shall be allowed.

III. All Black Alamodes and Lustrings wheresoever made, which shall be found
in the Possession of any Person not Marked and Sealed by the Custom House, or
the Royal Lustring Company, shall be forfeited, and may be seized as forfeited,
whether the same has been bought and sold or not, and the Person in whose
Custody they are found shall incur the penalties relating to Alamodes and
Lustrings, in an Act made 6 and 7 W. 3. ( cap. 18. Trade 84.)

IV. No Alamodes and Lustrings, that after the 10 of April 1697, shall be
seized and forfeited by virtue of any Law now in force, shall be used in
England, but shall be exported again, and to that end, shall immediately on
their Seizure be carried to the Custom-house Ware house in London, and there
sold by Inch of Candle, on Condition to be exported, and Security given for
Exportation, which Security may be discharged by Certificate from the Port
where such Goods shall be Landed, or Oath made that they were lost at Sea.

V. On Exportation of Foreign Lustrings or Alamodes, the Exporter shall not be
Entitled to Receive, Draw back, or be repaid the Customs or Impositions paid
or secured on Importation of the same, or any part thereof.

VI. Every Person that shall Imbezel, Pawn, Sell or Detain any of the Silk
delivered to them as Agents, Journeymen, Warpers or Winders, or after it is
wrought up, and every Receiver, Buyer and Pawn-taker, of any the said Goods,
shall be subject to all the Penalties and Punishments mentioned and provided in
an Act made 13 and 14 Car. 2. ( chap. 15.) and in another Act made 20 Car. 2. (
chap. 6.) both for regulating the Trade of Silk throwing.

VII. All such pieces of Alamodes and Lustrings as some Weavers have now by
them unmarkt, and shall appear upon Oath made in Writing before any Justice of
Peace, by one or more credible Witnesses, to be Manufactured within this Realm
before the 10 of April 1697, shall be brought to the Royal Lustring Companies
Warehouse, and the Evidence being there produced, shall be Marked and Sealed
gratis by the said Company before the 1 of May 1697, and then be lawful to be
Sold, as if manufactured by the said Company.

VIII. The said Weavers shall give an Account weekly to the said Company, to
whom they have Sold such Goods so marked and sealed under the penalty of double
the value of such Goods, for every Omission, to be recovered as other Penalties
inflicted by this Act; and the said Company shall keep a Register of the said
Sales.

IX. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 9. All Persons who after 25 March School, shall
Import or cause to be Imported into England or Wales, or Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, or who shall after 24 December School, Sell, Barter or offer to Sale, or
knowingly keep in their Custody for Sale, or for the use of any Importer or
Dealer in the Commodities aftermentioned, any Foreign Bone-lace, Loomlace,
Needle Work, Point or Cutwork, shall forfeit 20 s. per Yard for all the said
Foreign Bone-lace, etc. so Imported, Sold, Bartered, offered to Sale or kept as
aforesaid, together with all the said Goods.

X. The Importation, Selling, Bartering, offering to Sale or Barter, or
knowingly keeping for that purpose any Foreign Bonelace, etc. is hereby
declared a Common Nuisance; And the said prohibited Goods or any part thereof
may be seized, and the Offenders prosecuted by any person whatsoever. Any
Persons with a Constable or Tythingman, with a Warrant from a Justice of Peace
in the day time may enter into any House, Shop, Cellar, Warehouse or Room, or
other place whatsoever, to Search for and Seize any of the prohibited Goods
before mentioned, and in case of Resistance, to break open Doors, Chests,
Trunks and other Package whatsoever to Seize the Goods prohibited by this Act:
And every Justice of Peace is to grant such Warrant, to any credible Persons
making Oath, that they have reason to suspect there are such prohibited Goods
where they intend to Search.

XI. All Foreign Bone-lace, etc. Seized by virtue of this or any other Act,
shall be carried to the next Custom house, not thence to be delivered, unless
to be produced at a Trial, or otherwise discharged by Law. The Goods so seized
and condemned shall be sold publicly by Inch of Candle, whereof public notice
in Writing to be affixed at the Custom-house Door, and other public place
where the Goods are lodged Ten days before the Sale, and shall not be delivered
to the Buyers without Security by Bond, in double the value to Export the same
within Six Months, and not to Import the same into England, Scotland or
Ireland, or His Majesty's Dominions in America or elsewhere: Which Obligation,
upon Certificate of the proper Officer, and Oath of the Buyer that the said
Goods were Exported accordingly, and not Landed or intended to be Landed again
in any of His Majesty's Dominions, shall be Vacated; But the said Goods not
being so Exported, the Persons in whose Custody the said Goods shall be found,
shall be again liable to all the Forfeitures in this or any other Act, as if
the same had never been seized.

XII. If any Bone-lace, etc. be seized, and carried to any Custom-house as
Foreign, which the Seizer shall after believe to be English; He may take off
his Seizure, affixing public notice in Writing at the Custom-house Door and
the Guild hall, or other most public place, of the quantity and kind so
seized: And if no other person shall, within Ten days after, undertake to
prosecute for the same, it shall be delivered back to the Proprietor, Oath
being first made by him or some known Person on his behalf, that the said Goods
are (to the best of his knowledge and belief) English made, and Oath made
before some Justice of Peace of the place, where and of whom the said Goods
were bought, who shall certify the same at the next General Quarter Sessions;
and the Persons wilfully Forswearing themselves therein, shall suffer as for
Perjury.

XIII. The Officers of the Customs shall be Aiding in the Execution of this
Act, and upon conniving at the Importation, Delivery or Selling of any such
Foreign Bone-lace, etc. shall forfeit 20 pounds, and be ever incapable of
serving his Majesty in any Office.

XIV. The proof that such Bone-lace, etc. so found or seized was made and
Manufactured in England, Wales or Berwick, shall be only upon the Importer,
Keeper, Seller, Retailer, Barterer, or those in whose Hands or Custody the same
shall be found, and not upon the Informer, Seizer or Prosecutor that they were
made beyond Sea.

XV. The Penalties and Forfeitures incurred by this Act may be recovered (over
and above any Penalties in any former Act) in any the Courts of Record at
Westminster, and the said Penalties (the Prosecutor having been allowed his
reasonable Charges) shall be one Moiety to the King, the other to the Person
that will Sue for the same.

XVI. Persons sued for any thing done in pursuance of this Act may plead the
General Issue, and give this Act and the special matter in Evidence; And if a
Verdict pass for the Defendant, or the Plaintiff discontinue, be Nonsuited, or
have Judgment against him upon Demurrer, the Defendant shall have treble Costs.

XVII. All Informations against this Act shall be brought within Twelve Months
after the discovery of the Offense.

XVIII. Before any Person shall be admitted to Enter a Claim to any such Goods
seized, he shall be obliged to give Security by Recognizance before a Baron of
the Exchequer in Twenty pounds penalty to pay the Prosecutor full Costs of
Suit, in case a Verdict shall pass or Judgment be entered for the Plaintiff, and
in default of such Security in due time, the said Goods shall be adjudged
forfeited.

XIX. This Act shall not empower any Persons to enter into any House, Shop,
Cellar, Ware house, or other Room or Place, or to break open the same, or any
Door, Chest, Trunk or other Package not belonging to a Dealer in Lace.

XX. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 17. Enacted, That after 24 June School. All Bills
of Exchange Drawn in or Dated at and from any place in this Kingdom, of the Sum
of 5 l. Sterling or upwards, upon any Person in London, or any other Trading
City, Town or Place (in which Bills the value shall be expressed to be
received) Drawn Payable at a certain time after the Date thereof, may after
Acceptance in Writing, and the expiration of Three days after the same shall be
due, be protested by a Notary public, or in default of such Notary public, by
any other substantial person of the place before Two Witnesses, Refusal or
Neglect being first made of due payment; which Protest shall be made under a
Copy of the Bill in the form prescribed by the Act, and shall be notified
within Fourteen days after to the Party from whom the Bills were received, who
(upon producing such Protest) is to Repay the said Bills with Interest and
Charges from the Protesting: For which Protest there shall not be paid above 6
d And in default of such Protest, or due Notice thereof, the Person so failing
shall be liable to all Costs, Damages and Interest thereupon. Provided that if
any such Inland Bills be lost or miscarry, within the time limited for payment
of the same, the Drawer of the said Bills shall give other Bills of the same
tenor, Security being given to indempnifie him in case the said Bills so lost
or miscarried be found again.

XXI. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 26. After 24 Jun. School. The Royal African
Company, shall maintain all such Forts and Castles as they now have in their
Possession, or shall hereafter Purchase or Erect for the preservation of the
Trade to Africa; And shall supply them with Men, Artillery, Ammunition and
Provision, and all other necessaries as occasion shall require.

XXII. Any of the Subjects of this Realm, as well as the said Company may after
the said 24 June Trade from England, and after 1 Aug. School, from any of his
Majesty's Plantations in America, to the Coast of Africa between Cape Mount and
the Cape of Good Hope, the said Company and all others answering a Duty of 10
per Cent. ad Valorem, for the Goods and Merchandise Exported thither from
England, or from his Majesty's Plantations in America, for maintaining the said
Castles and Forts, and preserving the said Trade.

XXIII. The Master, Owner or Freighter of every Ship intending to Sail or Trade
between Cape Mount and the Cape of Good Hope, shall at one of the chief Custom
houses in England, or the Plantations from whence such Ship is to Sail, Enter
the name of the Master and Ship, and the Burden thereof so Freighted 15 days
before clearing thereof; And the Owner or Exporter shall there also enter upon
Oath the quantity, quality and value of the Goods and Merchandise so to be
Shipped, and Sign such Entry: And thereupon pay the said Duty to the Collector
or chief Officer of the Custom there, who is to demand and receive the same for
the use of the said Company: And all such Goods and Merchandise Exported from
England to the Plantations and thence to Africa, shall be valued at no more
than what they cost in England.

XXIV. The Collector or other Chief Officer in or near the Ports whence such
Ships are to be cleared, shall before the clearing thereof administer the Oaths
following, whereof the Master shall make Oath, thus,

I A. B do Swear, That the manifest or particular now by me given in and
signed, to the best of my knowledge and belief, does contain, specify and
express all the Goods, Wares and Merchandises, which are Laden or intended to
be Laden, or put on Board the Ship or Vessel called the (...) whereof I A. B.
am Master for this Voyage to Africa.

So help me God.

XXV. Every Owner or Exporter of such Goods, upon Entry thereof shall make this
Oath.

I A. B. do Swear, That the Entry by me now made and signed, does contain and
specify all the particular quantities, quality and true and full value of all
the Goods, Wares and Merchandises therein expressed, to be Shipped on Board the
Ship or Vessel called the (...) whereof (...) is Master, for the Voyage She is
now to preceed on to Africa.

So Help me God.

XXVI. Upon Exporting any Goods or Merchandise from the Plantations to Africa,
that were there Imported from England, the Owner or Exporter shall also Swear,
That to the best of his Knowledge and Belief, such Goods and Merchandise so
Entered were Imported from England into that Colony or Plantation; and that the
true and real value thereof as Cost in England is fully expressed in the said
Entry: And the said Master, and one of the Owners or Freighters, before such
Ship be cleared, shall give Bond to his Majesty, to the value of such Ship and
Lading, that the said Ship (not unavoidably hindered) shall Sail directly to
Africa, between the Capes aforesaid, and thence directly return to and unlade
in England, or one of the Plantations aforesaid: And the Collector or chief
Officer aforesaid is to take such Bond, and keep a distinct Book of all such
Entries and Duties payable for the use of the said Company; and to deliver to
the said Company, on Demand, a Duplicate of such Entries and Oaths, and Bonds
given and Moneys paid; And shall pay to the said Company the Moneys so
Received, deducting 5 per Cent for his or their trouble.

XXVII. After 24 June School. Any of the Subjects of this Realm as well as the
said Company may Trade from England, or any of his Majesty's Plantations in
America, to the Coast of Africa between Cape Blancho and Cape Mount, paying 10
per Cent. ad Valorem, for the Goods and Merchandise so Exported to the said
Coast; and paying a further Sum of 10 per Cent ad Valorem (Redwood excepted,
which is to pay 5 per Cent only) at the place of Importation, upon all Goods
and Merchandise (Negroes excepted) Imported into England, or the Plantations
from Africa between Cape Blancho and Cape Mount aforesaid: And every Master and
Trader Trading from England or the Plantations, between the said Capes, shall
make like Entries and Oath, and give like Bonds as is directed for Masters and
Traders between Cape Mount and Cape Good Hope; and upon such Entry and Oath
shall pay the Duty aforesaid, payable by Traders between Cape Mount and Cape
Good Hope: And the Collector or Chief Officer of the Chief Custom-houses in
England, or the Plantations from whence such Ship shall be dispatched, are to
take such Entries and Bonds, and give such Oaths, and receive such Duties, and
pay the same to the said Company on Demand, for the Uses before directed; and
to do every other thing mutatis mutandis as is directed touching Traders
between Cape Mount and Cape Good Hope: And that all Goods and Merchandise
(Negroes excepted) that shall be Shipped on the Coast of Africa between Cape
Blancho and Cape Mount, and shall be Imported into England or the Plantations,
shall pay the Duties aforesaid: And the Master or Chief Officer of every such
Ship, that shall take on Board any Goods or Merchandise (Negroes excepted)
between Cape Blancho and Cape Mount, shall upon making Entry thereof, and
before Landing the same, deliver in a Particular of his Cargo, and take the
following Oath.

XXVIII. I A. B. de Swear, That the Manifest or Particular now by me given in
and signed, to the best of my knowledge and belief does contain, signify and
express all the Goods, Wares and Merchandises (Negroes excepted) which were
Laden or put on Board the said Ship called the (...) during her stay and
continuing on the Coast of Africa, between Cape Blancho and Cape Mount, whereof
I A. B. am Master.

XXIX. And that the Owner or Importer of all Goods and Merchandises (Negroes
excepted) which shall be brought to England or the Plantations, from between
Cape Blancho and Cape Mount, shall make Entry thereof at one of the Chief
Custom-houses in England, or the Plantations where Imported, with the Collector
or Chief Officer of the Cussoms upon Oath, and Sign the same of the quantity,
quality and value of such Goods and Merchandise, as worth to be sold at ths
place of Importation, and pay the Duty for the same as aforesaid: And such
Collector or Chief Officer where such Ship shall Arrive is to take the Entries
and Manifests, give the Oaths and Receive the Duties aforesaid, and pay the
same to the said Company on Demand, for the uses afore-directed, and deliver to
the said Company a Duplicate of all such Entries and Oaths made and signed as
aforesaid.

XXX. The said Collector or Officer may deduct for his or their trouble 5 per
Cent. for the Duties arising by this Act, except from the Exports and Imports
of the said Royal African Company: And the said Company shall give an Account
in Writing of the Moneys by them received and by their Exports and Imports for
the Duties aforesaid, and how they have laid out the same yearly, within Three
months after the end of every year, to the Cursitor, Baron of the Exchequer,
who may examine Persons thereupon on Oath. And all such Goods and Merchandises
brought from between Cape Blancho and Cape Mount, as shall be Landed before
Entry made and Signed, and Oath of the value thereof made, and the Duty paid,
shall be forfeited or the value thereof.

XXXI. Every Ship which contrary to this Act shall Sail from England, or the
Plantations for the Coast of Africa, without being duly Entered, Oath made and
Bonds given, as before directed) shall be forefeited, or the value thereof: And
all Goods and Merchandise Shipped from England or the Plantations for the Coast
of Africa as aforesaid, contrary to this Act, before due Entry made thereof and
of the value, and the Duties paid for the same shall be forfeited or the value
thereof: And every Ship, and all the Goods and Merchandises therein belonging
to his Majesty's Subjects, Sailing from any other part than from England or the
Plantations to the Coast of Africa as aforesaid shall be forfeited.

XXXII. One third part of the said Forfeitures shall be to his Majesty, one
other third part to the said Company, toward maintenance of the said Forts and
Castles, and the other third part to the Informer and Prosecutor.

XXXIII. Any Persons whatsoever may Sue for the said Forfeitures in any his
Majesty's Courts of Record of this Kingdom, or in any of his Majesty's
Plantations or Colonies in America.

XXXIV. If any Ship Trading to Africa, and the Goods therein be Cast away or
Lest before she arrive at her Port, The Proprietors or Exporters shall upon
their sending any other Ship to Africa, be allowed so much as was paid to the
said Company for the Goods so lost.

XXXV. All the Natural born Subjects of England Trading to Africa and paying
the Duties by this Act imposed, shall have the same Protection for their
Persons, Ships and Goods, from the said Forts and Castles, and the like freedom
for their Trade as the said Company, and their Ships and Goods have: And all
Persons Trading to Africa and paying the Duties as aforesaid, may at their own
charge settle Factories on any part of Africa within the limits aforesaid,
without let of the said Company. And all Persons not Members of the said
Company, so Trading and paying the said Duties shall with their Ships and Goods
be free from all Molestation, Penalties or Impositions from the said Company,
by reason of their so Trading.

XXXVI. If any Goods exported for Africa, having paid the Duties on this Act,
shall be brought back to England or the Plantations, they may be exported again
to Africa without paying any Duty, Oath being first made by two Persons, not
interested in such Goods, that the Duty was paid upon their first Exportation;
A Copy of the Entry of such Goods upon their former Exportation being first
preduced and attested upon Oath of two Persons.

XXXVII. All the Duties arising by this Act are hereby appropriated wholly to
the maintenance of the Forts and Castles on the Coasts of Africa in the
Possession of the said Royal African Company, and for keeping them well
repaired, and providing them with Ammunition and Warlike Stores, and Soldiers
to defend them, and paying the Officers and Soldiers, and no other uses
whatsoever: And a true account of the said Duties, and laying out the same,
shall be kept in a Book for that purpose, which shall lie open at the
African-House in London, to be perused by all Persons Trading to Africa; And
that an Account be made up yearly at Michaelmas or within 20 days after, and
Recorded in the Exchequer.

XXXVIII. No Duty imposed by this Act shall be required in England or the
Colenies aforesaid, for any Gold or Silver imported from Africa, but the same
may be Landed without Entry or Declaration thereof.

XXXIX. This Act shall not hinder any Persons from Trading to that part of
Africa called Barbary, extending Southerly as for as Cape Blancho.

XL. Any of his Majesty's Subjects (notwithstanding the Act of 5 and 6. W. and
M. that no other Copper than what is made of English Ore should be exported)
may Export from England all such Copper Bars as have been Imported thither from
Foreign Parts, and upon Exportation shall draw back all Duties or Vacate the
Securities, saving the half of the old subsidy, as is usual in other
Commodities.

XLI. No Governor or Deputy Governor of any his Majesty's Colonies or
Plantations in America, or the Judges there, or any other for their use, shall
after 29 Sept. School, be a Factor or Agent for the said Company or others, for
the Sale or Disposal of Negroes; but every Person offending herein shall
serselt 500 l. to the uses aforesaid, to be recovered in any of the Courts of
Record at Westminster.

XLII. This Act shall be in force only 13 years, and from thence to the end of
the next Session of Parliament.

XLIII. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 28. After 24 June School. It shall be lawful to
Export such Watches, Sword Hilts Wrought-Plare, and other Silver Manufactures
made within this Kingdom being of the fineness of Eleven ounces and Ten penny
weight to every pound Troy, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser
weight, according to the Rules prescribed in the Act made 8 and 9 W. 3.
Entitled, An Act for the Encouraging the bringing in of Wrought-Plate to be
Coined, as shall be yearly allowed by the Commissioners of the Customs, or any
three of them.

XLIV. No Person shall after the said 24 of June Export or send, or Endeavor
to Export or send out or this Kingdom, any outward or inward Box, Case or Dyal
plate of Gold, Silver, Brass or other Metal for Clock or Watch, without the
movement in or with every such Box, Case or Dyal-plate, made up fit for use,
with the Clock or Watchmakers name Engraven thereon: Nor shall any Persons
after the said 24 of June (...) to be made up any Clock or Watch without
ingraving or putting their own Name and place of Abode or Freedom, and no other
Name or Place, on every Clock or Watch they shall so make up, on the forfeiting
every such Empty box, Case and (...), Clock and Watch not made up and Engraven
as aforesaid, and for every such offense 20 l. one Moiety to the King, the
other to them that shall Sue for the same, in any of his Majesty's Courts of
Record.

XLV. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 39. After 24 July School, All Silver Wire to be
drawn for the making of Gold and Silver Thread, shall hold at the least 11 oz.
16 penny weight of Fine Silver to the pound Troy, and all Silver to be guilt
for that use, shall be of the same fineness, and shall not have loss than four
penny weight of Fine Gold, laid upon each pound weight of Silver, on forfeiture
of five shillngs per Ounce, to be paid by the Refiner or Maker.

XLVI. After the said 24 of July, no Gilt Wire shall be colored with
Verdigrease or Dead-head, or any other forced Color, on forfeiture of 2 s. 6
d. per Ounce. And for all Gold and Silver so prepared and reduced into Plate,
there shall be allowed at least six Ounces to cover four Ounces of Silk, the
finest of which Silk shall not run above sixteen Yards to the penny weight
Troy; And six Ounces to cover three Ounces and a half of Silk, not running
above thirty six Yards to the penny weight Troy; And six Ounces to cover three
Ounces of Silk, not running above ninety Yards to the penny weight Troy; And
for all Gold and Silver Thread made finer, six Ounces of Plate to cover two
Ounces and a half of Silk: And shall be Spun close upon well Boiled and Light
Dyed Silk only (except Frost-work) on forfeiture of 2 s. 6 d. per Ounce. And
every Spinner of Gold and Silver Thread, that shall lay Gold or Silver Plate
upon Silk in other proportions, shall forfeit for every Ounce so spun two
shillings.

XLVII. After the said 24 of July, Copper, Brass and every other inferior Metal
than Silver, shall be Spun upon Thread, Yarn or Incle only, and not upon Silk,
on forfeiture of five shillings per Ounce.

XLVIII. After the said 24 of July, No Gold or Silver Thread, Lace, Fringe or
other Work made thereof, nor any Thread made of Copper, Brass or any Inferior
Metal, or Wire or Plate ready wrought, for the covering of Silk or Thread,
shall be Imported into this Kingdom, on pain of being forfeited and burnt.

XLIX. Of the several Penalties in this Act, one Moiety shall be to the King,
the other to them that shall sue for the same, in any the Courts of Record at
Westminster.

L. If any Person be sued for what he shall do in Execution of this Act, he may
plead the General Issue, and give the Special Matter in Evidence, and upon a
Nonsuit, Discontinuance or Verdict against the Plaintiff, the Defendant shall
have treble Costs.

LI. No Penalty shall be inflicted on any Person exposing to sale any Silver
Wire, or Silver or Gold Thread, or Lace or Fringe, on or before 29 Sept. 1699,
though not made according to this Act, provided it be proved by Oath before a
Justice of Peace of the Place, that such Goods were made on or before 24 July
School.

LII. Every Prosecution upon this Act shall be commenced within Six months
after the Offense committed.

LIII. This Act shall continue for Three years, and thence to the end of the
next Session of Parliament.

LIVE. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. Cap. 42. Whereas by an Act 7 and 8 W. 3. Entitled,
An Act for Preventing Frauds, and Regulating Abuses in the Plantation Trade; It
is Enacted, That after the 25th of March School. No Ship or Vessel shall pass as
a Ship of the built of England, Ireland, Wales, Berwick, Guernsey, Jersey, or
any His Majesty's Plantations in America, so as to Trade to or from the said
Plantations, till Registered as enacted by the said Act: And yet several
Merchants, Trading to the Plantations, have sent out several Ships and Vessels
thither, but through madvertency only, have omitted to Register them; It is
Enacted, That all Ships and Vessels of the Built of England, Ireland, Wales,
Berwick, Guernsey, Jersey, or any His Majesty's Plantations in America, being
English Property, shall have Nine months longer from the said 25th of March
School. for Registring such Ships; which being Registered within the said Nine
months, shall have the advantage of the say Act, as if Registered before the
said 25 Mar. School.

LV. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. Cap. 43. After 1 July School. no Foreign Silks, known
by the name of Alamodes or Lustrings, shall be Imported into this Kingdom, but
into the Port of London only; and Notice shall be given to the Commissioners or
Chief Managers of the Customs there, of the Quality and Quantity, with the
Marks, Numbers and Package of all such Silks intended to be Imported, with the
Name of the Importer, and of the Ship and her Burden, and of the Master and
Commander on which they are to be Laden, and the Port where the same are to be
taken on Board: And a License shall be taken under the Hands of the said
Commissioners or Chief Managers of the Customs, or any three of them, for the
Importing of the same; which License is to be granted without Fee or Reward.

LVI. The said Commissioners or Chief Managers of the Customs shall cause to be
marked and sealed all such Alamodes and Lustrings, which shall be Imported
after the said 1st of July, according to this Act; and cause a dissinct
Registry thereof to be kept in the Custom-House, to be made without Fee or
Reward before the Goods be delivered out of the Custom House Warchouse: And if
any of the said Silks shall be Imported into this Realm other where than in the
Port of Londen, or Imported without such Notice and License, and the Duties
paid for the same, or shall not be so sealed and marked, such Silks or the sull
value thereof shall be forfeited: And the Silks which shall be seized and
forfeited, by virtue of this or any former Act, shall be sold and exported
pursuant to the Rules mentioned in an Act of 8 and 9 W. 3 Entitled, An Act for
the further Encouragement of the Manufacture of Lustrings and Alamedes within
this Realm.

LVII. All Persons who shall Import or bring into this Kingdom any Alamodes or
Lustrings contrary to this Act, or knowingly receive the same into their
Custody, or sell or offer to sale any such Foreign Silks so fraudulently
Imported, and their Aiders, Abettors and Assistants knowing thereof, shall
forfeit 500 Pounds.

LVIII. If any Commission or Warrant Officer, or other Person in the Service of
His Majesty, and having the Command of any Ship or Vessel, shall Import or
Convey or procure or suffer to be Imported, or take on Board any Alamodes or
Lustrings, in Order to be Imported into this Kingdom, or shall Unship or suffer
to be Unshipt into any Boat or Vessel any such Silks, knowing thereof, shall
over and above the Forfeitures and Penalties in this or any other Act, be ipso
facto rendered incapable of serving His Majesty by Sea or Land or of receiving
any Advantage by virtue of such Service: And if any Seaman, Mariner or other
belonging to any Ship or Vessel, shall discover any Alamodes or Lustrings so
Imported, or Unshipt in order to be Imported, contrary to this Act, such
Persons shall (over and above their part of the Forfeitures by this Act) be
discharged from on Board such Ship or Vessel, if they desire the same; and the
Captain or Master shall immediately give them a Ticket, Intituling them to
their Wages on Board such Ship or Vessel.

LIX. If any Persons shall afterward Counterfeit or Misapply any of the Seals
or Marks now used at the Custom House, for Sealing and Marking Alamodes and
Lustrings, according to this or any other Act, or the Seals or Marks of the
said Company for Marking and Sealing their Goods; they, their Aiders and
Abettors shall for every such Offense forfeit 500 Pounds, and stand in the
Pillory two Hours: And all Persons who shall buy or fell, or have in their
Possession any Alamodes or Lustrings with a Counterfeit Seal or Mark, or with
the Custom-House or Companies Seal or Mark not lawfully affixed thereto,
knowing thereof, and not discovering the same, shall forfeit the Goods and 100
Pounds: Any Persons with a Writ of Assistance from the Exchequer, or with a
Constable or Officer, and a Justice of Peace's Warrant, may in the day time
Enter into any House, Shop. Warehouse or other place, to search for and seize
any Alamodes or Lustrings Imported contrary to this or any other Act, or Sealed
or Marked as aforesaid; And in case of Resistance to break open Doors, Chests
and other Package, to bring thence to his Majesty's Ware house any such Silks:
And the Justices of Peace are to grant such Warrants to Credible Persons making
Oath, they suspect there are such Silks where they intend to Search: And upon
Dispute whether such Silks were Manufactured beyond the Seas, or Imported
contrary to this Act, the Proof shall lie upon the Importer or Owner, and not
upon the Prosecutor.

LX. All Officers of the Customs, or in Corporations or elsewhere shall be
assisting in the Execution of this Act; and if any Officer of the Customs shall
knowingly connive at the Importation or Disposing of such Alamodes and
Lustrings, or if any Persons taking upon them to Seize or Prosecute in
pursuance of this or any other Act, shall by Collusion desist or delay
Prosecution to Condemnation of the said Silks, they shall forfeit 500 l. and be
incapable of any Office or Employment.

LXI. Such Persons Convicted for any Offense against this or any other Act
relating to Alamodes or Lustrings, as shall afterward offend a second time or
oftener, shall so often as they offend forfeit double the sum inflicted by this
Act.

LXII. All Persons offending contrary to this or any other Act relating to
Alamodes or Lustrings, shall be prosecuted in any Action, Suit or Information,
and thereupon a Capias in the first Process, specifying the Penalties sued for
may Issue, and sufficient Bail and Security shall be given by Natural born
Subjects or Denizens to answer such Suit, and at the time of Appearance
sufficient Bail and Security in Court to answer the Penalties in case of
Conviction, or to suffer Imprisonment.

LXIII. All the Penalties and Forfeitures imposed hereby, or by any former Law
relating to Alamodes or Lustrings, shall be two third parts to his Majesty, and
one third to the Prosecutor, the charge of which Suit shall be born by his
Majesty, out of his Majesty's part of the Forfeitures: Which Penalties and
Forfeitures shall be recoverable by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information, in any the Courts of Record at Westminster, wherein no Essoign,
etc. shall be allowed, nor more than one Imparlance: All which Informations or
Actions may be laid and tried in such places, and with the like proceedings as
are used about the Scizing, Condemning or Prosecuting any Goods for Non payment
of Customs or other Duties, or any Persons offending against the Laws relating
to the Customs.

LXIV. No claim shall be entered to any such Silks seized as aforesaid, till
Security given by Recognizance before a Judge, to answer the Penalties and
Forfeitures with full cosis of Suit, where a Verdict shall pass or Judgment be
entered for the Plaintiff: And in default of such Security within the limited
time, the Goods to be forfeited, and Judgment entered accordingly.

LXV. This Act and every thing therein contained shall be taken to be a general
Law, and not needful to be set forth in Heading, and shall be construed most
beneficially for the Prosecutor, and for preventing the mischiefs hereby
provided against. And Persons sued for any thing done by virtue hereof, may
plead the General Issue, and give this Act and the Special matter in Evidence,
And upon a Verdict for the Defendants, or if the Plaintiff Discontinue, be
Nonsuit or suffer Judgment by Demurrer, the Defendants shall have treble Costs.

LXVI. All Actions brought by an Informer against this Act, shall be Commenced
within two years after the offense committed.

LXVII. The Royal Lustring Company having been first Erected by the late King
James, by Letters Patents bearing date 23 November. 4. Jac. 2. for the Term of 14
years, and afterward by the Letters Patents of his present Majesty, and the
late Queen of Blessed Memory bearing date 15, October. 4 W. and M. Incorporated
with perpetual Succession for the making and dressing of Alamodes, Renforcez
and Lustrings in England; And having brought the said Manufacture to
perfection, but by reason of the fraudulent Importation of Alamodes and
Lustrings, and in contesting with many difficulties and obstructions, have not
enjoyed the benefit intended them by the said Charter. It is Enacted, That the
foresaid Company and their Successors shall from henceforth be a Body Politic
and Corporate by the Name of the Royal Lustring Company, and Enjoy all the
Privileges and Authorities granted them in the said Charter of Incorporation,
as fully as if the same were recited in this Act.

LXVIII. The said Royal Lestring Company, and their Successors, shall have the
sole exercise and benefit of Making, Dressing and Lustrating of plain Black
Alamodes, Renforcez and Lustrings within this Realm for 14 years, from 24 Jun.
School, and from thence to the end of the next Sessions of Parliament, any thing
to the contrary notwithstanding.

LXIX. The said Company having 17 Bails of Fine Italian Thrown Silk in
Amsterdam, brought thither over Land before the Conclusion of the Peace, and
designed to be Imported and used here in the Manufacture of Alamodes and
Lustrings, but could not be Imported within the time limited by Law, It is
Enacted, That the said Company may Import into this Kingdom, the said 17 Bails
of Silk before 29 Sept. next, paying the legal Duties to his Majesty.

LXX. Stat. 9 and 10 W. 3. cap. 44. Enacted, That there shall be through
England and Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, Levied and paid to his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors for Salt, (over and above all other Duties
already payable) these Additional Rates, viz. 5 d. per Gallon for all Salt
Imported from 1 July School. to 25 December 1699. And from 24 December 1699. for
ever 7 d. per Gallon, and so for a greater or lesser Quantity.

LXXI. For all Salt and Rock-Salt Home made, from the said 1 July School. to 25
December 1699. 2 d. Halfpenny per Gallon, and from 24 December 1699. for ever,
3 d. Half penny per Gallon; subject to the Redemption hereafter mentioned.

LXXII. Which Duties on Foreign Salt shall be paid by the Importer, before
landing, and if Landed before due Entry thereof, or before the Duties be paid,
or a Warrant for the Landing thereof, then to be Forfeited, and also 10 s. for
every Bushel so Landed.

LXXIII. Provided that the Importers of Salt giving Security for payment of
these Duties, shall have Six Months time for Payment, with a Discount after 10
l. per Centum per Aunum for prompt Payment.

LXXIV. The said Duties on Salt to be Managed by the Commissioners of Excile,
who are to Appoint the necessary Officers, and the Penalties and Forfeitures
hereby Imposed, to be Sued for and Recovered by the same Ways, as Directed by
the Act 12 Car. 2. For taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries and Tenures
in Capite, and by Knights Service and Purveyance, and Settling a Revenue on His
Majesty in lieu thereof, or by any Law now in Force, relating to the Excise.

LXXV. All Makers and Proprietors of Salt and Rock-Salt within the Kingdom,
shall make true Entries with the Officers so appointed, and shall have their
Warrant, gratis, for Carrying the same away, upon Payment, or Security to pay
the Duties within Six Months after such Entry, with a Discount after 10 l. per
Cent. per Annum for Ready Money.

LXXVI. The Officers so Appointed may seize all such Salt, as after 1 July,
School shall be Conveying away before due Entry made, or Warrant obtained for
Conveying thereof: And if not Claimed within Ten Days, then to be absolutely
Forseited and Sold, One Moiety of the Preceed thereof to go to the King, the
other to the Seizer: And if Claimed without Proof upon Oath before the next
Justice of Peace that the same was duly Entered, and a Warrant for Conveyance
obtained, it shall likewise be Forfeited: And the Persons so Carrying the same
away, shall Forfeit to His Majesly double the Value, and also 10 s. per Bushel.

LXXVII. No Retailer or Shopkeeper shall ship any Salt for any Port of this
Kingdom, before Oath, or other Proof made, before the Collectors, that the Duty
is Paid or Secured.

LXXVIII. Masters of Ships Carrying Salt or Rock-Salt from one Port to another,
shall before they have a Warrant for Landing it, Deliver to the Collectors
Particulars thereof upon Oath, and that no more has been Laded since their
coming out of Port; and upon Landing any Part thereof at any other Port, shall
have a Certificate thereof, or Forfeit double the Value so Landed, and also 10
s. per Bushel.

LXXIX. No Fees shall be taken for Debentures, Tickets, Warrants or Licenses
touching the said Duties.

LXXX. Provided that for Fish exported there be allowed over and above all
former Allowances) For every Cask of Pilchards er Scads from 1 July, School, to
25 December, 1699. 20 s. and after 24 December, 1699. 28 s. For every Barrel of
White Herring, from ^ July, School. to 25 December, 1699. 4 s. 2 d. And from 24
December, 1699. 5. s. 10 d. For every Barrel of Red Herring, from 1 July, School.
to 25 December, 1699. 3 s. 4 d. and after 24 December, 1699. 4 s. 8 d. For
every Barrel of Salmon, from 1 July, School. to 25 December, 1699. 8 s. 4 d. and
after 24 December, 1699. 11 s. 8 d. For every Hundred of Codfish, Ling or Hake,
after 1 July, 1692, and before 25 December, 1699. 25 s. and after 24 December,
1699. 35 s. For every Last of Dried Red Sprats, after 1 July, School. 6 s. 8 d.

LXXXI. Which Allowances shall be Paid by the Salt Collector, in the Port from
whence such Fish is Exported, within Thirty Days after Demand, upon a Debenture
duly verified, and Oath made that the Fish was English taken, and really
Exported beyond Sea: And if the Collector have not sufficient Money to pay the
same, upon his Certificate the Commissioners of Excise shall be Chargeable
therewith out of the first Money in their Hands on the said Salt Duties; And
any Officer neglecting or refusing to pay the said Money, or give such
Certificate, shall forfeit double the Sum payable.

LXXXII. Upon Exporting any Salt, Foreign, or English or Rock-Salt, the Officer
where such Salt was Made or Imported, and the Duty Paid or Secured, shall
deliver Certificates thereof, gratis, and the Officer at the Place of
Exportation, shall thereupon give a Debenture for Repayment of the Duty, by the
Officer, where it was before Paid or Secured.

LXXXIII. All Salt Imported or Brought into England, Wales or Berwick, not
there Made. shall pay as Foreign Salt, and Scotch Salt brought into England by
Land shall be entered at Carlisle or Berwick, under forseiture of double the
value, and also 10 s. per Bushel.

LXXXIV. Persons Sued for any thing done in pursuance of this Act, may Plead
the General Issue, and give the Act in Evidence, and if the Plaintiff he Cast,
Nonsuit or forbear Prosecuting, the Desendant shall have double Costs.

LXXXV. No Writ of Certiorari shall supersede the Orders of the Commissioners
of Excise or Justices of Peace touching the Duties on Salt.

LXXXVI. No Salt shall be Delivered from any Salt-works, without Notice given
to the Officer, on Pain of Forfeiture, and also 10 s. per Bushel, One half to
the Prosecutor, the other to the King.

LXXXVII. If any Exported Salt, after the Duty has been repaid, be Landed in
this Kingdom, before the Duty be again paid, the Offender shall forfeit double
the value thereof, and 10 s. per Bushel.

LXXXVIII. Subjects of this Realm, shipping Salt for any part of England in a
Ship perishing at Sea, or taken by Enemies, upon proof thereof before the
Justices in Session, of the loss of such Salt, shall be allowed to buy the like
quantity without Duty.

LXXXIX. Salt-Rock or Rock-Salt, after Entry and a Warrant, may be removed to
convenient Warehouses, and the Duty need not be paid or secured till sold and
delivered.

XC. No Person shall be obliged by any Contract made before 25 Dec. School. to
deliver any Salt, or Rock Salt, unless the Buyer pay the Duty,

XCI. Salt-Rock or Rock-Salt shall be Entered by Weight only, at 120 pound
weight to the Bushel.

XCII. Refiners of Rock-Salt, which had paid the Duty shall have an Abatement
(over and above any former Allowances) of 2 s. 4 d. per Bushel.

XCIII. The charge of managing this Duty on Salt, may be paid out of the said
Duties.

XCIV. Salt made from Rock-Salt (allowing the Drawback) and all Refined Salt
Imported or Made in England, is to be charged with the said Duties.

XCV. All Salt (except Rock Salt) shall be ascertained as to the Duty at 56
pounds weight to the Bushel.

XCVI. All Salt brought from Scotland, and all Imported and Home-made Salt,
brought in or landed before due Entry, shall be forfeited, and 10 s. per Bushel.

XCVII. The Collectors of the said Salt Duties, shall provide Scales at every
Salt-work; and Persons living near such Saltworks or Salt Pits, shall be Sworn
Weighers, and paid for the same by the Collectors.

XCVIII. The Officers shall deliver as many Warrants or Permits to Salt
Carriers as they desire, gratis, for what they shall Load at one time.

XCIX. All Persons shall sell Salt (except foreign Salt) after 56 pound weight
to the Bushel, under Penalty of 5 l. to the Informer.

C. The Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen in London. shall by to July School.
ascertain the price of Salt within the City of London and Bills of Mortality;
And the Justices of Peace in their General Sessions for other Places by 1 Aug.
School. And so from time to time if necessary; And Persons selling for higher
prices, or refusing to sell at the prices settled, shall forfeit 5 l. to be
Levied by Distress and Sale of Goods, by Warrant from the Lord Mayor aforesaid,
or a Justice of Peace of the Place. who in default of a Distress may Imprison
the Offender till payment thereof, one Moiety to the King, the other to the
Prosecutor.

CI. The Commissioners of Excise, and Commissioners for the Stamp Office
respectively, shall keep apart and pay Weekly into the Exchequer the Duties on
Salt by this Act granted, and the Additional Duties on Stamped Velum, Parchment
and Paper (granted to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, by an Act of this
present Session) and a distinct Register thereof shall be kept in the Exchequer.

CII. The Commissioners for managing the said Duties, not paying the same duly
into the Exchequer, or misapplying any part thereof, shall forfeit their
Places, and be incapable of any Place of Trust, and pay double the value so
misapplied.

CIII. In the Excise Office and Stamp Office, there shall for ever be
Commissioners and Comptrollers for the Execution of this Act; which
Comptrollers shall keep distinct Accounts of the said Duties, and in Case of
neglect shall lose their Places, be incapacitated, as aforesaid, and forfeit
100 l.

CIV. Collectors of either of the said Duties, detaining any part thereof,
shall be Dismissed, pay Interest at 12 per Cent. and treble Damages; And for
misapplying any part thereof, shall be Dismissed and Incapacitated, and shall
forfeit double the Sum.

CV. From 29 Sept. School. 160000 l. out of the said Additional Duties on Salt
and Stamped Paper, shall be the yearly Fund for answering the Annuities of 8 per
Cent. to the Subscribers of 2000000 l. And if the Duties shall not amount to so
much, then to be part of the said Fund, so sar as they will extend; Which said
Duties, or so much as will make up the said 160000 l. per Ann. shall be
Appropriated toward making good the said yearly Fund; And the Officers of the
Exchequer, not duly issuing, or Misapplying the Money contrary to this Act,
shall be forejudged from their Offices, incapacitated, and pay double the Sum
delayed or misapplied.

CVI. His Majesty may appoint Commissioners for taking Subscriptions till 29
Sept. School. from any Persons (except the Bank of England) for any Sum not less
than 100 l. toward the raising Two Millions, in some convenient House in
London or Westminster; which Commissioners are to provide Books for the said
Subscriptions, to lie open every day (except Sundays) till 29 Sept. School.
unless the Two Millions be sooner completed; And his Majesty may appoint a
Cashier, to receive the Money Subscribed.

CVII. Any Sums may be Subscribed (not less than 100 l.) to be answered by Ten
equal Payments, the First Payment to be made at the time of Subscribing, and
each subsequent Payment shall be made at the end of every Two Months (or 60
Days) till the whole be paid; Nevertheless the last Payment shall be liable to
make good any Desiciency which may happen (before the time of making the last
Payment) in the Produce of the said Duties, although the Kings intended supply
be thereby lessened.

CVIII. If the first Payment be not made at the time of Subscribing, such
Subscription shall be void; And if default be made in any of the subsequent
Payments, the first tenth part shall be forfeited, and the Annuity payable for
such Subscription shall be reduced according to the Money actually paid, after
an abatement of the first tenth part.

CIX. Talleys of Assignment or Anticipation, may be Levied on the Commissioners
or Receivers of the Money so subscribed, with an Interest of 8 per Cent. per
Ann. payable every Three Months out of such Subscription Moneys.

CX. The sums subscribed are to be written in words at length as well as
Figures, and truly Dated, and Attested under the Hands and Seals of Five or
more Commissioners; who immediately after 29 Sept. School. or sooner if the Two
Millions be completed, shall deliver Duplicates of the Subscriptions into the
Exchequer, or at least before 20 October. School. And the Auditor of the Receipt
and Clerk of the Pells shall Register and Record the said Duplicates. that
every Person concerned may have free access thereto; and Copies of the Books
Enrolled shall be delivered by the said Auditor and Clerk of the Pells to the
Commissioners, for the use of the Subscribers, gratis.

CXI. Each Subscriber shall have an Annuity after the Rate of 8 per Cent. per
Ann. for the sum subscribed by him, to commence from Michaelmas School. and to be
paid Quarterly, the First Payment to be made at Christmas School. subject
nevertheless to Redemption, and also to Reduction in case of failure in the
payments of the Subscription Money.

CXII. Every Person paying down one Tenth part of his subscription may desaulk
after the Rate of 10 per Cent. per Ann. for his whole subscription, from the
time of making his First payment, till Michaelmas School.

CXIII. The Commissioners or Cashier shall give Receipts to the Subscribers for
the Money so received, and shall enter the same and time of payment in a Book,
with the names of those that make such payments; A true Account whereof in
Parchment shall be delivered to the Auditor of the Receipt, attested by Five or
more of the Commissioners before 24 June 1700. And the Commissioners of the
Treasury are to Issue the Sums necessary for incident Charges in Execution of
the Commission.

CXIV. The Commissioners may be Subscribers.

CXV. His Majesty may by Letters Patents under the Great Seal, Incorporate the
Subscribers, whose Tenth part shall be paid, their Executors, Administrators,
Successors or Assigns, with perpetual succession and a Common Seal, and with
power to purchase Lands, to Plead and be Impleaded, and do all other things by
the Name of their Corporation.

CXVI. The sum total of all the subscriptions, shall be called the principal
Stock of the said Corporation; and all Persons shall have a share therein in
proportion to their subscription.

CXVII. Subscribers of 500 l. and upwards, having paid their Tenth part, may
meet at Guild Hall London, 10 October. School. or within 20 days after the
subscription is completed, to Elect 24 Trustees by way of Balleting; but no
Elector to have more than one Vote, nor any of the Trustees less than 2000 l.
subscribed in their own Right, and being so elected, to be Inserted in the
Charter of Incorporation as the First Trustees with Succession.

CXVIII. If the Two Millions be not subscribed by 29 Sept. School. the
Subscribers shall have only their proportionable part of the said yearly Fund.

CXIX After the Charter is passed, the yearly Sum of 160000 l. or a
proportionable part thereof, shall be paid to the general Society, or their
Treasurer in Trust for the respective Members.

CXX If the Two Millions or a Moiety thereof be subscribed by 29 Sept. School.
then the Subscribers, their Executors, Administrators, Successors or Assings,
and all Persons Licensed by them in their stead may Trade to the East Indies,
but none to Trade by himself or others in any one year from 29 Sept. School. for
more than the Amount of his Stock.

CXXI If the Two Millions or a Moiety thereof be subscribed by 29 Sept. School.
All or any Corporations or Persons Entitled to particular Shares in the
Principal Stock, may, if willing and desirous, be Incorporated into a Company
to Trade with a Joint Stock in proportion to their Interests, by such proper
Name as his Majesty shall think fit, with perpetual Succession, a common Seal,
etc.

CXXII. And after the Incorporating of any such Company, the proportionalle
part of the yearly Fund belonging to the Members thereof, shall be paid to the
said Company or their Treasurer, in Trust for the said Members by Weekly
Payments.

CXXIII. Every Member of the general Society, not in a Company, shall, before
he be permitted to Trade, take an Oath before Two or more of the Trustees, to
be faithful to the said General Society, and not to Trade to the Indies for
more than this Act allows.

CXXIV. And all Persons Trading by License, shall enter their Licenses in the
Books of the General Society, and take an Oath to the like effect. And no
Member of any Company, having Power to Trade thither, during his Continuance in
the said Company, shall Trade otherwise than in the Joint Stock thereof. And
every Member of such Company shall take an Oath before Two or more of the
Trustees for the said Company to be faithful, and not to Trade to the Indies
(during his Continuance in the said Company) upon any private Account. And no
person shall be Entrusted to Trade upon the Joint Stock, or for a Company,
before he has taken an Oath, to be faithful to such Company, and not to Trade
thither, but for the Account of such Company.

CXXV, Provided that Quakers may, instead of an Oath, make a solemn Declaration
to the same effect.

CXXVI. All Persons Trading to the East Indies in pursuance of this Act (except
in a Company) shall Enter the Goods they Export in a Book, before the Lading
thereof, with the Ship and Masters Name, that all Persons concerned may see
whether they Trade for more than is allowed, which Entries shall be upon Oath,
or Solemn Affirmation made before Two or more Trustees for the General Society
till a Company be Erected, and then before Two or more Directors of such
Company.

CXXVII. The General Society and Companies in Joint stock, may be empowered by
his Majesty's Charters, to make by Laws for the good of the said Trade.

CXXVIII. Persons not making true Entries and Affirmations, shall forfeit the
Goods Exported, or designed to be Exported, and the proceed thereof, and double
the Value, to be divided as the Charters shall appoint.

CXXIX. No Company or particular Person shall Trade to the East Indies, before
Security given to the Commissioners of the Customs, That all the Goods to be
Laden by or for them in the Indies, shall be brought to England without
Breaking Bulk, the Danger of the Seas, Pirates, etc. excepted; And any
Difficulties or Disputes in acceptance of such Security, shall be determined by
any of the Barons of the Exchequer.

CXXX. All Goods Imported by the Company or other Traders to the East Indies,
shall be sold openly by Inch of Candle, on pain of forseiting the same or the
value thereof, one moiety to his Majesty, the other to the Prosecutor.

CXXXI. His Majestics Commission or Charters, shall direct in what manner the
shares in the yearly Fund, and in the Stock in Trade, shall be Assigned or
Transferred.

CXXXII. The Stocks shall be esteemed in Law personal Estates, and descend
accordingly.

CXXXIII. The Annuities Issuing out of the yearly Fund, and the Shares in
Trade, shall be exempt from Taxes.

CXXXIV. A Guardian or Trustee for an Infant, may subscribe a moiety of the
Money in his Trust.

CXXXV. No Member of any Society or Company, within this Act, shall in respect
of his Stock only be Adjudged a Bankrupt, nor the Stock liable to Foreign
Attachment.

CXXXVI. The General Society nor any Company Established in pursuance of this
Act, shall Borrow or give Security for any Sums on Credit of the Funds by this
Act Granted, nor Borrow, Owe or give Security for any other or greater Sums
than shall be Employed in their Trade, (which shall be borrowed only on their
Common Seal, and not Repayable in less than six Months) not Discount any Bills
of Exchange, or other Bills or Notes, or keep Books or Cash for any Persons
whatsoever, other than their own Corporation or Society.

CXXXVII. An Additional Duty of 5 per Cent. shall be laid on all East India
Goods Imported after 29 Sept. School. by any persons Trading pursuant to this
Act, to be paid over to the General Society, or such Companies as may be
Erected, or their respective Treasurers, for maintaining Ambassadors, and
Defraying any other extraordinary Expenses; the Overplus to be disposed to the
benefit of all the Members.

CXXXVIII. And Security shall be given before Landing thereof, for payment of
the said Additional Duty of 5 per Cent. as soon as the Goods shall be sold; And
Goods Landed before due Entry, and the Duty secured, or without Warrant, shall
be forfeited, one Moiety to the King, the other to the Scizer.

CXXXIX. The said Duty of 5 per Cent. to be managed by the Commissioners of the
Customs, and paid over as the Act appoints.

CXL. Upon Three years notice, after 29 Sept. 1711. and Repayment by Parliament
of the said Two Millions, or such part thereof as shall be advanced, and all
Arrears of the said Annuities, then all Duties, Annuities and things granted by
this Act to cease and determine.

CXLI. All Wrought Silks imported from the East Indies or Persia, after 29
Sept. School. shall pay an Additional Duty of 1 s. 10 d. per pound Weight
Averdupoiz.

CXLII. The Persons who may Trade to the East Indies, pursuant to this Act,
shall have the sole Trade thither after 29 Sept. School. And any other persons
Trading thither, shall forfeit Ship and Goods, and double the value thereof,
One 4th part to the Prosecutor, the other three parts to the General Society or
Company, they bearing the charge of Prosecution.

CXLIII. If in any One year after 29 Sept. 1699. the Duties by this Act
appropriated, be not sufficient to satisfy the payments appointed, such
Deficiency shall be made good out of the next Parliamentary Aids.

CXLIV. Provided that the present East India Company, may Trade thither till 29
Sept. 1701. And that Ships not in the Service of the said Company, which were
cleared from England to the East Indies, before 1 July, School. (so as they
return into this Kingdom without breaking Bulk in Europe) shall not be liable
to Forfeitures.

CXLV. The present East India Company shall pay their just Debts, and their
Estate shall be liable thereunto; and if they make any Dividend after 24 June
School. before full payment of their Debts, the respective Members shall be
liable, so far as their Shares upon such Dividends shall extend to pay, besides
double Costs of Suit.

CXLVI Every Society or Company to be Erected in pursuance of this Act, shall
take care not to Owe at any one time, more than the value of their Capital
Stock undivided; And if by any Dividends their Debts at any time exceed their
Capital Stock, the respective Members shall be liable so far as the Shares they
Received upon such Dividends will extend, besides Costs of Suit.

CXLVII. Out of the Moneys contributed on this Act, or arising by any other Act
of this Session, not particularly Appropriated, there shall be applied, To the
use of the Mints 29209 l. For the Civil Government 40000 l. over and above the
600000 l. appropriated by the present Poll Bill, for paying of Talleys, etc.
And also such Sums as may be necessary to satisfy the Praemiums for
Circulating Exchequer Bills, and the rest to be disposed for Land and
Sea-Service; and the Commissioners of the Treasury are to cause the same to be
applied accordingly.

CXLVIII. The Rules and Penalties contained in the Act 2 W. and M. for an Aid
of 2 s. in the pound, for the speedy Payment of Money into the Exchequer, and
misapplication thereof, are hereby Revived.

CXLIX. After 10 July School. The Commissioners of the Treasury (if it consist
with his Majesty's Service) may direct Bank Bills to be Received in all
Payments to the King, until the end of next Session of Parliament; but not when
they are at any Discount.

Treason.
I. Stat: 8 W. 3. cap. 4. For the Treasons and other Causes in the Preamble
recited at large, Enacted, That Sir John Fenwick Baronet be Convicted and
Attainted of High Treason, and shall suffer the Pains of Death, and incur all
Forseitures as a Person Atainted of High Treason.

II. Stat. 8 W. 3. cap. 5. Enacted, That if Sir George Barclay Knight. --
Johnson alias Harrison, -- Durant alias Durance. Michael Hare, Major George
Holmes, Philip Handford alias Brown, Richard Richardson, John Maxwell, --
Bryerly, -- Plowden, -- Hungate, shall not before 25 March 1697. Render
themselves to the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, or one of the
Secretaries of State, in order to their Trials for the Tieason wherewith they
are charged, then such of the said Persons as shall not so render themselves,
shall Stand and be Convicted and Attainted of High Treason, and shall suffer
the Pains of Death, and all Forfeitures and Penalties as Traitors Convicted of
High Treason.

III. And -- Counter, John Bernardi, Robert Cassells, Robert Meldrum, James
Chambers and Robert Blackbourn, and such other Persons who shall hereafter
render themselves or shall be apprehended, against whom there shall be Evidence
upon Oath of being concerned in the said Conspiracy of Assassinating his Sacred
Majesty, shall be detained in Custody without Bail till the first day of
January 1697, unless they shall be sooner Bailed by order of Council, signed by
six Privy Counselors.

IV. Stat. 9 W. 3. cap. 1. Every of His Majesty's Subjects, who since 11
December. 1688. have voluntarily gone into France, or any of the French Kings
Dominions in Europe, without License from his Majesty or the late deceased
Queen Mary, or who have during the late War with France born Arms in the
Service of the French King by Sea or Land, or who have since 13 Feb. 1688. been
in Arms under the Command or in the Service of the late King James in Europe,
and shall after 14 Jan. 1697. return into this Kingdom, or any other his
Majesty's Dominions without License under the Privy Seal, shall be Guilty of
High Tieason, and suffer and forseit accordingly.

V. Every of his Majesty's Subjects, who after 14 Jan. 1697. shall without
License from his Majesty, within this Realm or without, in order to give any
Aid or Assistance to the late King James, hold or keep any Intelligence or
Correspondence by Letters, Messages or otherwise with the late King James, or
with any Person Employed by Him, knowing such Person to be so Employed, or
shall without License from his Majesty, by Bill of Exchange or otherwise remit,
or pay any Sums of Money for the Use or Service of the late King James, knowing
such Money to be for such Use or Service, shall be Guilty of High Treason, and
suffer and forfeit accordingly.

VI. Any of the Offenses against this Act committed out of this Realm, may be
laid and tried in any County of this Realm.

VII. The Clause in an Act of 3 and 4 W. and M. Entitled, An Act against
Corresponding with their Majesty's Enemies, whereby it was Enacted, That if any
of his Majesty's Subjects should after 10 March. 1691. without License from
their Majesty's, voluntarily go or Imbark in any Vessel, with intent to go into
France, or any Dominions of the French King, should be Guilty of High Treason,
is declared to be intended only during the War with France, and is now of no
force.

VIII. Provided, That if any Person, who since 11 Dec. 1688. went into France
or any of the French Kings Dominions without License, or who had been in Arms
under the late King James or the French King, or in either of their Services
since 13 Feb. 1688. and has returned into this Realm without License, such
Person shall depart this Realm by the first of Febr. 1697. unless before that
time such Person obtain his Majesty's License for staying here. And every such
Person not departing this Realm by 1 Febr. 1697. or after such departure,
returning into this Realm without his Majesty's License, shall be Guilty of
High Treason, and suffer and forfeit accordingly,

IX. No person shall pay for any such License above 10 s. in each Office
through which such License shall pass, and Persons receiving more shall forfeit
20 l. to the Party grieved.

X. All Persons who after 6 Jan. 1697. shall procure or accept any Charter of
Pardon or Grant of any Title of Honor, or other matter or thing in England or
Ireland from the late King James, or shall claim any Benefit thereby, or by any
Writing purporting any such Pardon or Grant, shall be Guilty of High Treason,
and suffer and forfeit accordingly. And whosoever has since 11 December. 1688.
accepted such Pardon or Grant, shall by the 13 of Febr. 1697. deliver such
Pardon or Grant to his Majesty in Council, or to one of the Secretaries of
State, before two Witnesses, or be Guilty of High Treason, and suffer and
forfeit accordingly.

XI. Any Person who having accepted or concealed any such Pardon or Grant,
shall discover and deliver up the same by the said 13 Febr. shall not be
punished for procuring accepting or concealing thereof, but be wholly
Indempnified for the same.

XII. All Persons Indicted for any thing made Treason by this Act, shall have
the benefit of the Act 7 W. 3. Entitled, An Act for Regulating of Trials in
cases of Treason and Misprision of Treason.

XIII. All Grants of any Estate forseited by Virtue of this Act shall be
utterly void.

Wool.
I. Stat. 9 and 10. W. 3. cap, 40. The Act made 7 W. 3. Entitled, An Act for
the more effectual Preventing the Exportation of Wool, and for Encouraging the
Importation of Wool from Ireland, and every thing therein contained, except
what is hereby otherwise altered, shall continue and be in full force.

II. After 24 Jun. School. No Fullers Earth or Scouring Clay, shall be Exported
out of this Kingdom into Ireland, Scotland or any other Foreign parts, but the
Exporter shall forfeit 1 s. for every pound weight.

III. All Owners of Wool Shorn, Housed or Lodged within 10 Miles of the Sea
side in Kent and Sussex, shall give an Exact Account in Writing, within 3 days
after Sheering, of the number of Fleeces, and where lodged or housed, to the
next adjoining Port or Officer of the Customs, and the like notice before
Removing thereof, and the Name and Abode of the Persons to whom disposed, and
where intended to be carried; and shall take a Certificate of such Entry, on
forfeiture of the Wool not Entered, or otherwise Disposed of, and a penalty of 3
s. per pound for such Wool, as if it had been actually Transported; which
Entries are to be made gratis, and Certificates given without delay, specifying
the Names of the Owners and Buyers thereof, and Limitting it to such times and
places to be removed, taking 6 d. and no more for each Certificate.

IV. No Persons residing within 15 Miles of the Sea in Kent or Sussex, shall
buy any Wool, before they enter into Bond to the King, with Sureties, not to
sell the said Wool to any Persons within 15 Miles of the Sea; And if any Wool
be carrying toward the Sea side in those Counties, unless entered, and Security
given, the same shall be forfeited, and 3 s. for every pound weight.

V. No Wool removed from the Place where it was first Housed, after Sheering,
within 10 Miles as aforesaid, shall be lodged after the first removing within
15 Miles of the Sea, in these Counties on pain of forfeiture, if found; but if
carried away, then the Owner to forfeit 3 s. per pound weight.

VI. All Persons laying or hiding any Wool, within 15 Miles of the Sea and not
Entered, such Wool shall be seized and forfeited, and the Persons claiming the
same shall give Security in the Exchequer (if Cast upon a Trial) to pay treble
Costs, over and above the Penalties and Forfeitures.

VII. If any Person be prosecuted in the Execution of this Act, he may Plead
the General Issue, and give the Special Matter in Evidence, which if done in
pursuance of this Act, the Jury shall find for the Defendant, and in such Case,
or if the Plaintiff be Non suit or Discontinue, the Defendant shall have treble
Costs.

VIII. All Forfeitures and Penalties in this Act, shall be One third to the
King, the other Two thirds to the Person that shall seize or sue for the same
in any the Courts of Record at Wesiminster.

IX. The King may cause such Persons as shall be Guilty of Transporting any
Wool, Wool-Fells, Fullers Earth or Scouring Clay, to be prosecuted at any time
within Three years after the Offense committed.

X. After the said 24 Jun. All Owners of Wool Shorn, Laid up or Lodged, within
15 Miles of the Borders of Scotland, shall give an exact Account of the number
of Fleeces and where Lodged, to the Persons appointed, pursuant to the Act of 1
W. and M. Entitled, An Act for the better Preventing the Exportation of Wool
and Encouraging the Woollen Manufactures of this Kingdom, Continued by an Act
made 4 and 5 W. and M. Entitled, An Act for Reviving, Continuing and
Explaining several Laws therein mentioned, which were Expired and near
Expiring: Which said Act was further continued by an Act of 7 W. 3. Entitled,
An Act for the more effectual preventing the Exportation of Wool, and for the
Encouraging the Importation of Wool from Ireland: Which Persons shall give
Attendance for that Purpose at the several Ports and Market Towns within the
foresaid Distance; and shall make a true Entry of such Wool in a Book for that
purpose: And the Owners of such Wool neglecting or refusing to give such
Account, or removing such Wool, after notice given, without License, shall
forfeit 3 s. for every pound weight of such Wool. And all the Wool found within
the Distance aforesaid of the Borders of Scotland, not Entered, shall be
forfeited, One third to the King, and the other Two thirds to those who shall
sue for the same in any the Courts of Record at Westminster.

XI. The Hundred of Winchelsea in the Cinque Ports, being divided by a
Navigable Arm of the Sea, shall be taken in respect to the said Act of 7 W. 3.
as two distinct Hundreds, viz. the part of the one side of the said Arm, and
that on the other, Each as an entire Hundred; and the Penalties for suffering
such Exportations, shall be Levied on that part of the said Hundred only, which
lies on the same side of the said Arm, out of which such Exportation was made
and permitted: But the said Hundred shall not he divided in any other
particular, but in this only.

A TABLE Of the General HEADS And particular REFERENCES.
A.
ABatement, Vide Partition,. 3. Suits, s. 6, 7. Actions, vid. Suits, Additional
Impositions, vid. Taxes,. 125, 126, 321. Administrations to Seamen and
Soldiers, vid, Stores,. 7. Taxes s. 361. Ad quod Damnum, vid, Highways,. 23.
Administrators, vid. Suits,. 5. Affidavits, vid. Taxes,. 163. African Company,
vid. Coin,. 1. Trade, s. 21, 26, 29, 30, 35, 37. Agreements, vid. Creditors,.
8, 10, 11. Alamodes, vid. Lustrings, Aliens Duties, vid. Taxes. 122.
Almshouses, vid. Taxes,. 46. Ambassadors to India, vid. Trade,. 137.
Annuities, Page 1. Annuities, vid. Excise,. 36. Taxes, 11.26, 89, 203, 204,
205. 206, 207, 209, 301, 302, 401, 404, 405. Trade s. 123. Apothecaries, vid.
Taxes,. 5. Appeals, vid. Poor,. 5, 6, Salt, s. 2. Taxes, s. 41, 112, 247, 418,
436. Apprentices, vid. Poor,. 5. Appropriation of Taxes and Duties, etc. vid.
Customs,. 38, 39. Excise, s. 36, 37, 39, 57, Taxes, s. 97, 119, 142, 147. 149,
151.161, 366, 404, 465. Trade s. 105, 147. Arbritration. page 4. Archbishop of
Canterbury, vid. Churches,. 2.3. Army, vid. Aunuities,. 9. Artillery Company,
vid. Squibs,. 5. Assassinates, vid. Imprisonment,. 1. Treason,. 3. Assault,
vid. Suits,. 1. Assignments of Talleys, vid. Taxes,. 163. Association, vid.
Brokers,. 3. Auditor of the Exchequer, vid. Exchequer,. 5, 9, 14. Auditors and
Receivers, vid. Taxes,. 75, 256, 473.
B.
BAdge for the Poor, vid. Poor, S. 2. Bail, vid. Prisons,. 4. Bank Bills, vid.
Taxes,. 134, 136. 140, Trade,. 148. Bank of England, vid. Oaths,. 4. Taxes, s.
132, 133, 134, 137, 140, 141, 142, 143, 150, 152, 155, 156, 159. Bankrupt, vid.
Taxes,. 154. Bank Stock, vid. Taxes,. 143, 144. Barbados vid. Customs,. 56.
Barbary, vid. Trade,. 39. Bargains, vid. Brokers,. 1. 2, 11, 1^. Batchelors and
Widowers, vid. Taxes,. 131. Beer and Ale, vid. Excise,. 3. s. 401. Bills of
Credit, vid. Exchequer Bills. Bills of Exchange, vid. Taxes,. 360. Trade s. 20.
136. Birdlip, vid. Highways,. 25. Bishop of London, vid. Churches,. 2, 3, 4.
Blackwell-Hall, page 4. Plancht Copper, vid. Coin,. 27. Blasphemy and
Profaneness, vid. Religion,. 1. Bone-Lace, Point or Cutwork, vid Trade,. 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14. Branches of the Revenue, vid. Customs,. 56. Breach of
Covenants, vid. Suits,. 8. Bridle-cutters, vid. Taxes,. 193, 194, 195.
Bridgwater, Page 6. Broad-Arrow, vid. Stores,. 1. Brokers, page 8. Brokers,
vid. Taxes,. 5, 164. 421. Burlington, page 11. Building of Ships, vid. Ships,.
14.
C.
CAnvis, vid. Stores,. 1. Capitation, vid. Taxes,. 1. Certificates into the
Exchequer, vid. Taxes,. 51. Cortioraries, vid. Justices of Peace. 2.
Chamberlains of the Exchequer, vid. Exchequer,. 4.13. Chancellor of the
Exchequer, vid. Churches,. 3. Ships,. 3. Chancery Officers, vid. Taxes,. 68.
Charcoal, vid. Ships,. 5. Surgeons, vid. Taxes,. 5. Churches, page 13. Cider
and Perry, vid. Excise,. 14, 15. Cinque Ports, vid. Seamen,. 9. Civilians, vid.
Taxes,. 5. Cities, Corporations and Market Towns, vid. Taxes,. 226, 400.
Clergymen vid. Taxes,. 422. Clerk of the Pells, vid. Exchequer,. 5, 9, 13.
Clerk of the Peace, vid. Highways,. 17. Clipped, Diminisht or Counterseit Money,
vid. Coin,. 1.6, 26, 27, 34, 35, 36. Clocks and Watches, vid. Trade,. 44.
Cloth and Clothiers, vid. Blackwell-Hall,. 2. 5. Coach-makers, vid. Taxes,.
195. Coal-meters, vid. Churches,. 4. Coals and Culm, vid. Burlington,. 1.
Churches, s. 1. Taxes, s. 208, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 318,
319, 465, 468, 469. Coffee, Tea and Chocolate, vid. Taxes,. 224, 321. Coin,
page 14. Collarmakers, vid. Taxes,. 193 194, 195. Collectors and Receivers,
vid* Coin.. 4.6, 19, 36. Customs, s. 32. Excise, s. 60. Colleges, Hospitals and
Almshouses, vid. Taxes, s. 46, 77, 254, 255. Commanders of Ships, vid. Stores,.
8. Commissieners for the Capitation and other Taxes, vid. Taxes.. 12.41, 44,
45, 54, 55, 56, 72, 234, 235, 236, 252, 265, 269, 270, 271, 296, 407, 411, 412,
429, 441, 444. Commissioners for Colchester River, vid. Rivers,. 12.
Commissioners of Excise, vid. Trade,. 74, 101, 103. Commissioners for Enlarging
London Bridge, South-end, vid. London,. 7. Commissioners for Paper, Vellum and
Parchment or the Stamp Office, vid. Taxes,. 365. Trade s 101, 102, 103.
Commissioners for Registring Seamen, vid. Seamen,. 6. Commissioners for
Transportation, vid. Taxes,. 211, 213. Commissioners of the Treasury, vid.
Brokers,. 16. Coin, s. 16 33. Customs, s. 32. Exchequer, s. 11. Ships, s. 3.
Taxes,. 104, 292. Commissioners of the Customs. vid. Taxes,. 175, 313, 314,
315, 484. Trade, s. 55.129. Commissioners for the 2 Millions, vid. Trade,. 106,
109, 110, 113. Commissioners of the Navy Ordnance and Victualling Office, vid.
Stores,. 1, 2, 4, 8. Common of Pasture, vid. Ships,. 9. Compositions, vid.
Creditors,. 1.2, 3, 10. Compositions for Malt, vid. Excise. 28, 29.
Concealments, vid. Excise,. 10. Conspiracy, vid. Imprisonment,. 1. Continuance,
vid. Bridgwater,. 1. Brokers, s. 14. Churches, s. 1. Coin. s. 30, 37.
Creditors, s. 9. Customs, s. 1. Excise, s. 14. Highways, s. 14, 38. Justice of
Peace, s. 1. Partitions, s. 6. Rivers, s. 1. Ships, s. 1. Soldiers, s. 1, 2, 3.
Taxes, s. 102 122.123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 138, 321, 386, 474. Trade,. 42,
53, 70, 140. Treason,. 7. Contracts, vid. Brokers,. 7.11. Taxes, s. 48.
Contractors for Stores of War, vid. Stores,. 1. Contractors for Circulating
Exchequer Bills, vid. Taxes,. 168. Contributors to the Militia, vid. Militia,.
4. Unequal Lights, vid. Taxes,. 55, 280. Copper Farthings, etc. vid. Coin,. 38.
Copper Bars, vid. Trade,. 40. Cordage, vid. Stores,. 1. Coroners of Counties,
vid. Jurys,. 1. Corruption of Blood, vid. Coin.. 28 Counterfeiting and Clipping
of Coin, vid. Coin, s. 21, 29. Counterfeiting the Seals or Marks for Alamodes
and Lustrings, vid. Trade,. 59. Courts of Chancery, Exchequer and Great
Sessions in Wales, vid. Judicial Proceedings,. 1. Creditors, page 22. Crickley
Hill, vid. Highways. 25. Cross Highways, vid. Highways,. 24. Crown Lands, vid.
Customs,. 56. Curriers, vid. Taxes,. 195. Customs, page 24. Customs, vid.
Taxes,. 122.
D.
DAmages, vid. Suits,. 6, 8. Dean of Westminster, vid. Churches,. 3. Debts,
vid. Taxes. 80, 81, 82. Debt, vid. Suits,. 3. Deficiences of Taxes, vid.
Taxes,. 146, 147. Demurrer, vid. Suits.. 2. Denmark Pr. and Princess, vid.
Taxes,. 98. Desperate Debts, vid. Taxes,. 80. Distillers, vid. Excise,. 10, 11,
13. Distresses, vid. Hay-market,. 3. Highways, s. 5, 8, 30. Militia, s. 3, 4.
Poor, s. 3, 5. Rivers, s. 3. Salt, s. 3. Squibs, s. 2. Taxes, s 20, 23, 24, 42,
109, 196, 243, 261, 393, 411, 430, 434, 456. Dower, vid. Coin,. 28. Drawbacks
and Allowances, vid. Customs,. 25, 48, 50, 59. Taxes. s. 114.160, 200, 201,
319, 478, 480. Trade, s. 5.40. Drugs, vid. Customs,. 11, 41, 42.47. Duchy of
Cornwall, vid. Customs,. 11.41, 42, 47. Dyers Goods or Drugs, vid. Customs,.
10.42, 46.
E.
EArl of Holderness, vid. Burlington,. 7. Earl of Kent. vid Rivers,. 6.20. East
India Goods vid. Taxes,. 115. Trade, s. 137, 138. East India Companies, vid.
Trade,. 115.120, 121.122, 123 124 126, 136, 142, 144, 145, 146. Eastland Trade,
vid. Taxes,. 122. Ejectment, vid. Suits,. 1. Escapes, vid. Prisons,. 2, 3, 5,
7, 7, 8, 9. Exchanging of Exchequer Bills, vid. Customs,. 33, 34, 35, 36.
Exchequer, page 34. Exchequer, vid. Coin,. 6. Exchequer Bills, vid Coin,. 33.
Custom, s. 32, 33, 34, 35.36, 37. Exchequer, s. 12. Taxes, s. 93, 94, 95, 97,
166, 167, 168, 169, 307, 308 Trade, s. 147. Exchequer Payments, vid. Taxes,.
28. Excise, page 38. Excise, vid. Annuities,. 6. Customs, s. 56. Taxes,. 401,
404, 472. Execution, vid. Suits,. 2, 3. Executors and Administrators, vid.
Suits,. 5, 6. Exporters of Malt, vid. Excise,. 31, 32, Exportations, vid.
Taxes,. 114, 199, 200, 201, 319, 478, 480. Trade. s. 5, 22. 23, 36, 40, 80, 82,
87. Wool, s. 1, 2, 10.
F.
FActors, vid. Blackwell Hall,. 3, 8. Taxes, s. 5. Factors for Negroes, vid.
Trade,. 41. False Imprisonment, vid. Suits,. 1. Farthings and Halfpence, vid.
Coin,. 38, 39. Felony, vid. Coin,. 27, 28. Customs, s. 37. Excise, s. 47.
Prisons, s. 18. Taxes, s. 97, 375. Fireworks, vid. Squibs,. 1, 2, 4. Fish, vid.
Customs,. 10, 46. Trade, s. 80 Fines, vid. Penalties, Fleet Prison, vid.
Prisons,. 11. Forest Laws, vid. Ships,. 8. Foreign Attachment, v. Taxes,. 254
Foreign Ministers, vid. Taxes,. 59. Foreign Bone Lace, etc. vid. Bone Lace.
Forfeitures (and Penalties,) v. Salt,. 4. Ships,. 3, 5, 10, 13. Squibs, s. 2,
3. Stores, s. 1, 2, 3. Taxes s. 36, 37, 38, 40, 69, 72, 74, 86, 94, 96, 103,
111, 152, 164, 174, 189, 194, 198, 202, 212, 214, 216, 220, 235, 271, 291, 314,
374, 375, 388, 390, 392, 396, 401, 405, 430, 473, 481, 483. Trade, s. 9.15, 30,
31, 32, 33, 41, 44, 46, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 63, 64, 72, 76, 78, 83, 86, 87, 96,
100, 102, 103, 104, 105, 128, 138, 142. Treason, s. 9. Wool, s. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
8, 10. Forgery, vid. Taxes, s. 390. French Goods, vid. Customs, s. 19. French
Wine, vid. Customs, s. 3, 15, 44, 47. Fuel, vid. Ships,. 9. Fullers Earth, vid.
Wool,. 2.9. Funds for Lives and Survivorships, vid. Taxes,. 203. Funds for the
Deficiencies of Taxes vid. Taxes, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 157. Fund for 2
Millions, vid. Trade.. 105.
G.
GAuging of Malt, vid. Excise,. 30. Gentlemen, vid. Taxes,. 64, 420. Ginger,
vid. Customs,. 23, 53. Glass Wares, vid. Taxes,. 208, 474, 479, 480, 481, 482.
Gloucester Road, vid. Highways,. 25. Glovers, vid. Taxes,. 193, 194. Gold and
Silver. vid. Coin,. 2.24. Trade, s. 38. Golasmiths Hall or Company, vid. Coin,.
17, 18. Goods or Drugs for Dying, vid. Dyers Goods, Governors of English
Plantations, vid. Taxes,. 170. Grants of Forfeited Estates, vid. Treason,. 13.
Grants of Honors, vid. Treason.. 10, 11. Greenland Trade, vid. Taxes,. 122.
Greeland Company, vid. Taxes,. 476. Greenwich Hospital, vid. Seamen,. 1.
Guineas, vid. Coin,. 1. Hammered Money, vid. Coin,. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 14, 15,
16, 20, 31, 32. Excise s. 40, 60. Taxes, s. 83, 96, 101, 116, 117, 118, 119.
Hawkers and Pedlers, p. 47. Hawkers and Pedlers, vid. Taxes,. 210, 211, 212,
217, 218, 226, 386, 387, 388. Hay-market, page 47. Herrings, vid. Taxes,. 160.
Hides and Skins, vid. Taxes,. 192. Highways, page 48. Horley, vid. Highways,.
1. Hospitals, vid. Taxes,. 46. Houses and Shops belonging to the Fleet, vid.
Prisons,. 22, 23. Houses and Windows, vid. Taxes,. 129, 130. House of
Correction, vid. Squibs,. 3, Householders, vid. Taxes, 33.462. Hull Trinity
House, vid. Burlington,. 1.
I.
IMbezlement, vid. Stores,. 1. Trade, s. 6. Importations, vid. Excise,. 35.
Trade, s. 48, 55, 57, 58, 83, 96, 129, 130. Wool, s. 1.10. Impositions or
Duties on Goods, Wares and Merchandises, vid. Rivers,. 1. 15, 16. Imprisonment,
page 55. Imprisonment, vid. Creditors,. 5. Poor, s. 3. Prisons, s. 16.
Religion,. 1. Rivers, s. 12. Ships, s. 6. Stores, s. 2, 3. Taxes, s. 24.435.
Trade,. 100. Treason, s. 3. Inns of Court or Chancery, vid. Taxes,. 131, 460.
Insurance from Fire, vid. Taxes,. 55.280. Iron, vid. Taxes,. 126. Judicial
Proceedings, page 56 Judgment, vid. Suits,. 2, 6, 8. Texes, s. 152. Juries,
page 56. Juries, vid. Highways,. 17. London,. 8. Rivers, s. ^. Suits, s. 8.
Justices of Assize, vid. Highways,. 22 Suits, s. 8. Chief Justices of the
King's Bench vid. Churches,. 3. Justices of Peace, page 56. Justices of Peace,
vid. Highways,. 16.23, 24. Juries,. 1. Partitions, s. 5. Poor, s. 3. Salt, s.
2, 3. Seamen,. 2. Soldiers, s. 5. Squibs, s. 2. Taxes, s. 112, 190, 407. Trade,
s. 6.100. Justices of Peace of Essex, E. Division, vid. Rivers.. 12. Justices
of Peace for GlocesterShire, vid. Highways,. 25.29, 31, 32, 33, 42. Justices of
Peace of HeresordShire, vid. Highways,. 41, 42. Justices of Peace for St.
Albans, vid. Poor,. 8. Justices of Peace of Somersetshire, vid. Bridegwater,.
4. Justices of Peace of Surrey and Sussex, vid. Highways,. 1.5, 15 Justices of
Peace of Westminster vid. Hay-market,. 6, 7. Justices of Peace of Yorkshire, E.
Riding, vid. Burlington,. 4.
K.
KEepers of Prisons, vid. Prisons,. 9, 10. Kensington, vid. London,. 1. King's
Bench Prison, vid. Prisons,. 11. King's Household, vid. Customs,. 56. Excise,.
37.57. Kings Printing House, vid. Taxes,. 55, 280.
L.
LAnd Forces, vid. Excise,. 36. Lunds Tenements and Hereditaments, vid. Taxes,.
10.232. Lapis Calaminaris, vid. Taxes,. 126. Lawyers, vid. Taxes,. 5.421.
Leather, vid. Taxes.. 173, 174, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184,
185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 199, 208, 209. Leward Island, vid. Customs,. 56.
Leather-Dresser, vid. Taxes,. 195. Limitation of Actions and Prosecutions.
Religion,. 2. Trade. s. 52, 66, 68. Linen, vid. Customs,. 13.47. Loans, vid.
Orders of Loan. Lodgers, vid. Taxes,. 23. London. page 57. London, vid.
Brokers,. 1.9. Trade,. 100. London Bridge, vid. London,. 7. Lustrings and
Alamodes, vid. Customs,. 57. Trade, s. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 55, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61,
62, 63, 67, 68, 69. Lustring Company, vid. Trade,. 7, 8, 67, 68.
M.
MAlsters, vid. Excise,. 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24. Malt, s. 1. Malt, 59.
Malt, vid. Excise,. 14. Malt Lottery, vid. Excise,. 40. etc. Malt Tickets, vid.
Excise,. 39, 41, 42 etc. Taxes,. 227. Malt Ticket Office, vid. Excise,. 56.
Marine Regiments, vid. Soldiers,. 8. Markets and Fairs, vid. Taxes,. 218, 221,
397. Marks of the Goldsmiths-Hall or Company, vid. Coin,. 10, 15, 17.
Marriages, Births and Burials, vid. Taxes,. 128, 130, 406, 407, 408. Marshall
of the King's Bench, vid. Prisons, 11, 12, 22, 24. Masters and Mistresses, vid.
Taxes,. 25. Lord Mayor of London, vid. Brokers,. 5. Churches, s. 2, 3, 4.
Trade,. 100. Mayor of Colchester, vid. Rivers. 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 16. Medals, vid. Brokers,. 9. Members of Parliament, vid. Taxes. 79, 297,
464. Merchandises, vid. Customs,. 8.55. Merchants, vid. Taxes,. 108, 280, 421.
Middlesex and Westminster, vid. London,. 1. Military Officers, vid. Soldiers,.
4. Militia, page 59. Militia, vid. Squibs,. 5. Million Lottery Tickets, vid.
Taxes,. 401, 402, 403, 404. Milled Money, vid. Excise,. 40. Minors, vid.
Taxes,. 85, 450. Mints, vid. Coin,. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 10, 11, 2^, 22, 23, 25, 32.
Mum, vid. Excise, 14.
N.
NAturalization, vid. Soldiers,. 9. Naval Stores, vid. Customs, 26. Ships,. 14.
Navy, vid. Exchequer,. 13. Ships, s. 1. Navy and Ordnance, vid. Excise. 36.
Ships, s. 14. Negroes, vid. Trade, 27, 29, 41. Newcastle upon Tyne, vid.
Burlington,. 1. New Forest in Hampshire, vid. Ships,. 1. Noli prosequi, vid.
Taxes,. 88.293. Nuisance, vid. Squibs,. 1.
O.
OAths, /^/. page 61. Oath and Oaths, vid. Brokers,. 2, 3. Coin, s. 6, 7.
Creditors, s. 3.11. Excise, s. 51. Haymarket, s. 7 Highways, s. 5, 17, 29, 32.
Imprisonment, s. 1. London, s. 8, 9. Militia, s. 3. Poor, s. 3, 5. Prisons, s.
7.14. Religion, s. 2. Rivers, s. 8.12, 13. Soldiers, s. 11, 12, 13. Taxes, s
16.61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 110, 165, 170, 197, 237, 270, 271, 281, 282, 283, 284,
285, 377, 414, 427, 458. Trade, s. 24, 25, 28, 77, 81, 123 124, 126. Officers
of the Exchequer, vid. Taxes,. 91, 145, 220, 292, 396, 484. Trade, s. 105.
Officers of the Customs, v. Taxes,. 104, 106, 107, 109. Trade, s. 60. Officers
and Commissioners of the Navy, vid. Stores,. 8. Officers of the Ordnance, vid.
Squibs,: 4. Offices and Employments, vid. Taxes,. 27.231. Orders of Discharge,
vid. Creditors,. 10. Orders of Loan, vid. Oaths,. 1, 2, 3. Taxes, s. 89, 227,
300, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471. Ordnance, vid.
Exchequer. 13.
P.
PAnnage, vid. Ships,. 9. Paper, Vellum and Parchment, vid. Taxs,. 102, 127,
322. Trade, s. 105. Papist, vid. Militia,. 3. Taxes,. 62, 84, 281. Pardons,
vid. Treason,. 10, 11. Parents or Guardians, vid. Taxes,. 25. Parliament, vid.
Members of Parliament. Partitions, page 62. Party-Guiles, vid. Excise,. 2.
Paupers, vid. Taxes,. 100. Penalties (and Forfeitures) vid. Seamen,. 8. Ships,.
6 Taxes, s. 42, 43, 45, 62, 63, 64, 75, 97, 107, 109, 118, 180, 183, 184, 191,
196, 213, 212, 244, 249, 250, 252, 381, 388, 389, 411, 412, 414, 442, 462.
Trade, s 2, 3, 8, 15, 49, 51, 74, 99, 148. Pensions, Annuities, and Stipends,
vid. Taxes,. 3.26. Pepper, vid. Custom.,. 12.47. Perjury, vid. Trade,. 12.
Persons not taking the Oaths, vid. Militia,. 3. Pewter, vid. Tin. Physicians,
vid. Taxes,. 5. Pilchards and Scads, vid. Taxes,. 160. Pipes or Stopcocks, vid.
Excise,. 5, 6, 7. Plantation Trade, vid. Taxes,. 122. Trade, s. 54. Plantations
in America, vid. Trade,. 22, 26, 27. Plate wrought, vid. Coin.. 10, 17, 18, 19,
20. Excise,. 40. Poor, page 63. Posse Comitatus of London, Middlesex and Surrey,
vid. Prisons,. 16. Post Office, vid. Customs,. 56. Excise, s. 1. Taxes,. 472.
Praemiums, vid. Brokers,. 11, 12. Oaths s. 1. Taxes. s. 164, 165. Prisoners in
the Fleet, vid. Prisons,. 14, 15. Prisoners in the King Bench, vid. Prisons,.
15. Prisons and Pretended Dribileged Places, page 66. Prisons, vid. Taxes, 71,
287. Privileged Places, vid. Taxes,. 60. 253. Process of Pone or Attachment,
vid. Partitions,. 1. Professions, vid. Taxes,. 5. Protests, vid. Trade,. 20.
Proviso's or Savings, for Anth. E. of Kent. and Nich. Corsellis, vid. Rivers,.
6. for Giles Sayer, s. 4.
Q.
QUakers, vid. Seamen,. 7. Taxes, s. 65, 285, 428. T^^^e, s. 125. Quartering of
Soldiers, vid. Soldiers Quarters. Quick Stock on Land, vid. Taxes,. 8.29.37.
R.
RAgs of White Liunen, vid. Taxes,. 121. Ready Money or Debts, vid. Taxes. 6,
26, 230. Receivers General, vid. Taxes,. 22.50, 53, 74, 86, 96, 239, 241 264,
295, 433, 454. Religion, page 69. Rectories, Vicaridges, and Curacies, vid.
Taxes,. 76. Rent in Malt, vid. Ex^^se,. 34. Rents and Rent-charges, vid.
Taxes,. 10, 11. Repeal, vid. Creditors, 9. Malt, s. 1. Taxes, s. 174. Rescous
of Prisoners, vid. Prisons,. 17, 18, 19. Riding Post, vid. Highways,. 12, 36.
Ribers, page 69. River of Bridgwater, vid. Bridgwater,. 8. River of Colue by
Colchester, vid. Rivers,. 1. Rivers of Wye, and Lugg, vid. Coin,. 9. Rock Salt,
vid. Trade,. 89, 91, 92, 94, 95. Rockets, vid. Squibs,. 1, 2. Rolls Liberty,
vid. Taxes. 68. Ryegate, vid. Highways,. 1.
S.
ST. Paul's London, vid. Churches,. 1. St. Peter's, Westminster, vid. Churches,.
1. 3. St. Thomas Southwark, vid. Churches,. 2. Sacrament, vid. Soldiers,. 11,
12, 13. Sadlers, vid. Taxes,. 195. Salary, Fee, Wages or Perquisites, vid.
Taxes,. 4. Salmon, vid. Taxes,. 160. Salt, page 74. Salt, vid. Annuities,. 1.
Taxes,. 160, 161, 205, 207, 301, 401. Trade,. 70, etc. 105. Saltfish, vid.
Taxes,. 160 Scire facias, vid. Suits,. 6, 8. Scotch Linen, vid. Taxes, 475,
477, 483, 484. Seamen, page 75. Seamen, vid. Stores,. 3. Taxes, s. 465. Seamens
Wills, vid. Stores,. 2.6. Seizure, vid. Taxes,. 112, 190. Trade,. 4, 10, 11,
12, 18, 59, 76, Wool,. 6. Serpents, vid. Squibs,. 1, 2. Servants and
Journeymen, vid. Taxes,. 2, 25, 437. Settlement of Poor, vid. Poor,. 1, 3, 4,
9. Sheriffs of Counties, vid. Juries,. 1. Partitions, s. 4, 5. Sheriff of
Essex, vid. Rivers,. 8. Sheriffs of London and Surrey, vid. London,. 8. Ships
and Shipping, p. 77. Ships, vid. Trade,. 54. Shoemakers, vid. Taxes,. 195.
Shopkeepers, vid. Taxes,. 7. 423. Silks, vid. Customs,. 14, 15, 25, 47, 55.
Trade, s. 141. Silver Money, vid. Coin,. 3. Silver Manufactures, vid. Trade,.
43, 44. Silver Wire, vid. Coin,. 17. Trade, s. 45, 46, 47, 48. Soldiers, page
81. Soldiers, vid. Highways,. 12, 36. Militia,. 1, 2. Soldiers Quarters, vid.
Soldiers,. 4, 5, 6, 7. Taxes, s. 97, 465. Specifications of Debts, vid. Taxes,.
36, 80, 81. Spicery, vid. Customs,. 12, 47. Taxes, s. 224, 321. Squibs, page
831 Stamped Paper, vid. Paper, Vellum, etc. Stationers, vid. Taxes,. 108. Stock
Jobbers, vid. Brokers,. 1.6. Stock of Paper, Parchment, etc. vid. Taxes.. 108.
Stock in Trade, viz. in Goods, Wares, etc. v. Taxes,. 7.29, 38. Stock upon Land
viz. in Cattle, etc. vid. Quick-stock. Stocks in Companies, vid. Taxes,. 55.
Stone and Earthen Bottles and Wares, vid. Taxes,. 208, 474, 479. Storts of Wat
page 84. Strtets paving and amending, vid. Haymarket. 1. London, s. 1. Sugars,
vid. Customs,. 20, 21, 25, 50, 51, 55. Suits, page 86. Suits, Actions or
Prosecutions, vid. Highways,. 11, 35. Prisons, s. 21. Rivers, s. 19. Equibs, s.
6. Stores, s. 5. Taxes, s. 49. Surveyor General of St. Paul's, vid. Churches,.
7. Sweet-maker, vid. Excise,. 25. Sweets, vid. Excise,. 14. Sword Hilts, vid.
Silver Manufactures. Swyne, vid. London,. 4.
T.
TAble of Repayment of Loans vid. Exchequer,. 8. Talleys, vid. Brokers, s. 16.
Customs, s 56. Exchequer, s. 1, 2. Excise,. 1. Oaths, s. 1, 2, 3. Taxes, s. 87,
134, 135, 136, 139, 162, 163, 472. Trade, s. 109. Tanners, vid. Taxes,. 173,
180, 182, 189, 191, 19^. Taxes, page 89. Taxes, vid. Customs,. 1, 2, etc. 27,
etc. Tellers of the Exchequer, vid. Coin,. 36. Exchequer, s. 1, 2, 3, 5, 13.
Tenants, vid. Taxes,. 25, 66, 77, 246, 258, 286. Tillage and Breed of Cattle,
vid. Taxes,. 122. Timber for Shiping, vid. Ships. 1, 3 Tin and Pewter, vid.
Customs, 40. Tin farthings, vid. Coin,. 39. Tithes, vid. Suits,. 3. Titles of
Honor, vid. Treason,. 10 Tobacco, vid. Customs,. 15, 16, 22, 25, 47, 52, 55.
Taxes, s. 1^4. Tobacco Pipes, vid. Taxes,. 172, 474, 479. Tolls, vid.
Haymarket,. 1. Highways,. 4.27. Trade, page 152. Tradesmen, vid. Taxes,. 7.38.
423. Trained Bands, vid. Squibs,. 5. Transportation, vid. Prisons,. 18, 19.
Transport Ships and Debt, vid. Taxes,. 222, 223, 389, 398. Treason, page 175.
Treason, vid. Coin.. 21, 22, 23, 24, 28. Treasury Commissioners, vid.
Commissioners. Treasurer of the Navy, vid. Ships,. 14. Treasurer of the
Ordnance, vid. Ships,. 14. Trespass, vid. Suits,. 1.4. Tunnage (and Poundage)
vid. Annuities,. 1. Customs, s. 2.43, 46, 55. Taxes,. 122, 205, 207, 301, 401.
V.
VEllum, vid. Paper. Verderers, vid. Ships,. 11. Viscount Irwin and others,
vid. Burlington,. 1.
W.
WArden of the Fleet, vid. Prisons,. 11, 12, 13, 23. Wages, vid. Taxes,. 26.
Wast, vid. Suits,. 3. Wares and Merchandises, vid. Taxes,. 230. Watches, vid.
Silver Manufactures, Waterworks, vid. Taxes,. 55, 73, 280, 288. VVhale-Fins,
vid. Taxes, 475, 476, 483, 484. Walebone, vid. Customs,. 24, 54. Wills of
Seamen and Soldiers, vid. Taxes,. 361. Winchelsea Hundred, vid. Wool,. 11.
Winchester Bushel, vid. Excise,. 23, 59. Window Tax, vid. Houses. Wines, vid.
Customs,. 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 15, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 55. Wines and Vinegar, vid.
Taxes,. 123. Wire, vid. Silver Wire. Wivenhoe Chanel, vid. Rivers,. 1. Wool,
page 177. Wool-Fells, vid. Wool,. 9. VVoollen Manufactures, vid. Wool,. 10.
Writ of Arrest, vid. Taxes,. 359. Writ of Enquiry, vid. Suits,. 6. Writ of
Error, vid. Suits,. 2. Writ of Partition, vid. Partitions,. 1. Wrought Plate,
vid. Plate and Silver Manufactures. Wrought Silks, vid. Silks.
FINIS.

