AT THE Council Chamger in Whitehall, The Eight Day of November, 1697. PRESENT,
Their Excellencies the Lords Justices in Council.
WHereas diverse of His Majesty's Subjects who are Attainted of High Treason, or
who have been in Rebellion against His Majesty, and other Dangerous and
Disaffected Persons, have withdrawn themselves into France, and other Parts
beyond the Seas, And whereas Information has been given to this Board, That
some of the said Persons are coming out of France and other Foreign Parts into
this Kingdom, without any Permission or Leave for the same* which, if not
prevented, may Endanger the Safety of His Majesty's Royal Person, and Disturb
the Peace of this Kingdom: Their Excellencies the Lords Justices in Council,
taking the same into Consideration, have thought fit to Order, That all Mayors,
Justices of the Peace, and other Magistrates and Officers, whom it may Concern,
do take Care, and give the necessary Directions, That all Persons, being His
Majesty's Subjects, who shall come from France, Flanders, Holland or Hamburgh
into this Kingdom, not having a Pass from His Majesty, or His Majesty's
Minister Residing in any of those Places respectively, be Apprehended and
Secured in Safe Custody, together with their Papers, till they are Examined. In
Order to which the said Magistrates are to give Notice from time to time to One
of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State of all Persons so Apprehended,
that such further Directions may be given concerning them, as shall be
Requisite. And to the intent that all Persons concerned may take due Notice
hereof, Their Excellencies have thought fit to Direct that this Order be
Printed, and also published in the Gazette.

John Povey.

London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1697.


