A SHORT NARRATIVE OF Mr. Fitzgerald, Who lately was Summoned up from BRISTOL
By one of His Majesty's Messengers, To the HONORABLE PRIVY COUNCIL For
SUSPICION of HIGH TREASON Giving a Brief Account of his Carriage there at the
Board, his Innocence, and other particulars relating to the farther Discovery
of this Hellish POPISH PLOT.

Omnibus qui patriam conservaverint, adjuverint, auxerint, certus est coelo,
and definitus locus, ubi beati aevo sempiterno fruuntur.

Cicero. Printed in the Year 1680.

A SHORT NARRATIVE OF Mr. Fitzgerald,
Who was lately Summoned up from Bristol, by one of His Majesty's Messengers,
to the Honorable Privy Council, for suspicion of High Treason, giving a Brief
Account of his Carriage there at the Board, his Innocence, and other
particulars relating to the farther Discovery of this Hellish Popish Plot.
MR. Fitzgerald formerly a Franciscan, Lecturer of Philosophy, and Student of
Divinity in Ireland, having been very diligent and studious in the reading of
Books of Controversies, such as Thomas Aquinas, etc. and being very desirous to
satisfy and settle his mind upon the best Basis and Foundation, which had been
for a long time very wavering, found very sensibly that the Church of Rome both
in her Doctrine and Manners, had departed in many weighty points from her
primitive purity, for which the Ancient Romans in St. Paul's time were so
highly commended, and their faith become famous throughout the Universe; and
that now the Church of Rome having apostatized, and so far degenerated from her
primitive Integrity, was no longer to be embraced by him, but to be accounted
no better than a spuriour Harlot by all good Christians. To this end therefore,
that he might set himself seriously to this so necessary a work of his
Conversion, there being several errors which that Church maintains, and of
which he could not be well satisfied, by his reading of their Divines and
Authors; he often conferred with many persons accounted learned of several
strange points and opinions which that Church holds, such as
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc. who gave have him not the least content and
satisfaction to those Queries he proposed to them. Since therefore that in
Ireland he found so little success, he resolved to travel into France and
Italy, where he conversed and often disputed, with the most famous and learned
of those Nations, but was no wiser than before; and the more he considered of
their tenets, he found nothing but senseless absurdities contained in that
Idolatrous Religion, and thus concluded with himself, that no persons of common
sense, and endued with any reason, could believe or give their assent to them,
who make Ignorance the mother of Devotion, and deprive men of the Word of God,
which as the Apostle has told us, is only able to make us wise unto salvation,
who introduce in the room of it, their own senseless and ridiculous fopperies,
empty gaudy Pageantry, to amuse poor ignorant souls with the outward splendour
of it, full of empty Ceremonies, but quite destitute of that Innocence,
meekness and spotless purity, which becomes the Gospel of Christ, as it was
delivered and taught by our blessed Savior himself, and transmitted down unto
us by the holy Apostles; the Church of Rome holding only the name of
Christians, and every day becoming more and more odious unto all persons; who
daily forsake her Communion, and abhor to have any society with her, by reason
of her abominable practices, damnable and no less than Atheistical Principles,
Hellish Plots, countenancing Massacres, and Treasonable Contrivances, which she
daily infuses, and perpetually instills into the minds of her deluded Votaries;
who walking blindfold through an implicit faith of obedience which they suppose
is due to their Church, and the Popes Infallibility, refuse no attempts imposed
on them, though never so Diabolical, and hope to merit Heaven, by assassinating
Kings, and destroying Kingdoms; subverting Laws and the Government; and
endeavor to make all those Heretics which oppose them, to truckle under the
Popes Dominion; whom they blasphemously call by no less a name and title than
this, Deus Noster Papa, Our Lord God the Pope.

Having seriously pondered and weighed these things beforementioned, he
thereupon fully purposed to leave those Countries, and come for England where
he hoped to find, not only greater satisfaction in his Conscience, as to
Religion, by conferring with those many worthy and Reverend Divines which
abound amongst us; but likewise to serve his King and Country, in some very
weighty Discoveries, mindful of that memorable saying of Cicero, non nobis nati
sumus, sed partim patriae, etc. Men are not born for themselves, but for their
Country, Parents, Kindred, and Friends; but our Country above all the rest
ought to have the Pre-eminence, as Ovid very well, Nescio qua natale solum
dulcedine cunctos
Ducit, and immemores non sinit esse sui.


These his Discoveries are touching the Plot in Ireland, how affairs were there
carried on by the Popish Party, to subvert and destroy the Government now
established amongst us, and to bring Popish Anarchy and Confusion in the room
of it, wherein they were indefatigably industrious; for several Popish Bishops
met, and had diverse Consultations and Meetings, near the River Shannon in
Ireland, very large sums of Money were raised to carry on their design, the
Popes Legate was in Ireland, and did encourage the Popish Party in this their
Enterprise, as likewise to dispose of the Kingdom for his Holiness own use,
great Encouragements and Preferments were promised those Persons which would
hazard their lives for the good of the Catholic cause, which was no less than
meritorious; told them that this was an opportunity which by no means was to be
neglected, but every one of their party must put a helping hand to it; they
likewise took care that their youth should be well exercised in Arms, and to
be all ready when they should be commanded to fight; he likewise gives us an
Account of a large vessel which came from Spain, fraught with Powder, Ball, and
all sort of Arms and Ammunition, which was happily cast away near Kingsale
Harbor, no doubt to the great grief of all good Catholics, who we may imagine
were possessed with no little Consternation at this unlookt for unlucky Accident,
who being such exquisite Incendiaries, no doubt would have made excellent use
of that Cargo if it had landed, and come safe to them. But thus the Divine
Providence defeats, and confounds the wicked and treacherous practices of
unreasonable and cruel men, who delight in blood, and passionately desire to
embrew their hands in the blood of the Innocent, who cry aloud for vengeance to
the Almighty, who does miraculously deliver them from such Monsters, and brings
them to condign punishment for such Enormities.

But I only designing a short discourse of their proceedings in Ireland, you
may ere long expect a more full, and exact Account in his own Depositions which
he does ere long intend to publish to the world, to the shame and confusion of
the Popish party, and for the content and satisfaction of all zealous
Protestants, I proceed now therefore to his Jovrney.

Being come to London, and having little or no Acquaintance there, he made it
his whole business, to enquire out some worthy person, to whom he might
heartily impart so important an affair, knowing very well that delays in a
business of that Consequence, were dangerous; but could not find any, with
great patience enduring much want and distress, exiled his Native Country,
still waiting an opportunity to make himself and business known; not at all
discouraged, but still remaining very zealous to serve his King and Country,
when ever he should find an opportunity to meet with a real and cordial Friend
who would promote his Affairs, and that he might freely disclose his thoughts
unto; who found out one, who at the first very civilly and courteously
entertained him for some time; and in some things did assist him, but this
lasted not long, for of a sudden he forsook him, and his bus^ness, upon what
grounds he knows not, not having been guilty of any Uncivility whereby he might
incurr his displeasure; finding therefore no hopes in him, he was forced to
seek out some other, and very soon after he came acquainted with a Reverend
person, unto whom he freely disclosed his business; but for want of
Encouragement he could not as yet prosecute it, whereupon he told him, he would
serve him to the utmost of his power, and made it his whole Business to follow
his Concerns. Mr. Fitzgerald daily visited him, and conferred with him,
desirous that no delays might be, which he was very mindful of, but found not
that quick dispatch which he desired; having tried all ways imaginable to
procure him money but to no purpose; all his Friends being extreme backward in
it, though no less than a National Concern, upon whose Journey, so much of good
depended to these three Kingdoms; which indubitably is a very great
discouragement to any person to concern himself with any thing of that nature,
though obliged to serve his King and Country to the utmost of his capacity;
when we see so few public spirited persons, who sit at the helm of Government,
and though they have vast Estates, will scarcely contribute one farthing,
though it be for the saving of their own Throats, their Estates, Laws,
Religion, and whatsoever is most sacred or dear to them; which would
indubitably have been all involved in the same precipice of destruction; had we
not had [together with the Divine Providence which continually surrounds and
encompasses us, as a sure Bulwark, by it is secure protection,] likewise some
very vigilant and industrious persons, who make it their daily business to sift
out their inhumane and barbarous Practices, which such Incendiaries as they
are, have too often brought to pass; but this Plot has now proved an abortive
brat, not without an overruling Power sensibly perspicuous in the hands of
those Instruments, which he has made to be Patres Patriae, the deliverers of
their Country in a much more transcendent degree than any Roman Conqueror
could claim after all his Victories and Trophies gained by his valor, over his
Conquered and Submissive Captive Enemies, for now every day produces new
Champions for the good of the Kingdom, which cut off this Hydra, as fast as it
grows, and will in time root her up, and leave her naked, exposed to the
contempt and scorn of all persons, and again make good that saying of the Poet
in another sense than as he literally spoke it, -- Jam seges est ubi Roma fuit.


My zeal for my Country has transported me thus far out of my way, now I shall
reassume the thread of my Discourse; His friend finding no possibility of any
supplies from those whom he was in hopes to have received it from, having a sum
of Money by him resolves at his own Cost and Charge, to send him, and another
person, one Mr. Charleton, lately a Clark to that worthy Justice of the Peace
Sir William Waller, to whom our Nation is not a little obliged for his
indefatigable diligence, and daily Industry in detecting Popish Priests and
Jesuits, which before the discovery of the Plot, like so many Locusts, did
swarm in every Corner of this Kingdom, and infect with their poisonous
doctrine, and do more hurt than those Locusts did the Egyptians; through his
Care we are now blessed be God pretty well rid of them, being a true and lively
pattern of Loyalty to his Sovereign, and whom all true subjects should imitate,
zealously to promote the Protestant Interest; but this by the by, the better to
clear my discourse concerning this Charleton, who was designed as Mr.
Fitz-Geralds Companion in his Journey, which how well he behaved himself I will
declare by and by.

Mr. Fitzgerald by the assistance of his friend had several Letters from
persons of Honor to further him in his business, when he was landed in
Ireland, and Directions given him, how to manage his business when he came to
Bristol; thus having at length gotten those necessaries which he wanted through
the means and generosity of his Reverend Friend; Mr. Fitzgerald, and this
Charleton both took Coach at the Goat Tavern near Cheering Cross, to go for
Bristol, where they both arrived in a short time, which they testified by many
Letters sent to London, Sr. John Knight the Mayor of Bristol being requested to
give his assistance, which he accordingly performed. The wind being contrary,
here they were compelled to wait a fortnight or three weeks, which all that
time continued and varied very little from one certain point, not sufficient to
land them in Ireland, Charleton instead of being an associate, and co-helper
with Mr. Fitzgerald, carried himself very rudely toward him, not without
opprobrious and uncivil Language, which he bore all along with great patience,
but extremely troubled in mind, because that his business was retarded. Whilst
they were still expecting a fair wind, Charleton finds some papers of his under
his Bolster which were of no such sad Consequence to him as High Treason, for
they were counterfeited by Charleton, and those he had, only some Directions
and Memorandums, for his memory, to assist him when he came to Ireland. Mr.
Fitzgerald searching his Pockets soon mist his Papers, and sent the Maid of
the house up stairs, to see for them, who told him she had narrowly searched the
bed, and could find none; whereupon he taxed Charleton with them, who confessed
he had them, and that he must go along with him before a Justice of the Peace,
who accordingly went with him, there he swore positively that he was a Popish
Priest, and alleged High Treason against him, who (although innocent of what
was laid to his Charge) committed him to Bristol Gaol, where he remained three
days, very civilly used by all the Prisoners, and especially by the Master of
the Prison, and visited by several persons of Quality in the Town, who flocked
to see him, and there during his Confinement showed him great respect and
kindness.

Presently after his Commitment news of him being brought to the Council,
Captain Carter a very civil, obliging person, and one of his Majesty's
Messengers, by especial order from the Privy Council, and the King's especial
Warrant, was ordered by the Lords to take into his Custody the body of Mr. John
Fitzgerald, who immediately according to order went to Bristol, and brought
Mr. Fitzgerald as his Prisoner up to London before his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, where he accordingly appeared, and gave their
Lordships full satisfaction in all things concerning his Papers, himself and
Business, was by their Lordships discharged and ordered to proceed on his
Journey, who acquainting their Lordships with his indisposition by his Journey,
and being an infirm person, he desired some respite for two or three days, and
then he would obey their Lordships Commands, if those necessaries were provided
for him which he must necessarily have along with him, to which Answer was made
he should have them, whereupon he withdrew, and Mr. Charleton was committed to
the Gate House, though since he is as I am informed released.

Thus have I given a short and impartial Account of Mr. Fitz Geralds
proceedings, concerning whom we have had little or no satisfaction in some of
our Intelligences; I hope at his return from Ireland, we shall have a complete,
and more full account of his Journey, and of his Discovery; and this in the
mean time was printed to satisfy all sober people of his Innocence, and
vindicate him from that aspersion, and calumny of being a Jesuit, whose
Principles I am very confident, are far different from his, who has embraced
our dear Mother the Church of England, and puts himself under her protection
and safeguard, from whom none can stray, but be worse, who detests and abhorrs
those Tenants which the Church of Rome do maintain; and who is likewise
desirous and ambitious of nothing, so much as to be serviceable in his
Generation, and in that Station wherein God has placed him, to make a farther
discovery of their Plots and Intrigues, for which purpose he is now gone, and
for whose good success and happy return, all will pray, who wish the
prosperity, and happy Tranquillity of these three Kingdoms. That Popish Plots
may be more and more confounded, and detected, and the Protestant Religion
established to us, and ours, is, and shall be, the sincere and hearty prayer to
the Throne of Grace,

Dear Countrymen, Of your humble Servant, Philalethes.


