Fair Warning from TYBVRN: Or, the several CONFESSIONS and EXECUTION OF The
FIFTEEN notorious MALEFACTORS That suffered there on Monday the 8 of March,
1679/80.
VIZ.
William Harris, John Anderson, Joseph Philips, Timothy Grady, Edward Grady,
Richard Hodgkinson, HIGHWAY-MEN.

John Braford, William Carter, For several Burglaries and Robberies.

William Woodward, William West, Evan Wood, For several Felonies, being burnt
in the hand before.

Randal Russel, For breaking the Goal of Newgate; burnt in the hand before.

Frances Lewis, Dorothy Clarke, and Dorothy Hall, For diverse Felonies; all old
Offenders.



With the Behavior of each Person in Prison after Sentence, and last Words in
the Cart.

IT IS but vain to make a long Prologue to this Tragedy; for though the nature
of the Subject might seasonably enough afford an Exhortation, yet so hardened
are People in their wickedness, that little Reformation can be hoped for from
them: For since they are grown Sermon-proof, what Effects can we expect from
the Remonstrances of a Pamphlet? and when the terrible and untimely Sufferings
of their Companions can make no impression on their steeled Hearts and seared
Consciences, we may well despair of success from any words we can use:
Therefore we shall immediately address our selves to give the Reader an Account
of the Behavior of this numerous Shoal of Criminals, and manner of their just
Suffering; leaving every one to make such Application thereof to himself, as
God shall put into his heart. -- He that has an ear to hear, let him hear.

ON Monday the first of March, there were in all Twenty five that received
Sentence of Death; of whom some obtained a gracious Reprieve: The rest were now
brought to Suffer. Their Crimes were briefly as follow:

William Harris, John Anderson, and Joseph Philips, were Condemned for Robbing
of William Northey Esquire and others, upon the Kings Highway, of Goods to the
value of One hundred and fifty pounds. They were Foot-padds, as they are
usually called, and it is said had long followed that wicked Occupation. As
Harris was the Ringleader of them; as it is supposed, to this Villainy; so after
Condemnation he behaved himself most stubbornly, seeming nothing to mind the
Condition he was in, or to have any serious thoughts concerning the future
state of his Soul.

Timothy Grady and Edward Grady were Brethren by Nature, as well as in
Iniquity: Their Crime was for Robbing of Richard Holder and his Wife on the
Highway, not far from Vxbridge; from whom they took in Money, Rings, etc. to
the value of 14 l. 7 s. and particularly a Campaign Coat, which was found upon
one of their backs, when they were apprehended two days after. This Timothy
appeared all along in a very penitent frame, giving himself much to Prayer,
Reading, and diligent Attention to the Christian Advice and Exhortations of
several Ministers that came to see him; And was very desirous to have saved his
Brothers Life, saying, That he feared he was not in a fit Condition to Die.

Richard Hodgkinson Suffered likewise for two Robberies, both committed on the
Road upon one Jonathan Man, at several times; taking from him to the value of
50 s. one time, and 6 s. another. He appeared very resolute and unconcerned to
the last.

John Braford was Condemned for several Robberies and Burglaries.

Robert Lewis for two Burglaries, and stealing Goods and Ribbon, to the value
of 8 l.

William Carter for a Burglary, and Stealing two Flitches of Bacon; of whose
Behavior we can say very little, but Qualis Vita, Finis ita.

Evan Wood received Sentence for stealing of Books from Norman Nelson; a just
Judgment, that the same thing should bring him to the Gallows, which once saved
him from it. For this was he that two or three Sessions ago had the Mercy of
the Book, for stealing 1600 l. from Esquire Hooker. He was now sick, and seemed
very little apprehensive of any Applications that were made to him for his
Souls Health by the Ministers.

William Woodward was likewise very sick, being Sentenced for stealing a Silver
Tankard from Ralph Lodge, of the value of 6 l. 10 s.

William West for a small Felony; but he and the former burnt in the Hand before

Randal Russel was one of the six that lately broke out of the Goal of Newgate,
being committed thither for breaking open a Chamber in New-Inne, and stealing
thence Three hundred pounds. He was a most obstinate obdurate fellow, without
any kind of Remorse; and rather scoft at than valued any good Advice that was
given him.

The three women, Frances Lewis, Dorothy Clarke, and Dorothy Hall, were for
several Felonies, having several times before been concerned in such lewd
Practices, and received the Mercy of the Bench, but would not be reclaimed; and
therefore were thought fit to be made Examples, since they would not take any.

Between the time of Condemnation and that of Execution, diverse worthy
Ministers charitably offered their Pains to these wretched Criminals;
endeavoring with earnest Exhortations to bring them to a sense of their
deplored estate, and a due sight of their sins; and instructing them in the
nature of Christian Religion, to the Life and Power whereof these poor
Creatures seemed utterly strangers; they likewise Prayed often with them very
affectionately, and it is hoped, through Grace, their Labors were not without
good success on several of their Souls. Execution being respited so long, that
they might have the benefit of one Lord's Day; to prepare themselves for Death.
The Minister in his Sermons was very laborious and zealous to improve that
opportunity to the advantage of their Souls: And several of them, by their
outward Deportment, seemed much affected with the Word Preached, and to join
very heartily in the Public Prayers.

Two of them in private Discourses to their Friends, made large and particular
acknowledgments of their Crimes; being so many and various, that those that
heard them were surprised with Admiration, to think that men of their years
could be Guilty of such a multitude of Thefts and Villainies. They expressed a
great desire to have made satisfaction, if they had been able, to all they had
wronged; but that being impossible, all they could do was to declare, where
several parcels of Goods which they had stolen, were laid and disposed of, that
the Owners might have the same again.

Another of these Prisoners Confessed, that he had followed the Trade of a
Thief, and had no other employment ever since he was Five Years of Age; and
with many tears accused his Parents, for promoting his ruin, by encouraging or
at least winking at his petty Childish Thefts, and not sufficiently Correcting
him for the same; whereby he became emboldened to go on, and attempt greater
Rogueries, which now brought him to this untimely End. A notable Warning to all
Parents, to avoid such a course as gives their Children just occasion to curse
their Memories; and accuse their Fondness, as the principal Cause of their
Destruction,

They were carried to Tyburn in five Carts; in the first, Hodgkinson, Braford,
and Russel; in the second, Anderson, and the two Gradies, who were Papists, in
the third, Harris, and West, whereof one did lamentably bewail his condition,
and beg the Prayers of all the Spectators: then came the Three Women in a Cart
by themselves; and in another, some distance after them, Wood, Carter, and
Woodward.

The rest of the Prisoners Condemned, (amongst whom were James Baker, alias
Heskins, the Romish Priest, and Tobias Butler, for Murdering Mr. Symonds in
Gardiners-lane Westminster) are for the present Reprieved.

At the place of Execution they spoke very little, but what is usual on such
dolesome occasions; desiring all people to take warning by them, in avoiding
idleness, bad Company, and lewd Women, and neglecting the public Worship of
God, which had engaged them in these wicked courses, and brought them to this
untimely disastrous end.

Philips just at his going into the Cart, was stopped in expectation of a
Reprieve; but though an Honorable person interceded, yet it could not be
obtained, so that about an hour after the rest, he was carried away in a Cart
by himself.

FINIS.

