FAIR WARNING TO Murderers of Infants: BEING AN ACCOUNT OF THE Trial,
Codemnation and Execution OF Mary Goodenough AT THE Assizes held in Oxon, in
February, 1691-92.

TOGETHER With the Advice sent by her to her Children, In a Letter Signed by
her own Hand the Night before she was Executed; with some Reflections added
upon the whole: Printed for the Public Good.

LONDON: Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Sign of the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard* 1692

TO THE READER.
IT would grieve a Man to think how many's Curiosity will tempt them to buy
this Paper; how few's Consideration will lead them to make useful Application
of it to themselves; how many more will, through a vainly censorious Wit,
charge the Publishing this Letter, as a Trick to pick Pockets; how few's Wisdom
will conduct them to fall in with the direct Tendency it has to enrich and
ennoble their Minds; whilst most, it is to be feared, read such things with no
more concern, than Persons in Health, read Quack-Doctors Bills, and make no
better use of them. Yet he that has an Ear to hear let him hear; this Letter
speaks by strong Consequence at least, to the highest concerns of Mankind in
general, it lays open Men's greatest Mistakes about, and misconducts of them: Oh
that they were wise, that there were in all that shall read, an heart to
consider this. In this Letter is wrapped up most suitable Persuasions to the
Youth of these Kingdoms, to consider thoroughly of, and engage themselves
heartily in their Baptismal Covenant. It gives an awakening Alarm to negligent
Parents, to instruct their Children in, and conduct them diligently into the
Paths of Heavenly Wisdom, lest they deeply mourn at last, (as this poor Woman
did) their fatal Cruelty to their Childrens Souls* This Letter suggests a
Warning to Adulterers and Adulteresses, to repent of, and forsake their Crimes,
lest God bring them to repent by open shame, as he did this poor Creature, or
suffer them to go on in a covert way to Hell. It Is a Cry after the Backsliders
in heart, those who have had strong Convictions, taken up good Resolutions, and
followed them for a while, with a course of Amendment, but are returned with
the Dog to his Vomit; that they return to God from whom they have fallen, lest
he in Judgment give them up to commit enormous Sins, to fali under dismal
Punishments, yea, the most dismal of all, final Impenitency. Here Is a discharge
to all their Hopes of the Favor of God and everlasting Life, who are but
formal, hypocritical, heartless Pretenders to Religion, till their Hearts are
renewed, as well as the Face of their Conversation reformed. And who amongst
the dissolute, profane and profligate part of Mankind, can say, but here is a
most passionate Cry to them that break and shake off the fatal Chains wherein
the Devil is leading them down to the Chambers of Eternal Death? In short,
there is that in this Letter, which may lead all to the most intimately
acquainting themselves with their own Mortality. There Is that by which, all
Persons may determine, whether they belong to the Kingdom of Light, or that of
Darkness; the Letter of a Dying Persons Trial of the Truth and Life of her
Repentance, Faith, Love and Obedience. Reader, will you not use what you have
bought? do you know all this Letter tells you already? Oh be persuaded now to
fall a doing it. Will you censure it as being above these Children? Oh cast it
not away as if it were below you; it was calculated as a Guide to them through
their Lives. Will you charge it as too wordy? Oh confute not your charge, by
making it appear there are not Words enough to persuade you to become Pious.
Well, when the Testament of our Dying Jesus, nay, his last charge in that
Testament, Do this in Remembrance of me, prevails so little with Christians,
what Effects shall we hope for, from the words of a Dying Malefactor,
recommending him to the World she has so lately left? Yet can not thou Oh
God, that causest Gibbets to preach, make the most Refractory of Rebels hear?
You that will not hearken to Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles,
will you not hear, though one is here raised from the Dead, a living Witness to
the great Truth they taught? Was she not dead in Trespasses and Sins? Was she
not made alive to God, through Jesus Christ think you, before she died to Nature?
Hear her then, Christ Jesus by her, that your Souls may live. Open thou the
Ears Oh God, that are deaf to the Voice of Charms. Is not Judgment thy strange
Work! Oh then Reform Multitudes by the Chastisement of this one Criminal; who
will otherwise by their Rebellions, run themselves into great Misery in this
World, if not also into everlasting Misery in the next: Well, whether any
Person that reads this Letter, will give a practical regard to it or no, this
is certain, it will barden where it does not soften. They are a Degree nearer
Hell by refusing, who don't advance toward Heaven by embracing its
Instructions. And if ever they repent, their slight of this Counsel, will yield
them a most bitter Reflection; or if they never repent, this reflex Advice will
add to the Smart of their Eternal Vexations in the World they are posting to, of
Horror and Despair.

As to that man who had the first and principal hand in this Woman's and her
Infants Tragedy, I would desire some Neighbors (supposing he will scarce take
pains to read this) to ask him seriously some such Questions as these. Whether
he did not act the Devils part, when he tempted this Woman as Satan our
Savior, to purchase a Supply for the cravings of her Nature, by a Crime
tending to the Ruin of her Soul? Whether he that serves the Devil in his Life,
and repents not, is not like to fall into his Condemnation and merciless hands
at Death? Whether he believes God has commanded Thou shall not commit Adutery?
If he does not, whether he believes, or can prove the Christian World Fools, or
Madmen, who also thus believe it? Whether God has not owned this Command, as
often in History, so now by avenging the Breach of it, in this his fellow
Criminals Death? This were easily argued, though she was Condemned at man's Bar
for another Crime. But if he believes God has forbidden Adultery, whether he
thinks God will always bear with him, in the violating the plain Letter of his
Laws? Whether he that being often reproved hardens his heart, shall not
suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy? Whether he does not flatter
himself with a secret Thought of future Repentance? Whether it be not his best,
and may not happen to be his only time to repent now? or if he has no thought
of Repentance, how he can think to dwell with devouring Flames, or everlasting
Burnings?

And as to the Neighborhood of this poor Woman, if the Judgments of God abroad
in the World should teach the Inhabitants of the Earth Righteousness, surely
then this Judgment of God, fallen upon one amongst you, whom you knew, with
whom you conversed, is now clearly designed by God to teach you Righteousness.
Think it not a Warning to you against the particular Crimes for which she died
only: Tho I dare affirm it positively, you are not secure of your selves, that
you shall not commit the Crimes, or worse than those for which she died; till
you get your Hearts renewed and changed, as she has showed you in the Trial of
her self. No, nor are you then secure of avoiding the commission of such
enormous Crimes, but in your close walking with God, and through Faith on Jesus,
receiving continual Supplies of Grace and Strength from him to resist
Temptations. Did not David commit Adultery and Murder? Was not this Woman as
Religious as most of you? Did not she seeminly out go many of you? Will you not
be warned by her Fall then, not to content your selves with a Form of Religion,
without the Power of Godliness? But I would chiefly apply my self to you on the
behalf of her poor destitute Children. The Law of the Nation exacts from you
the care of their Bodies, does not the Law of God under several Penalties,
require you to take care of their Souls? Are not their Souls more valuable than
their Bodies? Are not you become as Parents to these poor Orphans? The case of
Orphans and Bastards is deplorable. Parishes indeed, take care to place them
out where they may learn a slavish way of living at the cheapest rates, but
seldom consider whether they will be carefully instructed in the Fear, and
p^ously conducted in the ways of God where they have placed them; a Cruelty
indeed (Oh monstrous) many religious Persons are guilty of toward their
Children. The best Trade and most knowing worldly Master is all their enquiry.
Will you be so cruel to these Childrens Souls? know if you be, their Blood will
God require at your hands. But whilst I speak to all, I Am afraid lest none will
think themselves concerned. Are there none amongst you that have devoted your
selves to Christ Jesus in an everlasting Covenant, and Love him in Sincerity? I
apply my self to you in Christ's words, Feed these his Lambs. Of such little
children as those of this Woman's, with you are the Kingdom of Heaven; are they
not Christ's Members whilst they are yet devoted to him in Virtue of their
Mothers Faith? Will not God reward your labor of Love toward them? Will they
not be Blessings to the Families, to the Town they shall live in, and an Honor
too, if you endeavor to bring them up to the Practice of their Mothers
Precepts? Take care her Children learn to read, learn the Catechism; read to
them, and press upon them this their Mothers Last Will concerning them. Don't
stick at a little charge or trouble to do them good. Will any thing please you
but the good you have done with what you had, when you come to dye? Will any
thing displease you then but that you have done so little! And I beg leave to
mind you of an Obligation, which, however to you it may seem small or none at
all, yet by God perhaps, is accounted no small one upon you, to be kind to
those poor Children. Who knows how far your Uncharitableness hiding your selves
from your own Flesh, from this poor Woman's Wants, contributed to the strength
of that Temptation which brought her to that Sin and Punishment which have left
these Children Motherless. It was for want of Bread she said: If her Modesty
did make her ashamed to beg, did not her meagre Look, her starved Children, her
meanly furnished House and Table beg from you, should you not have answered
this silent Prayer by Charity? Tho you did not do it then, show your Repentance
now in showing a more bountiful and constant Kindness to her Children. This way
God has left open for you. I wish all Parishes might by these Considerations,
be brought more narrowly to inspect the State of their poor Neighbors, and
consequently to administer to them. Some noisie poor are maintained in their
Idleness, whilst other modest poor are starved in the midst of their Labors.

In short, from this Woman's Crime and Punishment, may we be brought firmly to
believe, Except we repent we shall all likewise perish: May they that think
they stand, take heed lest they fall: May all hear and fear, and do no more
wickedly.

An Account of the Trial, Condemnation and Execution of Mary Goodenough, at the
Assizes held in Oxon, in February 1691-92.
MAry Goodenough Widow, aged about 40 years, lived at Bradwell in the County of
Oxon. Being in great Poverty and Straits, even to the want of Bread for her and
hers; she was seduced by a neighboring Baker, (reported Infamous for like
Practices with others,) through his Promises of some Allowance toward her
necessary Maintenance, to the commission of Adultery with him who was a married
Man: She becoming with Child by him, concealed it to her time of Travel, which,
when she fell into, she also concealed under pretense of Sickness, till on the
3d. day, 2 or 3 Neighbors suspecting the matter, came to her, and upon search,
presently discovered by her Breasts, etc. that she had had a Child. Upon their
charging it, she immediately owned and directed them to the Infant, which lay
wrapped up in a Blanket at her Feet in the Bed dead. She had a Son about 7 years
old, and a Daughter about 11, whom she shut out of the Room in the time of her
Labor: The Daughter told the Neighbors she heard her Mother cry out. About
Ten days after her Travel, she was brought to Oxon, committed Prisoner to the
Castle, and toward the end of February, being about a Month after her
Committment, she was brought forth and Tried before Judge Airs, at the Assizes
there: The Witnesses, (who were the Neighbors above mentioned) deposed the
Matter of Fact, as above declared; and she acknowledged the Purport of it, and
particularly that she called not out for Help, as also with relation to the
Child afterward, That it perished for want of suitable Help and due
Attendance; so that upon the whole Matter, she was justly Convicted of Murder,
and received Sentence of Death. Together with which, when the Judge pronounced
it, he told her with a most becoming Concern and judicious Piety, to this
purpose, That she had committed Murder, where even Nature, as well as the Laws
of God and of the Land, one would have thought, should have bound up her Hands,
and so had drawn the deepest Charge of Blood upon her Soul; that from Man's Law
nor Gods, there was no escape for her natural Life; quoting her that Passage,
He that sheds Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed; And the Statute Law
of this Realm to her Case. Yet in Answer to her vehement Cries for Mercy from
him, he directed her to God, as being gracious, merciful and ready to forgive
the Guilt of that, and all her Sins which would bind her over to a great
Tribunal, and more dismal Sentence; and persuaded her to apply her self to the
Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, which could wash out the deepest Stains, and
dissolve the strongest Guilt of her Sins. Whilst she lay under Sentence of
Death, she was with Care and Diligence, attended by the Ordinary, Mr.
Blackbourn, (Minister of Cairfax in Oxon) to her last hour; he instructed her
in the way of Salvation, frequently prayed with her, and gave her the Sacrament
on the Sabbath Day, which was the very day before she died; she giving good
Evidences of her Repentance. She was also during this time, visited by the
Nonconforming Minister in Oxford, who from the Wednesday before her Death, had
daily Conferences with her. In his 3 first Conferences, he most industriously
applied himself to lead her into an affecting Sense of the Sinfulness of her
Nature, the Sinfulness of every Sin, to bring her to an humbling Reflection
upon all the Sins of her past Life before God, as also to show her the fearful
Consequences of an unpardoned, unrenew'd State; still interweaving the
comfortable Doctrins of the Gospel. One particular result of these Conferences,
was her sending for him on the Friday before she died, and acknowledging with
great Remorse, that she had been convinced of her Duty toward God, by the
Famous Mr. Birch, late of Burford; and had resolved on those Convictions, to
live more Piously, and accordingly endeavored it. But in some process of time,
had baffled them, and returned to her former Remisness in Religion,
Forgetfulness of God and of her Soul, etc. in the two last Conferences, the
Minister proceeded to make more particular Application to her, concerning her
closing with the Offers of Pardon and Salvation, on the Terms and Grounds of
the Gospel Covenant, which she professed her Readiness to embrace: But he
admitted it not without the most trying Search he could possibly make into the
Nature and Grounds of her professed Consent, that she might not be imposed upon
as to her Eternal Estate: She aswer'd the most trying Questions with great
Sincerity, and to the great Satisfaction of the Minister, who also prayed with
her at these Conferences: Most of the Prisoners attended usually whilst he
discoursed her, and it was hoped, some of them, to good purpose. The Night
before she died, she was observably more Cheerful in her Countenance, more Free
and at Liberty in her Speech, and more Satisfied in her Condition, than ever
she had showed before. She said she had been under Clouds and Darkness, but God
had vouchsafed her the Light of his Countenance. She Blessed God that had
caused her Iniquities to find her out, else, said she, I might have gone on in
my Sin, smother smother, till I had fallen into Hell. And this she did with
Signal Demonstration, that she had a cheerful and sensible Feeling of what she
said. When she was asked what she would have prayed for for her, she answered
greater Assurance of Gods Love, but Blessed God for good Hopes through Grace. To
the Pious Advice and Fervent Prayers in this her Letter to, and for her
Children, I am persuaded none of the Bystanders, can from their Hearts, witness
any less, than that she gave her Heart as well as Hand, the Night before she
was Executed. This was her own Project and Desire, and she did then most
Sollicitously beg of God that he would give her a Mouth of Courage, to say
something that might be for his Glory, and the good of their Souls who should
come to see her dye. And when she was put upon writing to the man who had drawn
her into this Wickedness and Shame, she was more than willing, nay, seemingly,
desirous to have something writ to him; Though she said she feared he was so
hardened in that Sin, it would not reclaim him: And though he neither came to
see, nor sent to her, neither took any manner of Care of, or showed any Pity
toward her, after she was in this Distress: But want of time prevented a
Letter to him. When she came to the Gallows in the Castle-Yard at Oxon, at
about 6 of the Clock on Monday Morning, being the 7th. of March, 1691-92. she
said, or did little there but died; only begged of the People to be warned
against her Sins, by her shameful and untimely End. And indeed, without a
Miracle almost, it could not be expected she should say much more; for she must
needs be in great Confusion and Surprise, who in less than Two Months time, was
Committed, Tried, Condemned and Executed for her Crime. Besides, she seemed
never to have had any great Faculty or Freedom of Speech; and farther, the
Fatigue and hard Fare of a Prison, to one that kept the Two Thirds of her
Lyingin Month there, had mightily weakened her, and impaired her Spirits; though
she declared to one that carried her some Victuals, she eat them out of
Conscience; Looking upon it, as a Duty required of her by God, to support her
Nature for the short space of time she had to live. In short, though she died
without such outward Demonstrations of it as some have done, yet there are few
or none that saw the last Scenes of the last day of her Life, but must own she
appeared to have a great Abhorrence of Sin, a strong Love to Holiness upon her
Heart, and a sincere Desire to propagate them both in others. Her Character
amongst her Neighbors, was a Quiet, Honest, Civil, Harmless, Poor Woman; yea,
Religious too, before this Fact: And thus you have seen what was necessary to
lead you clearly into this her following Letter of Advice to her Children, and
to Recommend it to you, as being the Advice of a Dying Penitent.

My Dear and Loving Children,
IT is no small addition to my Troubles, that I cannot see and speak to you
before I go hence and be no more in the Land of the Living; especially
considering how wanting I have been toward you: I would most willingly have
endeavored to do that for you at my Death, which I have hitherto neglected. I
am now forced to take this way of Writing, and to beg the help of another Hand,
my own Hand being as my Heart is, trembling; and my confused Head incapable of
expressing what I desire to impart to, and impress upon you. I leave nothing in
this World with so much Grief and Trouble, as you my poor Children, and it
greatly aggravates my Sorrow, that my Sin shortens my time with you in this
World: As I have hainously sinned against God and my own Soul, against him whose
Body, and her whose Bed, I joined in defiling; and against the Life of that
unhappy Infant, which I took not care to preserve; So have I also offended
against you, my Dear Children, whom, through my own Default, I am forced to leave
to the wide World, e're you are fit to live in it; and to leave you under a
Blot, to be reproached it may be, with that which is not your Fault, but
Unhappiness: But as to this, I Am less concerned, if you shall but make a good
use of it, endeavoring to humble your selves under that mighty Hand of the
Just God, which falls so heavy, even upon you through me: Consider this your
Affliction is righteous with God, since you also were born in Sin; and that it
may by your due Improvement, be a means of greatest good to your Souls. That
which is my greatest Trouble with reference to you, is, that I have not only
conceived and brought you forth in Sin, but have neglected the means I should
have used, for the changing of you from Darkness to Light, and bringing you
from under the Power of Satan unto God: And though I have indeed brought you to
Baptism, therein professing to give you up to God the Father, Son and Holy
Spirit, to be his true and faithful Servants, and to engage you by that Solemn
Vow against the World, the Flesh and the Devil; Yet I have not instructed you
about that Engagement, nor called upon you to perform it. Had I considered how
much I my self stood obliged to God in my Baptism, and by my farther
Resolutions upon sometime hearing of my Duty from Mr. Birch, I had never fallen
into those Depths of Sin, which have brought me into the Depths of Misery that
at present cover me, It Is now my last time to call, and your last time of
hearing me call in the Land of the Living; this Call is accented to you with
Groans and Sighs from the deepest Bowels of a Dying Parent: It Is a Call to
which God and all good Men witness to be your Duty, yea, to which your own
Consciences will witness to be so. If you diligently listen to them, and do not
stifle and harden them by sinning against them, it is a Call to the performance
of what I have laid you under, the most Solemn Vow and Oath to Almighty God to
perform in your Baptism. It Is a Call of both of you, so soon as ever you come
to understand your selves, to sign or take upon you your parts of that
Baptismal Covenant which you are brought under, according to the Direction
given you in Page 155, of the Reverend Mr. Allein's Sure Guide to Heaven: Which
I herewith send you, that you may have all the Blessings of that Covenant for
your Heritage in this Life, and the alsufficient God for your everlasting
Portion. If you take not upon you this Covenant so soon as you ripen in
Understanding, but should go on to neglect it to your Lives end, I testify to
you both, that your Baptism will prove no other, than a strong Band to tie you
faster to everlasting and aggravated Misery. And take notice, this Call to you
to this your Duty, is from one who feels every Sin cut deeper into her Soul by
its having been acted against such a Vow, so early laid upon me, so reasonable,
so beneficial a Vow: A Vow, which had I kept, would have kept me from those
Sins which now as Spears, pierce my Heart, and are the poisoned Arrows that
drink up my Spiritis. A Vow, which if kept by you, will sweeten the bitterest
Miseries of your Life; yea, the most harsh and terrifying Embraces, of the most
painful and linguering Death. A Vow, which ought to curb all your sinful
Inclinations, and to constrain you to all virtuous and religious Conversation
in the World. A Vow, which greatens all the Sins that the World count little,
though they will not so account them I Am sure, when they come either to repent
of, or suffer for them eternally. In short, it is the Vow upon you, in force of
which, I conjure you both, deeply to consider, and diligently to observe this
my Dying Charge, that you may live eternally.

Let not the Devil cheat you of your Youthful days, with the Promise of a long
Life to come, wherein you shall serve God and save your Souls. Let him not
cheat you with the fair outside of Profit, Pleasure, Ease or Esteem in Sin;
no, nor with the hopes of Secrecy, Impunity, or the hopes of an after and late
Repentance. This last, believe me, is most difficult to attain, most dangerous
to trust to. And as to Secrecy and Impunity in Sin, both which were promised
me by the Father of Lies, behold how I enjoy them, whose Crimes are brought
forth and punished in the sight of the Sun; and then depend on them if you can
or dare: It Is a Mercy I bless the God of Grace for, that I enjoyed them not.
Believe Gods Word, which tells you a Companion of Fools shall be destroyed: Be
you so wise for your selves, as to be Companions of those that fear the Lord,
whilst you shun all idle Company, or loose or profane, with more care, because
more dangerous than Persons infected with the Plague. The former will corrupt
your Souls, the latter do but threaten the corrupting of your Bodies. I charge
you as you will answer it at the Tribunal of the great God, that you get and
labor to understand the Catechisms I herewith send you; Two Questions at least
every Week out of them, that the Elder of you teach it to the Younger, whilst
you are together. Hence shall you learn what God would have you be, believe and
do the Ten Commandments, Lords Prayer and Creed, being there. Thus shall you
not be destroyed for lack of Knowledge; which want highly greatens my present
Misery. I farther charge you, that you read some part of Gods Word daily,
diligently and reverently in your Bibles, since according to that Word, you
must finally be Judged. I charge you to keep the Lords Day holy to the Lord,
spending it in publicly hearing Gods Word, where most soundly and
affectionately Preached: And in privately reading and meditating on that Word,
and in Prayer; because God has promised great Blessings to those who keep that
day from polluting it. And because your religious Conversation all the Week
depends much, that I say not altogether, upon this; I charge you that you pray
to God devoutly and fervently on the Morning and Evening of every day at least,
confessing the Sins of your Natures, and the Sins of your Thoughts, Words and
Deeds; begging Gods Pardon and his Renewing Grace, that you may amend, and grow
fitter every day you live, for Heaven when you dye: Beg also in your Prayers,
Gods Protection, Provision, Guidance and Blessing, as those who are sensible
that on him you depend for Life and Breath and all things. Renounce
particularly in your Prayers, the Black Si^s for which I dye; and pray to God
that he will not farther visit them upon you; yea, Watch and Pray, that you
enter not into Temptation to them. Be content with what Condition God shall
assign you in this World. Besure you Love your Neighbors as your selves; do no
body the least Injury in Thought, Word or Deed; yea, Love your Enemies, even
those I charge you, who, you may think had the first hand in your poor Mothers
Death, whom with all the World, I do now heartily forgive. Set a Watch before
the Door of your Lips, against all Swearing, Lying, Idle Talking, or Foolish
Jesting, Slandering or Censuring any, that you offend not with your Tongues.
See that you be diligent in whatsoever Employment God shall assign to you for
the gaining a Livelihood in this World; obey those that shall have Rule over
you, as Masters, Mistresses, etc. in all things Lawful, for the Lords Sake: And
beg time from them, yea, Redeem time by your Diligence from their Business,
wherein you may serve God every day. Shun all unjust ways of getting, though for
the Supply of mere Necessity. In a word, get Gods Commands into your Heads, and
hide them in your Hearts, that you may not sin against him. Remembering always
you are not of your selves sufficient, so much as to think any good thing as of
your selves; but believe it upon my sad Experience (who failed, and fell by
trusting to my own strength for performing the good Resolutions I took up)
Without Christ you can do nothing; That all your Sufficiency is of God, whose
Spirit and Grace you must therefore beg, as you would do Bread when you are
ready to starve, of your Parents. Since Christ has told you, if Parents though
evil, give good Gifts to their Children, how much more will not your Heavenly
Father give the Spirit to them that ask it, and continue asking it? Oh
Children, would you live happily and dye so, take the Advice of your Dying
Mother. Would you not have it to say at last, How have we hated Instruction and
despised Reproof? Would you not have God laugh at your Calamity, and mock when
your Fear comes? Oh then, take my Advice as here given you. Would you be
Blessings to your Generation, the Love of Good Men, the Delight and Care of
Heaven, Read then, over and over, Ponder and Practice my Advice: Bind these my
Precepts, on your Heads, Hands and Hearts; an Ornament of Grace they will be
unto you, even as Chains about your Neck, and Bracelets on your Arms. Oh what a
Peaceful, Happy and Joyful Life had I lead, if I had ever chosen these ways of
Wisdom, these ways of Pleasantness which I mark you out! Oh what an Honorable
Death should I have dyed, what a Sweet, Flourishing and Blessed Memory should I
have left behind me; whereas now, Woe is me, my Life is going out like the
Snuff of a Candle, cut off in the midst of my Years, the Proud Waters are come
in unto my Soul. Oh what would I now give, Ten Thousand Worlds surely if I had
them, that I had lead my Life as I am persuading you, the Dear Fruit of my
Womb, to lead yours! Oh had I my past Life again, would I barter it away for
Toys, for Vanity or sinful Pleasures? Should the World or the Devil again
impose upon me as I find they have done? No, surely No: Yet alas, had I kept
the Precepts I have recommended to you, from my Youth upward, as exactly as I
would beg of you to keep them, or as you would wish you had kept them, did you
stand in my present Circumstances, yea, allowing these Precepts to contain a
perfect Rule of Life, yet would there be one thing lacking and chargeable upon
me, even a Satisfaction for the Guilt of my Sin, in and from Adam. Nor can my
present Prayers, Tears, Penitent Confessions, Promises of future Obedience,
etc. expiate that Guilt, much less atone for all the Violations of Gods Laws
through my past Life. Oh no, I must have the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus to
cover my naked Soul withal, before the Bar of God, in order to my Acceptance
and Salvation. Where Is any room then, my Children, for that vain Conceit, think
you, that Persons may be too diligent, exact or abounding in the Way and Works
of God? When you have done all, must you not own your selves unprofitable
Servants? But oh how much short of the whole will you fall, when you do all you
can, of whatever I have counseled you! Believe me then, (for it is undoubted
Truth) never any repented of too much Diligence in Gods Service whilst they
lived, much less when they came to dye. Oh that I could draw forth the present
earnest Pantings of my Soul before you! Sure they would put your Souls into the
like or better motion. Hear Children the Prayers of your Dying Parent for her
own Soul, which she puts up with infinitely more Earnestness if it were
possible, than she could pray for her Release from the present Chains she
wears, the Dungeon she lies in, the Shame and approaching Death she is to
undergo: Yea, hear the Prayers, and pray them whilst you live, which your Dying
Mother makes for you; not for Riches, Preferment, Esteem, Ease or Plenty in
this World: No, let the World enjoy the Gods they dote on. May you my Children
(who are born with Souls naked before God, and so ought to be ashamed) have the
Clothing of Christ's Righteousness to cover your sinful Nakedness: May you (who
have Souls exposed to the Wrath of God, for the Sin of your Natures, and the
Sins of your (but as it were,) newly begun Lives, have Christ's Righteousness as
Armor against the second Death, Armor of Proof to keep off all furious
Discharges of Gods Law upon you. May you who have Souls miserably poor by
Nature, void of all saving Knowledge and Grace, which are the true Riches, have
your Souls made Rich by Christ Jesus, with his Gold tried in the Fire, Rich in
Faith, Rich with all the Graces of his Holy Spirit dwelling richly in you, Rich
in the Love of God manifested to your Souls, and Rich through Christ's Purchase,
in your being united to him, having a sure Reversion of Eternal Glory. These
mighty Blessings may you seek after, may God give you them early. Had I looked
after them, as I advise you now to do, I might once more easily have attained
and secured them, I might have had the Use and Comforts of them through my Life;
Oh that I may not now fail of these Blessings at Death! Alas that I have driven
it to this doubtful Point! God and Christ waited on me with these Offers ever
since, and are ready always to bestow them upon you, if you are but ready to
receive them. Well, shall I show you the way wherein you are to seek these
Blessings, wherein seeking ye shall find, yea, wherein only seeking, I hope my
self to find them; why truly it is in the way of Repentance and Faith on the
Lord Jesus Christ: The World think they can as easily Repent and Believe,
almost, as I can write the Words; but alas! they will find themselves desperately
mistaken, if they don't alter their Minds, mistaken to their endless Ruin.

Oh how hard is it for me to believe my Heart, which was but some Weeks ago, in
deep Love and League with Sin and with this World, to be now absolutely,
unalterably, irreconcilably set against all Sin, and set fixedly to mortify its
Members to this World! My Heart once flattered me, the Change was wrought, but
alas! 'twas but a Cheat: And do not I now want the issue of some time and
trying Temptations, to prove to me whether its present Pretensions to a Change,
be true or no? Oh my Children, don't think of delaying to begin Repentance till
the time comes of Sickness or of Death, when most begin it indeed, but it is
odds whether one in an Hundred of them ever end it to a long Eternity. Every
day you delay it; every Sin you commit, renders it more difficult to attain.
Every Delay draws on the Curse of God, provoking him to give you up to a
Judicial Hardness. Begin this great Work betimes, which you will see occasion
never to break off till your Lives end. Who would be so Mad as to have the
whole Volumes of their Accounts of Sins to call over, when they should have
nothing to do but dye? Lament your lesser Sins now, that you may not have
greater hereafter to lament. Lament your Buding early Sins, it is the way
wherein you are likely to prevent gross and more grown Sins; resist the first
springings of every Motion of Sin in your Thoughts, that is the way to prevent
it is growing into sinful Thoughts, and yet more sinful Actions. Oh that I had
thus used my self to fight against my Lusts, surely through Almighty Grace, I
could not have been thus miserably foiled by them, surely I should have been
more then Conqueror. When now alas! Behold what Shame covers me; I am
Contemned, the Scorn of Bad Men, and a Scandal to the Good; and now whither
shall I cause my Shame to go? Well for all this, I once thought I had repented.
Beware then, rest not in Sorrow for some single Sin alone, rest not in present
Pangs of Grief for, or hasty Resolves against Sin in general. Pray, Strive, and
wait upon the Grace of God in Gods way, to have your Hearts deeply touched with
Shame and Sorrow for, with loathing of your natural Aversion from God and what
is good. Labor to see an evil in Sin, greater than all you can suffer for
Righteousness sake: Labor to feel it an intolerable Burden, which therefore
you are glad to throw off on any Terms, and by which you are brought to admire
Gods Terms of Pardon through Christ.

I needed a Savior, Christ Jesus, as soon as I was bron, and so did you; yea,
and every day you live, your need of him greatly Increases. Is it too soon to
look after an Interest in him? or can you do without it? You have an Interest
in Christ, if you unseignedly consent to have him on the Terms in your Covenant
of Baptism, (for which, see Mr. Allein's Book again, Page 135.) But Oh Fool
that I was, whilst I was Well, at Ease, in Business, I saw no need I had of a
Savior; Or if I thought I wanted him upon the sight of some affrightful Sin,
or in some serions Fit, I took him for that time, and banished him again when I
had done with him. I thought I could have him with a wet Finger almost, A Lord
have Mercy upon me! an outward Reformation, some cold Prayers now and then,
going to Church, repeating my Creed: I thought I could have served my turn of
Christ, without any cordial Affection or sincere Consent. I was for having him
with the World and my Sins, or when I could have these no longer: But these
Shadows are fled away, now the Deceit lies plain. Christ Jesus is indeed to be
had without Money and without Price; but I must give up my self to him, if I
will have him; and that is no Price neither, for I am my self the Purchase of
his Blood, though I have unjustly detained it from him. Now I am convinced I must
Love, Honor and Obey Christ Jesus, and so must all that will receive him to
the saving of their Souls: And oh Blessed Jesus, how can I be sure that I love
thee now, who a while since, loved not thy Ways, nor thy People, for the sake
of thine Image on them, nor thy Laws the Image of thy self, who was for the
most part of my Life, doing those Works which thou came to destroy? How can I
assuredly know that I Honor thee, who lately slighted and trampled under Foot
thy Blood, the Blood of the Covenant, contemned the Methods of thy Government,
despised in my Heart the Mean and Garb of thy Subjects, even the chief Glories
of thy Person, whilst on Earth, viz. thy Deep Humility, Extensive Charity,
Heavenly Mindedness, Readiness to do thy Father's Will, Faithfulness to advance
his Glory? Thy Submission and Pray'rfullness to him, thy Patience, thy Purity
of Heart and Life, thy strong Faith even under strong Hunger; These I despised,
in that I endeavored not the Practice of them, nay, practiced contrary to
them. How know I, in short, that I Honor thee now; who know to my Sorrow, a
while since, I preferred Sin, my Name, yea, the Devil in Disguise, before thee?
Oh my Lord, how know I that I now have a fixed and unalterable Disposition to
obey thee, when before I came into this Prison, yea, before I came into these
condemned Circumstances, other Lords had Dominion over me, my Practice was
quite contrary to thy Commands? What, have I learned the Christian Exercise and
Discipline so soon? learned habitually to deny my self, that always used to
please my self, even to the Refusal of my self to thee? Have I learned to Watch
and Pray in good earnest, that I enter not into Temptation, whose Aim and
Endeavor was chiefly for Profit, Pleasure or Esteem in this World before?
What! have I learned to resist the Devil, that never understood his way of
Fighting, his Baits and Snares before? Have I learned to despise all this World
for Christ Jesus, that could not a while ago, deny a lustful Thought, sinful
Word or Action for thee? How do I forsake this World for thee, from which I Am
forced by the Punishment of my Sins against thee? Have I learned to believe all
thou say practically, that scarce a while since, could give any reason why I
believed any of it historically? Oh Good God! what a Change is this! who
amongst my Neighbors will believe it is wrought in my Heart? Or how can I
believe, at least, how can I be assured of it? Only the Almighty Grace of God
can effect, and the Spirit of God assure this Change. Thus, thus it must be
with me and every one before they dye, if ever they be admitted into the
Kingdom of Glory. Did the World know and believe this, would they not be
startled at it? But who has believed this Report? Children, will you also be
numbered amongst the Deceived, and at the next Remove, the Damned Multitude? Oh
be Wise, be Instructed, Kiss the Son of God, lest he be Angry and ye Perish
from the way, when his Wrath is kindled but a little: Blessed are all they who
place a rightly grounded Trust in him. Oh learn betimes to Love, Honor and
Obey this Lord that has Redeemed you with his Precious Blood shed upon the
Cross, his Meritorious Righteousness; learn to hear and know his Voice, he
speaks to you in your Bibles, by Faithful Ministers, by your own Consciences,
by his Spirit, by Sound Christians; if you seek to get into their Company,
their Houses, yea, their Hearts, by enquiring of them concerning his Will: Nay,
sure he calls you by your Dying Parent, now to come to him that you may have
Life, to prefer him before this World, before childish Sports and Vanity. Oh my
Aching Heart for you, my Yearning Bowels toward you, what a World of Snares and
Wickedness have you to pass through? What a Life probably of Labor, Contempt and
Poverty to undergo, and of Persecution too, if you will live Godly in Christ
Jesus? What a Subtle Devil to resist, Cunning and Malicious to cheat and
destroy you? To whom shall I leave you, to whose Care and Conduct? You have
been sometime without a Father on Earth, shortly you will be without a Mother
too: Will you not seek a Father in Heaven? Oh choose Christ Jesus, he will be a
Friend, a Portion, a Guard, a Guide, Honors, Pleasures, all things; yea, more
and better than all things to you, in him God will be your Father. Oh Blessed
Trinity in Unity! will thou accept my (I hope now unfeigned) Dedication of
these my poor Children to thee? Oh Son of God will thou be their Savior from
Sin and from Eternal Death? Oh Blessed Spirit, will thou early Enlighten,
strongly Incline, and powerfully Enable them, to choose God for their Portion,
Jesus for their Prince and Savior, thy Word for the Rule of their Life? Shall
my Unworthy Prayer be heard on the Account of my Savior for these my
Distressed Children? Oh then I Will no longer call them forsaken, no, nor think
them so; the Lord is their Shepherd, they shall not want. Well, had I my Life
again my Tender Hearts, would I not again Travel in Birth with you till Christ
were formed on you? were you not Happy think you, if you were in such a case?
will you not be happy, Children, if your God be the Lord? Well then, as you
love your Souls, Pray daily, Early, Earnestly, that you may be Renewed in the
Spirit of your Minds; Pray till you find a Return of your Prayers, Pray till
you can understandingly and truly say, you need no more Grace, no more Aids
against Corruption, no more Help in Religious Duties, no more Wisdom and
Resolution to contest against the Devil, who will be always Tempting you; then
I Am sure you will from this time to your latest Breath on Earth, and in all
likelihood, till you breath Praises in Heaven. If you pray aright, pray
earnestly, believe those Honest Christians that tell you there are Joys in
Religion above the Joys of Harvest; not to the Formal, Sluggish, Inconstant,
Trifling Christian, I believ, but to the Diligent. Must you not work in this
World to maintain you? will you not work for Eternity much more? with what
words shall I Excite you? will not my Death, my Doubts, my Danger of
Everlasting Death excite you? Oh I exceedingly Fear and Tremble, lest your hard
Heart should bar out, or despise my wholesome Council; how often has Heaven
Thundered in my Ears, and yet I dead in Trespasses and Sins, arose not to call
upon my God? I started indeed once in my dead Sleep, but the World Flesh and
Devil, soon Lulled me asleep again, faster than I was before, on the Pillow of
Carelessness and Security: Now by waking Pains I pay for that Lethargick Sleep.

Come, cast a Look with me into Eternity; see if that will move you: Oh that I
could leave you the Eyes wherewith I now see; but use your own, I mean the Eyes
of your Mind, to look into Eternity. Such Thoughts will Instruct and make you
Wise; Thoughts of your Temporal Death may stir you up to lay hold on
Everlasting Life: Keep Death always in view of your Minds, so whenever it
seizes, it shall not surprise you.

If you shall fear at any time henceforward, when you are reading this Paper,
that I Am gone to the Blackness of Darkness for ever, where God is only known by
the Vengeance which he Executes, where the Damned drink Eternally of Rivers of
Flaming Brimstone, and keep Company with Spiteful Fiends in endless Despair:
Will you not be afraid to follow, though it were a Mother, to that Eternal
Prison? Or how can I bear the Thought that you should come to share, yet not
alleviate, but sharpen Torments before Intolerable? To Curse my former
Negligence toward you, and your own Neglects of my present Advice in so
doleful a Place, in such dreadful Company for ever? Oh take Heed better, Ten
Thousand times better a Millstone were hanged about your Necks, and you cast
into the Depths of the Sea. But if you can believe from this Copy of my Mind,
that I Am gone to Heaven the place of Everlasting Joys, will you not take my
foregoing Advice, wherein I have marked you out the Strait and Narrow Way
thither? Oh if you do, who can tell the Joys shall attend our Meeting in those
cheerful Regions that never know a Storm, nor so much as fear a Cloud? Blessed
with the most Healthful, Refreshing Airs of Gods Countenance, Watered with the
Rivers of Pleasures that flow at his Right Hand: Oh how shall we there Rejoice
Eternally together!

Oh that I could prevail with you to Meditate some time every day upon
Eternity! Your Mother in a few Hours will be swallowed up therein, will not
that draw your Thoughts a little thither? Oh that you might be Haunted as it
were, wherever you go with the Thoughts of Death and Eternity. I see Death
marching toward me every Hour and Moment, and is it not thus marching toward
you and all the World, whether they Eat, Drink, Sleep or Play? I see my Judge
seated on his Throne, will he not be yours likewise? having Eyes as a Flame of
Fire, which will pierce into all the Secrets, both of mine and your Hearts and
Actions. I see methinks, my own Conscience unfolded and as it were, compared
with Gods Omniscience, where all I have done in the Body is Recorded; and is
there not in Heaven a Register kept of your Actions too? I hear the Devil as it
were, charging all my Sins against me at Gods Bar, Asserting my Services to
his Interest, and putting in an High Challenge to me as his own. Will he not
serve you so think you, if you serve him? I would think I hear on the other
side the Blood of Jesus pleading for my Ransom from Eternal Death and Hell, as
being made a Penitent Believer: This is all the Life I have in Death. Will you
not want it at your Deaths? may you not have it in your Lives? In short, I see
as it were, Hell naked before me, and Destruction without a Covering: I see
Heaven filled with Crowned Martyrs, Triumphing Saints, and Shining Angels all
swallowed up in the Light and Love of the Glorious Jehovah. And now what Hope
and Fear fills my Head and Heart? I cannot certainly determine which is my Place
and what my Portion. I lived neglecting to determine this great Point, it is
just if Heaven suffer me to dye doubting of it. And will you dare to do so? can
you like to dye so? Oh now a World for such a Repentance as I could be assured
I should never repent of were I to live in this World again; as that I should
hate Sin in my very Soul, and burn it up with Jealousy and Indignation. Oh for
such a Love to God and Holiness, as I could be assured, if I were to live on
Earth again, would carry me through the Force of contrary Examples, through the
Fires of raging Persecution, through the deepest Waters of Affliction, through the
strongest Contradictions of my own Corruption, to Love, Serve, Honor, Fear,
Obey, Trust, Reverence, Desire, Delight in the Living God. Then would I welcome
Death in its closest Attack and most dismal Shape; yea, I would leave this
World with a more cheerful Heart, than ever I bore in it through my whole Life.
My Dear Children, that I have any Hopes now of Pardon of my Sin, Peace with God
and Everlasting Life, is owing to the abundant Riches of the Glory of Gods
Grace: Oh take you heed of Sinning that Grace may abound; if you do, you may
come to rue it for ever. But go I must hence, whether I hoped or no; Time draws
to a Close, and calls me to bid you a long Farewell. Farewell my Dear Children,
May your Souls be bound up in the Bundle of Life: I commend you to God and to
the Word of his Grace; May the very God of Peace Sanctify you wholly, and
preserve you Blameless in Body, Soul and Spirit to the Second Coming of the
Lord Jesus. Amen, Amen.

Signed with my own Hand, Mary Goodenough.
POSTSCRIPT.
I am in this Paper a Witness to you my poor Orphans of your Duty and Danger,
Oh force me not in as a Witness against you by your Carelessness and Obstinacy,
at the Great Tribunal, whither I am now called, and where you must shortly
appear. Read this Paper, or get it Read to you by my Neighbor Thomas Bolt, or
Mrs. Mary Rose, or such others as will teach you to Understand and Improve, not
to Contemn and Neglect it. Read it over, or a good Part of it every Lords Day;
be not ashamed of my Dying Confessions or Advice; for they are the best Remains
of your Dying Mother, the only Legacy she has to leave you, and if well
Improved, they will indeed yield you a Goodly Heritage.




FINIS.

