An Account of the PROCEEDINGS OF THE Lords and Commons, In the
Parliament House, upon their first Convention; With the several Debates and
Speeches relating thereunto.
TVesday being the 22 d. of this Instant January, and the time appointed for
the Meeting of the Convention, the Members, accordingly Elected, met at the
Parliament House at Westminster; Where, after the usual Customs and Ceremonies
of the House were over, the Members accordingly took their places; and Mr.
Powle being chosen Speaker, made this small Harrangue to the House.

Gentlemen, The Distracted conditions of these Kingdoms, being now left without
a Head or King, requires a speedy and double Care from the Representatives in
this House: And since there are few here but must of necessity know the
Calamities that attend a large and populous Nation, under no certain form of
Government, The great Enormities, as Rapes, Murders, Robberies, Devastations,
and Private Pillages, that are very usual and common in such Cases; every Man's
private Interest, besides the care of his Native Country, (a Duty Incumbent
upon you all) must be sufficient Motives. But one thing I am Commanded (by His
Highness the Prince of Orange) to put you in mind of, viz. The present
Condition of the Protestants in Ireland, who are now in a deplorable Condition,
so vast an Army of Papists being in actual Arms in that Kingdom, and all Sworn
Sacramentally Enemies, not only to the Protestant Religion, but also to the
Crown of England, that unless some speedy Care be taken for their Relief, they
will not only undergo a general Massacre, but also that Kingdom will be
Inevitably lost to this Crown. I am also commanded to put you in mind of the
Growth of France, and the aspiring Hopes of their Turbulent Monarch, who, we
know, is not only an Enemy to the Protestant Religion, but also a Sworn Foe to
the Crown of England: We therefore ought to be in such a condition, not only to
Defend our selves against the utmost of his Force, but also be able to give him
so Powerful a Diversion in his own Country, that our former Conquests in France
may be remembered, and the Provinces formerly belonging to the Crown of England
recovered.

This Speech was received with a general satisfaction of the House; and a
Worthy Gentleman of the same, made this Reply.

Mr. Speaker, We cannot be sufficiently Thankful to Almigh^y God, whose
Providence, Per varias casus, per tot discrimina Rerum, has brought us all to
this Place, and once more put us in a condition of shaking off the Tyrannick
Yoke of Romes insufferable Bondage under which we began to Groan; and to which
we had been perpetual Slaves, (a miserable condition for Englishmen) had not
the speedy Succors of His Royal Highness the Prince of Orange come just in the
Nick and prevented it; and, indeed, in a small time Confounded the tedious
Toyls, and incessant Labor of the Papal Chair and its Adherents. And as for the
Condition and State of Ireland, and Growth of the French Monarch, I hope we
shall take that Care, that we may be in a Capacity of keeping our Own, and stop
the Progress^^^ ^^d Grandeur of our Enemy the French King. But the first thing
we must conclude on, is, A suitable Return to His Royal Highness the Prince of
Orange, for the great Care and Hazard he has undergone for our Preservation,
and other Things will follow in course.

This being the general Opinion of the House, a Committee was chosen out to
present the Thanks of the House to the Prince, and so ended the business of
that Day.

His Highness the Prince of Orange His Letter to the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal Assembled at Westminster in this present Convention, January 22d. 1688.
My Lords,
I Have endeavored, to the utmost of my Power, to perform what was desired
from me, in order to the Public Peace and safety; and I do not know that any
thing has been omitted which might tend to the Preservation of them, since the
Administration of Affairs was put into my Hands: It now lies upon you to lay
the Foundations of a firm security for your Religion, your Laws, and your
Liberties.

I do not doubt, but that by such a Full and Free Representative of the Nation,
as is now met, the Ends of my Declaration will be attained: And since it has
pleased God Hitherto to bless my good Intentions with so great Success, I trust
in him, that he will complete his own Work, by sending a Spirit of Peace and
Union to influence your Councils, that no interruption may be given to an happy
and lasting Settlement.

The Dangerous Condition of the Protestant Interest in Ireland, requiring a
large and speedy Succor, and the Present State of Things abroad, oblige me to
tell you, That next to the Danger of unseasonable Divisions amongst your
selves, Nothing can be so Fatal as too great Delay in your Consultations: The
States, by whom I have been enabled to rescue this Nation, may suddenly feel
the ill Effects of it, both by being too long deprived of the Service of their
Troops, which are now here, and of your early Assistance against a Powerful
Enemy, who has declared War against them: And as England is by Treaty already
engaged to help them upon any such Exigencies, so I am confident that their
cheerful Concurrence to preserve this Kingdom with so much Hazard to
themselves, will meet with all the Returns of Friendship and Assistance, which
may be expected from you, as Protestants and Englishmen, when ever their
Condition shall require it.

Given at St. James' this 22 d day of January, 1688. Will. H. P. d' Orange

To the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, assembled at Westminster in this present
Convention.
An ORDER of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, Assembled at
Westminster in this Present Convention, for a Public Thanksgiving.
ORDERED, By the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, That Thursday the
31 of January Instant, be and is hereby appointed for the City of London and
Ten Miles distance, for a Day of Public Thanksgiving to Almighty God, for
having made his Highness the Prince of Orange, the Glorious Instrument of the
Great Deliverance of this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary Power. And that
Thursday the Fourteenth Day of February next, be and is hereby Appointed for a
Public Thanksgiving throughout the whole Kingdom for the same.

LONDON Printed for W. D. 1688.


