(...)

BABY-BAPTISM MERE BABISM. OR AN ANSWER TO NOBODY in five words, to Everybody
who finds himself concerned in it.

I. ANTI-DIABOLISM Or the true Account of a dispute at ASHFORD proved a true
counterfeit.

II. ANTI-BABISM Or the Babish disputings of the Priests for for BABY-BAPTISM
disproved.

III. ANTI -- RANTISM Or Christ'ndome unchrist'nd.

IIII. ANTI-RANTERISM Or Christ'ndome newchrist'nd.

V. ANTI -- SACER DO TISM the deep^tage of the DDDivines discovered, and or the
Antichristian CCClergy cleared to be that themselves, which they have ever
charged CHRIST'S CLERGY to (...)*

By SAMUEL FISHER an unworthy ^ant of Jesus Christ, and his poor
PPPriest-belyed Church and People.

1 King. 18. 27. And it came to pass that Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry
aloud, for he is a God, etc.

LAND. Printed by Henry Hills, and are to be sold by Will. Larner at the sign
of the Blackmore at Fleet-bridge, and Richard Moon at the seven-stars in
Pauls-Church-yard. 1653.

TO THE HONEST HEARTED, unprejudiced Reader of these ensuing Systems, More
especially to you my loving Country men of the County of Kent, Greeting,
BELOVED Friends, and Brethren you have been earnest, and are now wellnigh
hopeless, and therefore by this time may possibly be (for ought I know) half
angry Expectants of something or other from me in answer to that True
Counterfeit (so I call it) of the Ashford Disputation; A Pamphlet, so injurious
(not so much to me as the truth) that it was provocation enough to the press of
itself, to one so clearly concerned in it as my self, but as if it were not,
was a while after seconded by another: Nevertheless, what evil surmises
soever you have of my so long silence, as I dare not say I am altogether
blameless, so I dare say I am not altogether excuselesse in the business, for
verily * Witness the Letter sent to me, in the name of more, from from one of
the opponents; which, in fuller satisfaction concerning my call to this work,
is extant at the end of this Epistle.
as it was little less then half a year after the Disputation before that Hasty
Birth of theirs came to light, in which time it threatened the Country to come
out upon it, and at last came (out upon it) indeed, so was it little less then
a quarter after the nativity of that trifle before I received, from the
Publishers thereof, the copy of it, together with this ensuing Summons to let
somewhat be seen in my own right, in which since its declared that they would
needs interpret my total silence as a giving of the cause, I stood, as strictly
engaged* so from thenceforth Irrevocably resolved (being elsewise indifferent)
as the Lord should lend me strength, life, and leisure (not in my own, but the
Gospels Right, which now I saw must suffer, if I were silent) to set upon this
wearisom work, notwithstanding which resolution of mine, what by Partly my
often avocations from home in way of service to the truth, there being (if I
may become a fool so far without offense, in satisfaction to such Churches as
compel me to it by their unjust offenses at my just absence from them as here
to utter it) no less then ^en public (not to speak of Private) Disputations,
in which I have been actually interessed since that of Ashford, besides
public preachings, other occasional meetings, and writings, Church visitings,
and visitations of sick members, to whom I have been moved several times to
move many miles in such junctures, when (saving the pressingnesse of that case)
no other should have importund me to have stired an inch out of my own doors*
Partly my own necessary occasions and outward affairs at home, which I am
(though but little) yet to this day too much entangled in for a Soldier of
Christ: Partly one long and tedious sickness which my God was pleased to
exercise me with toward the dead of one winter (a) for almost a quarter
together, so that I was in all that * In which sad winter visitation I may not
but ta^ no^ice here, in satisfaction to the deluded world, how miserably I was
misreporte^ to have met the Devil in a field, to have been out of my wi^s, and
senses, stark mad, bound down in my bed, to have renounced, and that with
raging, that way of the (...), which, throw Gods goodn^sse, I stand fast in to
this hour, of all which not the least Jota is true, and this too no^ only by
much people, but* in part also by such of the Priesthood, as lived near enough
to me to have given t^uer intelligence, had they, or their E^rwigs been either
of them any better then they should be.
time, and somewhat more, neither capable to stir much without doors, nor do
much within. Partly (if not principally) an earnest desire I had (as deeming it
not worth while to trouble the world, and travel throw the Press with no more
profitable a birth, then a bare contradiction to that Bawble of theirs, which
does more then sufficiently contradict it self, and a mere Nugatory Negation of
a few false Affirmatives, that are made in that Account concerning my silly
self and one poor particular disputation) to stop more gaps with one bush* and
to hand forth something more for public use together with it, as I here have
done, namely, not only two entire Treatises, viz. Anti-rantism, and
Anti-ranterism* both which bear little or no particular reference to the
Ashford Disputation, but also very many useful Animadversions of a number of
lame Arguments, Empty Answers, absolve Absurdities, Babish Ba^lings*
Sophistical shuffles, and clear Contradictions, sometimes to themselves* and
often to each other in their carrying on of the same cause (which are therefore
the more remarkable) that are in the books of their best Champions, Dr.
Fea^ley, Dr. Holmes. Mr Marshall Mr Bailey. Mr Blake. Mr Cotton. M Cobbet. Mr
Cook.
all which as it asked me no small time to tumble ore, to summon together, and
enter in a new Treaty with, to see if I could yet possibly find cause to agree
with, and fall back to them in the point of Infant baptism, before I struck a
stroke against them with my pen, so when I could come to no accommodation by
that last parley, but saw them all at odds among themselves, and cons^quently
saw more occasion then ever to fall out with them afresh, it took me up much
more time to encounter with them all, for so I was fain to do more or less
occasionally, as I found them in their several works falling in to the help of
the Ashford Disputants by the way:

Finally partly the starting of fresh Hares (I had almost said Foxes) * M^
Symson of S^ardens so veraign pre servative against Anabaptism. Mr. Baxters
Plain Scripture proofs.
upon me whilst I was working to weariness in des^rying the starting hole^ of
the old ones, which occasioned, yea even necessitated me to take up and follow
those new sents, unless I would rather suffer them to range up and down, and
do mischief without putting on in the least measure to prevent them: more
especially that Hasty birth of Mr. Baxters, which as well for the sake of some
Friends, that commended it to my consideration, as for the sake of that deep
delusion I saw the whole Country to be under by doting on it, I was constrained
to speak (as I have done at the end of Anti-rantism) though succinctly, yet
more distinctly to, then to any other.

What (I say) with these obstructions Partly* and some other also of another
nature, I have been forced inevitably to press your patience (Dear Friends)
almost to death: whereupon I challenge you notwithstanding to forbear Murmurring
and acting in ^uch sullenness, as, because the book came out no sooner,
thereupon to neglect it altogether: if my pains may not abate his displeasure,
and balance his patience, who is offended without a cause, for not hasting it
out by the halves, as some (for ought I see) had rather I should have done,
then tarried till I had done the tenth of what I intended. I desire that man,
who ever he is, either to fry still in the fire of his own fretfull humor, or
else to please himself, when he sees Good, without amends from me, who having
disposed of this, that's out, to the public service as soon as I could well do
it acceptably to God, whose providence has hitherto prevented me, dare not
disparage his acceptance of me so much, as, in what I have it, to ask
forgiveness from men:

Its never long that comes at last, if withal it effect that in order to which
it comes, and if you say, Bis, qui cito, he does indeed, that dispatches, I say
Sat cito, si sat been, soon enough, if well enough, or else too soon even yet:
whether this present Bulk does perform its errand so well or no, as to be
worth your waiting so long for it, Its not for me to determine; I leave it to
your strictest examination, regardlesse utterly of any censure, whether yours,
or theirs, to whom it bears strictest Relation, my business in it lying more
with God, then either them, or you; well knowing that he, who spends himself in
thoughts of what others think of him and his, has more pride then wit, and
more time then grace and wisdom to improve it, let the work therefore stand or
fall to its own Master, I Will neither beg any man's good word for it, nor put it
under any patronage, but Christ's, from whom it came to me, and to whom together
with all honor, thanks and praise for his assistance of me most unworthy
creature in it I dedicate it back again. If any quarrel with the length of it
now it is come, as some do in that it was so long ere it came, and ask why I
have laid such a large and voluminous siege to so small and trivial a fort,
such poor paper works, as might have been battered and taken in much less
time, and with a far less train of Artillery then is here brought against the
Ashford Disputation? I desire them to understand, that howbeit the daring
defiance thereof engaged me to make my first onset upon that petty Garrison, so
that there is as it were a vein of dispute therewith continuing, and running
(for the most part) throwout the whole Volume; yet the battle is also with the
main body of their worthies (as I said before) according as (inter pregnandum)
they have occasionally bin accessory to their relief.

Secondly, Possession is eleven points of the twelve, in which respect, they
being but defendants, and we now indeed (as they say page the first) invading,
or rather re-invading (for they at first by their own invention brought
innovation, and invasion upon the truth) both them and the practice of their
Church in the point of infant sprinkling, which are both praepossed already of
all Christendom, and have now of a long time planted, seated, and settled
themselves so firmly in the dark Cells of men's in most consciences and
affections, that it has been and is not only hateful, but hazardous for any
to storm them out, we go upon no small disadvantages, and so had need be more
free of our shot then else we should be; Intus existens facile prohibet
alienum, a few within the walls may be a match to many that are yet without,
how much more when the stormed are many to one of those that storm them, even
four hundred and fifty of the rest to few of the Lords Elijahs.

Thirdly, An ell too long is better than an inch too short: he that likes not
the length has enough of the same to make it shorter to himself when he
pleases, and liberty from the Author to look into as little of it as he lists.

Fourthly if you find it not greater in quantity then in quality advantageous
to the truth, it may welcome it self into reasonable men's affections, when such
a short shuffle as that it relates to, may, without injury, be shut out of
doors.

If the title of it chance to trouble Any body, that shall not at all trouble
me: for though the Ashford disputation, which it mainly answers to, was
assuredly penned by Some Body, yet No Body is pleased to own it, and therefore
to him, even to No body, it was most meet to superscribe the answer.

In a word, and to conclude (for it were an unreasonable thing, and no less
then to set my self upon a new score by wiping out the old one, if while I am
excusing my self for detaining the book so long from you, I should detain you
long from the book it self, now it is out, by a long Epistle) what ere it is,
here it is, if Every Body be free from the guilt of those errors and He^esies,
those fopperies, and fal^ties, those dissembling shifts, and contradictions,
ignorances and other evils that are here condemned, then No body shall have
need to complain of it, for then it complains of No Body at all, but if Any
Body suspects shrewdly that it speaks to him, it speaks to him indeed.

Yours, and the Truths, SAMUEL FISHER.

For Mr. Fisher.
SIR,
THESE short Collections of the Ashford Disputation had slept long enough, if
your private letters had not awakned them by a too much slighting your
opponents and their arguments. I know you have seen the thing long since, and
heard the other day you intended a Uindicatition. The last Thursday there was a
conference at Wadhurst in Sussex upon the like subject, where were more then
one of your Opponents at Ashford. This relation was objected to them among
other things, as a Pamphlet injurious to your self, as neither setting down
your answers truly, nor fully. This puts the Publisher upon a further work. Not
an new thing upon the subject, but a desire of you (if you give not the cause
by your silence upon this Provocation) to let something be seen in your own
right, by which he may take occasion to clear himself about the publishing of
this. To that purpose I was entreated to send you this Copy; that you may not
take advantage of those many faults, which through the negligence of the
Printer are found in your former. Sir, I pray deal clearly and ingenuously, for
you deal with such as your self in this, that their aim is only Gods glory,
and the discharge of their own consciences in vindication of the truth,
suppressing heresy, reducing those who are gone, confirming those who are
doubtful, and praying that God would give the assistance of his spirit to these
ends. So rests

March 11. 1649. Your Friend R. M.

An Epistolary praescript to Mr. R. M. and the rest of the Clergy that were
present, and (at their own choice) president at the Disputation, whether
Accountants, or Associates in answer to their expostulatory Provocation
WORTHY SIRS,
HAd your sleeping Disputation been some Lion, it had been better for me to
have been asleep then to have Awakned it (as it seems I did) by but two or
three touches with my pen, but since it is but a Fox spoiling (as far as they
are within its reach) the Vine and her tender grapes, I am (notwithstanding its
majestical craft) neither sorry, nor ashamed, nor asraid that I reached it a
rap, and roused it into such a resolution toward the vindication of it self;
for I doubt not but he, with whom it falls out afresh, even Truths Champion
Christ Jesus, that true David* who wearied it once before, may possibly Master
it again (though by the same silly instrument, that he used then (even a stone
and sl^g in his hand) so as thereby to awaken, if none of your selves (as O Si,
O Si) yet many others (as the first encounter di^) to come into the Vineyard,
and cluster together with the Saints, who else happily would sleep still, so as
to remain in that wast Forest of Parish posture, wherein you Gentiles dwell:
^pecially when they shall find that though we are a people small and despised,
yet we keep Christ's statutes, and cleave close to that primitive simplicity of
the Gospel, from which all the CCClergy in the world, and their co-acted more
then either truly collected, or (for ought yet appears) elected people, are
most miserably stragled, and the best reformed Nations in all Christ'ndome,
which yet pass with you (qua tales) for curant Churche^, are to this very day
^stranged.

Now Sirs, as to your Book, of which together with your Provocation to answer
or yield you sent me a perfect copy, whether I had seen it before or no, I
kindly thank you for it however, and have accordingly put forth this following
Answer, in vindication not of my right (for twere better for me to d^e, then
not be under injury in the midst of innocence for the truth; yea your book has
righted me more by wronging me in such wise as was obejected to you at
Wadhurst, then if it had righted me indeed) but of that truth from which by
Heresy both you and the whole world, save a few that return, are departed,
which let it live, as it must now, m^ugre malice it self, and then though I die
for it, as I am unworthy to do, yet I trust to be no loser by the bargain,

2. As to those letters you speak of, which awakened your disputation into this
Thing called the Account.

1. I must tell you that I know but one (that is my self) who did, and but one
letter wherein I did at all make mention of your doings: If that be it (as no
doubt it is) you were so exceptious at, as thereupon to betake your selves to
vindication in so public a way as the press, one would think you should have
excepted, and acted principally in print against such matters in that my
letter, as are of more general and public concernment, as lay the Ax to the
root of your tree, as strike at the very standing of your Kingdom, and sight
at the (...) Function of the whole Fraternity of you as false and sa^ed, and
not against such only, as only seem to savor of some sleightings of your
single persons, and some (not undu^) disrespects toward your disputings: but
though there is so much in that letter of mine, as clears the whole CCClergy to
be corrupt in the constitution of their Ministry, and congregations, and even
so much truth, as you^ never understand, whilst you go on to bark against the
Moon, as you do, nor stand under the trial of within a while before either God
or man; yea though the Gentleman also, to whom I wrote, being one of quality
then Partizing and Patronizing in your cause, did turn me over to your selves
for satisfaction to the contrary Whose (...) words in his return to mine are
these viz. as for that most rev^rend Clergy, whomin general you spa^er with so
much dirt, with what ^ingers a blind man may discern, I shall leave them to
vindicate themselves, and their profession from such (...) obloquies:
, whence it might very well be expected, when it was rumbled about that you
were at the press, that you would have returned* omething to that, rather then
turn me off with no more then a few fragments of your old disputation, yet, all
this notwithstanding, you touch not the main tenor of that my letter with the
least of your fingers, save that you say in the preface of your book, you are
disgraced by it, but show it not.

2. Whereas you judge that you my Opponents, and your Arguments were too much
sle^ghted in that my letter, I judge to this hour, that neither the one nor the
other are slighted below that we weakness which was then, and is now much more
discovered in your Account it self, insomuch that a man may well save himself
the labor of making good what ere he says in disparagement of your
disputation, any otherwise then by sending him thither, where they may see by
your own testimony of it, how meanly it was managed, though you have made the
best side of your Arguments to stand outward, and the worst of your Ant
agonists Answers, yea Qui verbis opu^ est quum facta loquuntur? if any believe
not me affir^ing how poorly infant baptism ^as proved* at Ashford, let him
believe the work it self now extant, proclaiming it self weak, its argument's
weak, for so the ^ing called the ^rue Account th^reof does, in word in us
preface, and indeed in the resia^, Litera scripta manet non ^a verba diu.
Litera sculpta manet not ita scripta* diu.


3. As to the privacy of that my Rescription and Recrimination to the Gentleman
you wot of, which you complain of, not only in this your monitory missive to
my self, but in your Preface also to the Reader, where you say your Aversaries
in Private loaded your disputation with disgraces, as if you had been bob'd
behind in some base way, and so secretly suppl^nted, that he who spoke so
diminutively of you and yours, must needs be ashamed that his words should ever
see the light; you know Sirs that my letter was not so private, but that it
might have been made public (if yo^ had pleased) by your selves, who as you
had a quarrel against it, so both had it amongst you, and free leave also from
me (of whom if you had had a mind to it, or any advantage by it, I am sure you
would not have ask^ it) to have pressed it out in your service, with your own
defense against it, the press being also as open to your excusation, as my
accusation.

4. If you ask me why, I reply not to the sole publisher of the Account, but
address my self in way of blame to you all, even such as were no more then
present at the disputation. I answer,

1. How to personate the chief publisher of your collections I knew not, for I
know him not: or if I know him well enough for my self, yet I know not how to
know him so well, as on my knowledge to notific him to others: he has chosen
to be namelesse, whether to this end that he might be the more securely
shameless in setting down orno, I will not say at any hand, but many a one will
think so for all that: for my part since I saw it pleased him to hide himself,
I was not disposed much to enquire after him, much l^sse shall he be dicovered
for me, who can tell, from the time I first saw his work, whose finger it is
not, more safely then I can yet, whose it is: for in such sense as some
Scripture is, its doubtless no singer of God, and though I am sure it is the
finger of mere man, assisted by Satan, yet of what man in special, (I confess
I have good ground to pay it with thinking) I may not speak positively in
print, unless I Will speak upon bare hearsay, which I heed not.

Secondly, if it were mainly the employment of one to gather things together,
and compose them into one bulk, yet it seems plainly to be the joint issue of
several men's brains, and to have been raked out of more memories then one, and
therefore well may you call them Collections, yea that not merely one, but more
then one had a hand in it, I am informed sufficiently to belief by the voice of
the Baby-book it self, which speaking in some places plurally, but not any
where singularly of its Parentage, little less then assures me of this, that
howbeit there might be one prime penman of the Pamphlet, or whoere it was that
thrust it through the press, yet the minds of more men, yea more Ministers
then one is sounded forth in it, yea of such as were but Auditors at the
Disputation, whose sense both of it, and of its efficacy upon the people is
said in your Account to be so unanimous, that they resolved together with the
rest to declare their sense of it in their several congregations, and oppose
the growth of Anabaptism, as it is called, in their respective flocks, which since
it has been done by them too, accordingly as was then agreed, whether if not
all, or at lest a plurality of those Priests, who before laid their heads
togethe^ to betray the truth of God, did not since compare their notes together
to belly it, and whether birds of a Feather did not flock together to give their
several influences toward this hotch-potch relation, it is more if (if any of you
can clear your selves of it do) then I can clear any of you of at all, save the
Scotchman of Kenington, who at Folston disclaimed his having any hand in it:
But should that be more then I have warrant to be sure of, yet however I am
certain of this, that either it is the sense of you all, or else some of you
have the more wrong, whilst the book is so curiously composed, that it may seem
to be the Ministers book, and the Arguments that are set down in it, be they
never so silly and inconsequent, are fathored upon you all in gross, recorded
as the Ministers arguments, though proceeding but from one Ministers mouth, and
not few follies and absurd things, whilst the Penman dances in the clouds
himself, are related as spoken, and done by the Ministers, which the Ministers
may very well, and will once find time to be ashamed of: yet you seem to take
all that's put upon you to your selves, not any of you entering your dissent:
whilst therefore you seem so jointly to justify him, that puts you all upon
the score in the Report, you cannot justly condemn him, who Arrests you all for
it, in the Reply.

5. As to these present Returns of mine to that threefold thing you have
thrust forth, I am experienced by your wonted Demeanor toward such as trouble
you too much with truth, how much more Odium then ever I must come under there
by among both your selves and your Admirers; but hic murus ahaeneus esto nil
conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa. This verily is no less then a Brazen
fence to me against all your censures and exceptions, that even herein, as well
as in in other things for which you condemn me, I have exercised my self so, as
to keep a conscience void of offense, and that toward both God and man. Yea if
I have not dealt clearly, as you wish me to do, i. e. according as the truth is
indeed, then in the very way of waiting upon God only, singly, seriously, and
with many tears for the understanding of it, in which way he, that cannot lie,
has assured me he will be found, my conscience is most wonderfully clouded;
therefore see that you see, if you see.

But if I have not dealt ingenuously i. e. as heartily as so crooked a
generation as the CCClergy is, that do always err in their hearts, and have
not known Christ's ways, can justly claim from any, but some Cowardly Clawback,
that cares not to be unfaithful in his carriage both toward God and them, then
the Lord deal so graciously with us all, as to humble both you under a
sanctified sight of such sins as you are as truly guilty of, as here reproved
for, and me under my miscarriage in reproving.

6. Finally Sirs, having briefly premised these things, and praying earnestly
that our Lord Jesus Christ would vouchsafe you all that holy spirit of his,
even the spirit of promise, which (I fear) you are more strangers to then you
are aware of, and in order thereunto, adjuring you to repent from your dead
works, to arise and be baptized and wash away your sins, calling on the name of
the Lord, so rests, as to this Epistle,

Your truly loving, though as little Beloved, as Believed Friend SAMUEL FISHER.

ANTI-DIABOLISM. OR THE TRUE ACCOUNT A TRUE COUNTERFIT.
ANd now Sirs (to say nothing of your pretty Preface till anon, for even that
also must then be forth coming to give Account of its dawbery, and incongruity,
as well as your Account it self) I will begin with your book, which (as
diminutive as it is) you have for all that stitcht up in no less than three
Treatises.

First, A Report of your Disputation. Secondly, A Review of your Arguments.
Thirdly, A Ratiocination about Heretics.
In all which, how far forth you quit your selves like men of truth, and
reason, comes now before the world to be examined.

The first I say, is a Story of the long Disputation that was held at Ashford,
July 27. 1649. from noon, till near seven at night, and it is contained in the
five first leaves, whereof two whole ones at least (but say so they had need)
are spent in your exact setting down of the Arguments and Answers, and the rest
in praevious and posteriour passages.

So that in this first part of your Pamphlet, there are two things in general
which you profess to give A true Account of.

First, The Propositions agreed on between your selves, and your Respondent,
his Position, and what else was precedent, and preparative to the Disputation.

Secondly, The Disputation it self, and such things as were subsequent to it,
in each of which, if I show not that you have recorded more flat falsities, and
downright untruths than one (and that were too much to fall from your pens,
were you Ministers of Christ indeed) then let my own pen record me for a liar,
and my own self bear the blame of over-charging you, and that for ever.

In order to a trial of the Truth in this case between you and me, though I
suppose I shall not be more critical in considering, nor volumnous in dilating
on them, than your selves are numerous in bewraying of your own negligences,
ignorances, contradictions, fictions, ^nakednesses, and abusive shifts,
throughout this your threefold thing, yet I shall make little less than a
total transscription of your Papers, before I have done, and therein take
notice of such absurdities at least whereby you most notoriously delude the
world, most grossly oppose the truth; most unworthily wrong your Respondent, and
most palpably proclaim your selves to be rather true Dissemblers, than true
Discoverers of the Ashford Disputation, and Smotherers, rather than Publishers
of that Gospel Truth in the point of Baptism, which you pretend also to give as
true an Account of to the world, as of the other.

Report.
You talk first of Propositions agreed upon between your Respondent, and your
selves, the Ministers at the Communion Table, in the Church of Ashford in Kent,
before the Disputation began.

Reply.
Give me leave (Sirs, since silence with you may be taken else for Assent) to
say a word or two to this; you style your selves the Ministers both here, and
elsewhere, throughout your book; But if you mean Ministers of Christ, and the
Gospel, I am yet to learn that from you (which I never found you very forward
to teach me) viz. that you came truly, and honestly by that Title; you have
hitherto wanted no provocation from me to prove the lawfulness of your calling:
I made bold to denominate you Antichristian Ministers, in my Position, upon the
very day of the Disputation, before those Thousands, which (you say) were
Auditors thereof; And I have asserted the same more abundantly since in that
letter to Mr. G. C. which it seems you know so well, as even thence to take
occasion in a Pet, to publish so much as you have done of your Disputation, all
which is enough to give you to understand that I own you not at all in that
capacity, yet did you never, no neither then at the Disputation, nor since in
your so true a Relation of it, so much as once open your mouth, or strike one
stroke with your pen, whereby to evince it, that you are Christ's Ministers,
which gives me to believe, that howbeit you have a habit of calling your selves
so, yet you had rather men believed you, on your bare words, than put you to
prove your selves to be so, and that you are as utterly incapable to clear it,
as it is clear you are unwilling to be urged to it.

You speak of the Church of Ashford, and a Communion Table in it: 'Twere
strange if I should not know what you mean thereby, yet had you told this piece
of your tale in other Terms, it had been so much the less liable to correction:
I know but one Church of Ashford, that has a Communion Table in it, and that is
those few persons, who since they have gladly received the Word of Truth, have
been according to Christ's will in that kind, baptized in his name for remission
of sins, and do now continue in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and prayers, to which the Lord I hope will add daily such in
those parts as shall be saved: in this Church there is a Communion Table
indeed, even the Table of the Lord, at which they meet, blessing, and drinking
that Cup of blessing, which is the Commemoration, and Communion also of the
blood of Christ, breaking, and eating that bread, which is the Commemoration,
and Communion of the body of Christ, at which you, and your Respondent never
yet met, but may do yet in due time, if the Lord please to grant you, (for till
then surely it never will be) repentance to the acknowledgement of his truth:
But for other Communion Table, I wot not Sirs that there is any at all at
Ashford. As for that common Table, which stands in the great stone house, where
the Bells hang, where the people meet once a week, but never do that they
should do, if they were disciples of Christ indeed, which house you call the
Church of Ashford, (and I cannot but allow you so to do (since you disclaim the
true one) the very Steeple being well nigh as much a truly constituted Church
of Christ, as a parish people, the one whereof is but a compacted number of
dead stones in a literal sense, and (for the most part) no less in a spiritual
sense is the other, besides stone Churches, and wooden Priests (such as if you
are not, yet most of the Popes children are) suit well enough each with other)
as for that Table (I say) where you, and your Respondent agreed better about
the Articles of the Disputation, then they do (for ought I see) to this day
about that Article of faith they disputed on, you had need to find some fitter
phrase for it, than Communion Table, for it has long since ceased to be of any
such use as for people to communicate at it; The Gentleman, my beloved friend
that is now Resident there, and President too (in pretense at least) as a
Pastor over that flock, having never administered it at all since his abode
among them, nor since the Classis possessed him of that Relation, and gave him
orders to feed them with that ordinance: why he does not meddle with that
service in his parish, would be far more wonderful to me then it is had not
mine own conscience been of the same constitution with his when I was with him
in the same condition, for as my own feet stuck once in the, same stocks when I
stood in Pastoral relation to parochial people, so I believe him to be
further enlightened, then to be free for a promiscuous admittance to the Supper
of such Societies, among whom he discerns (not a few) more goats than sheep, or
to hold Communion there, with them whom in the Pulpit he cries out on as
unbelievers, as knowing well enough, there is no fellowship to be held between
light, and darkness, believers and unbelievers in that holy ordinance: yet he
sprinkles the Infants of all (as you also do, and my self blindly did) or else
that parish will prove happily to hot to hold him: upon what account he does so
I know not, for sure it cannot be upon this, because only believers Infants
are to be sprinkled. The Lord open all your eyes to see those sorry shifts
wherein you shroud your selves for a time from your own sight, so that ye see
not when ye interfeer, nor feel when you hack your own shins, for who so blind
as those that cannot see how you act quite contrary to that you argue for, and
overthrow your own principles by your practice?

Report.
These Propositions say you were as follows. First, that both parties should
publicly protest that they sought for verity, not victory.

Reply.
I acknowledge this is very true, and it was protested on both sides,
accordingly as was agreed, nevertheless whether it be the Proud Priesthood,
that seeks to tuck all men under their girdles, and by force to tie high, and
low, rich, and poor, Prince, and people, male, and female, bond, and free, to
serve God in no other way than the Pope, or their Archbishops or
Arch-presbyteries appoint, and to tread all under them, that with never such
evidence of Scripture, and demonstration of the Spirit, and power do gainsay
them, or that poor party of people, who merely in order to the promotion of
truth rejoicingly subject themselves to scorn, shame, hatred of all, revilings
from friends, foes, neighbors, old acquaintance, etc. whether (I say) it be
those, or these, alias you or we that pretend verity, and intend only victory
will appear more at large in the examination, of the 23. page of your book, in
the first line whereof you charge us therewith, as an evil most specially
incident unto us, mean while I let it pass, and go on.

Report.
Secondly, that the question to be disputed was Paedo-baptism, namely, whether
the baptizing of little Children, born of believing parents, practiced by the
Church of God, were lawful?

Reply*
I remember indeed that when 'twas questioned what the question should be,
Paedo-baptism was agreed upon to be it, i. e. whether children ought to be
baptized? but had I been as wise as a Wood-Cock, or minded the matter so well
as I should have done, I had spoken in a language more consonant to your
practice, for Paedo-rantism was the question I intended i. e. whether children
ought to be sprinkled? for though Baptism, or Dipping of Infants is that the
lawfullness of which you will never be able to demonstrate, an error lying
still in the Subject, in case you did (as in truth you do not) dispense it, yet
you are gone further from the truth then so, no more (at best) than Rantizing
that false Subject, which to do is indeed no Raptism at all: I excepred against
this in my Position as well as the other, but your prudence was pleased to
leave it out in your accurate Account thereof, least it should do you more harm
than good, and asserted your error to be double, in your dispensation of that
you call Baptism viz. first in that you plead to have Infants be baptized when
they ought not, Secondly, in that you pretend to baptize them, and yet do not;
of both which I demanded an account at that time, and in all reason you should
have given it, but not caring how little your sprinkling is spoken of, because
you have little, or nothing to speak for it, you so took me at my word at the
Table when I yielded to dispute Paedo-baptism, that Paedo-rantism (your only
practice) might not be meddled with in discourse at all.

Secondly, I observe when ever you come to dispute for your
Childish-christenin^s you plead only for the Infa^s of Believers: but is not
your plea by far too narrow for your practice, whilst you commonly christen
the Infants of all? you know your people are not all in the faith, why else do
you preach to them as profane to the end you may convert them thereunto? yet
the wickedest wretches you so keep from the Supper, that you often keep all
from it for their sakes; have access with their seed to be christened, as
freely for the most part as the other: does not that same faith that
denominates men believers, saints, godly, and gives them, and (as you say)
theirs too a true title to Baptism, entitle their persons to the Supper? or
must a man bring you another, and that a better kind of faith to the one, than
he had need care for toward the other? this some of your Tribe do not blush to
say, because (as the case is) there is naught else to be said: but know ye Sirs
and they too, that though you have your several sorts of Saints for your
several services viz. your grosser sort of believers to admit (not in their
own persons neither when at years, but) in their posterity only to your
Rantism, and a finer sort for the Supper, yet Christ requires but one sort of
faith and saintship to both these ordinances, viz. no more than a true one to
the one, and no less than a true one to the other. Again you had much need (had
you not think you?) to set children of believing parents as the only subjects
of Baptism in the state of the question between us, when throughout your whole
Dispute (as I shall show when I come to consider it) there is not a tittle, nor
grain of argument brought by you to prove the right of Believers Infants to
Baptism, but it serves as much every whit to prove the like for the Infants of
Unbelievers also: yea Sirs take this from me, you do your cause a world of
wrong in stating your question so straightly, for besides that you give the ly
therein to your own action, which is the admission of all that are brought to
you, and are born within the precincts of your parishes, you drive your selves
to such a Dilemma by your own disputes, that you will not know how to open your
Church-doors for Believers Infants to come in thereat, but Unbelievers Infants
will with ease creep in at them too.

Thirdly, one word more to this yet: Did your Respondent assent to you in it
(as you seem to say) that the Baptism of children is practiced by the Church of
God? how pretily have you put these terms [practised by the Church of God] into
the very question, and that too as it stands stated beeween us? Did I give, and
grant so much? or have you not rather taken it for granted from me whether I
will, or no? Sirs I had thought I had given you sufficient evidence of my
denial that the Baptism of Infants is practiced by the Church of God; yea
though the Church of the Pope, and such as you call the Church of God, as the
Church of the Prelate, the Church of the Presbyter, and some others too, do
dispense Rantism to Infants under the name of Baptism, yet I did then, as also
I do still, deny it to be, or have been practiced by any true Church of God
primitive, or modern, that then was, or now is visibly constituted according to
his will in the word: As for what you call the Church of God whether you mean
all Christendom, or the Protestant part of it only, it is even therefore no
true visible Church of God because it Rantizes Infants: for that being
undoubtedly a straggling from the truth, and an undue administration of that
ordinance, not only as to the form of it, but the subject also, the name of the
true visible Church of God is (ipso facto) destroyed from it, were there no
more error in it but barely that, if Doctor Featly (to whom you send us in your
Review) define the true Church of God aright; for while he says that (meaning
that only) is a true Church where the word is truly taught, and the Sacraments
duly administered, consequently that is no true Church where baptism is unduely
administered; and so it is, (or rather Rantism instead of it] not only at Rome,
but in England also, whilst to Infants; therefore as the Church of Rome is but
a false Church, so the Church of England is no true one. I utterly do
therefore, yea and did then, deny that Infant Baptism is at all practiced by
the Church of God: and yet (O full of all fallacy) as if your Respondent were
agreed with you in it that the true Church of God did baptize Infants, how
finely have you foisted in this Epithet to the baptism of little children viz.
[practised by the Church of God] and that in this very Account you give of our
agreement about the very form, and terms of the question, that was yet to be
disputed between us?

Report.
Thirdly, That the Arguments used in the disputation should be only express
Scriptures, or arguments of necessary consequence from them, All Authorities of
Fathers and Churches laid aside; though the practice of the Church was pleaded
for, yet would not be yielded to.

Reply.
1. I agree with you that the Arguments should indeed have been such only by
agreement, but that one of those you then used, or any of these few material
ones (for the immateriall being of no account with your selves you Account not
for) which you here expose to be perused is grounded upon express Scripture, or
any good consequence therefrom I deny, as will I hope be manifested in my
ensuing Re-review of them, and Review of your Review it self.

Secondly, if by Fathers, whose authority you hang so much on, you mean those
that were some hundreds of years after Christ, and were canonized more lately
for such, as Father Origin, Father Chrysostom, Father Ierom, Father Cyprian,
Father Austin, and the other objects of the Clergies Dotage; and if by Churches
you mean those that were in the ages when, and places where these Fathers
lived, or any other since the primitive times, which were the purest, it is but
a folly to stand arguing from them, whose words and ways are no more the rule
of truth to us then ours are to be to them that succeed us: for verily they
might and did speak sometimes not according to the word, and then they were as
Heterodox as others, and our selves are in as good possibilities as they to
speak according to the word, and then we are as Orthodox, and Authentic to the
full as themselves. I did therefore utterly disown all authority of these
Fathers, and Churches, for I knew none they had to be a Standard to after ages:
yet though I counterpleaded your Plea from their practice, it was not least
your cause should be advantaged thereby, for even the Testimony of those
Fathers is against you; but because as they were subjected to the word, so were
they as subject to error as our selves: but if by Fathers you mean the
Primitive Prophets, and Apostles to whom all your Forefathers are but
Children, viz. Father Peter, Father Paul, Father James, Father Jude, Father
John, whose Doctrine was the foundation to the Churches, and by Churches those
that were then built upon their doctrine, as that of Ephesus, Corinth,
Philippi, Rome, etc. before the falling off from the truth, the Authority of
these Fathers, and practice of these Churches is pleaded for as seriously by
us, as the other superstitiously by your selves.

Report.
Fourthly, Here you tell us it was propounded, That the form of the Disputation
should be Syllogisticall, which I, after many reasons alleged by you the
Ministers to enforce the same, at last yielded to.

Reply.
A very fit phrase for it: for 'twas enforced by you indeed, yet more by
strength of resolution than reason, that 'twas yielded to by my self is as
true; yet I must profess it was because the Disposition of your wills did put
me as (as we say) to Hobsons Choice, for I saw you so desirous to draw your
necks out of the collar, and to make any thing in excuse to break off the
Discourse, that I must choose either that way, or none, and therefore rather
than the work of that day should fall (as it must have done altogether else for
you) to the total failing of the expectation, and hindering the edification of
the people, I could not but give way to your desires: Nevertheless your many
reasons (which were but two, and those as reasonless too as if you had said
nothing) were counter-mand with as many more, and those also of so much weight,
that because you began to feel them sit heavy upon your Scholastic skirts, you
would have obstructed my delivery of them to the people: for what great matters
did you allege whereby at that time and place to prove the expediency of such
a form? First, that 'twas given out (as my desire to them is it never may be
again) by them of our party, that I was a Scholar, and durst meet with Scholars
in discourse, and therefore seeing I now was before Scholars, it was expected
that I should dispute in the way that is most usual among them. Secondly, That
the way of Dispute by Syllogisms (for which some of you had little need to
dispute, considering their illogicall, and un-syllogisticall doings that day,
wherein they were all-to-be-puzzled in their matter by fumbling so much about
that form) was the clearest, and most compendious to the proving of things, and
the preventing of extrravagancies, and disorder; much what in such a manner did
you utter your selves, in order to enforcing your Proposition, to which the
reply was to this purpose, Namely, First, that though I had been in the
University, and a Graduate there, yet I pretended to no great Scholarship, yea,
that I was a Dunce, and a fool, which very terms, and no other, I repeated
again in my Position, and was contented to be counted for no other, as to that
kind of learning of much of which I was willingly forgetful, that I might know
more of Christ, and the plainness of his Gospel. Secondly, that I came not
thither to dispute, (nor did I (the Lord is my witness) in that formal way you
stood upon) but in plainness to give an account before all, to as many as
should ask it, according to my ability, and what liberty you should allot me
thereunto, (which yet was well nigh none at all) of the way you call Heresy,
after which I, and many others did worship. Thirdly, that these Syllogisticall
ways of arguing, and the foolish feigned forms of the Scribes and Disputers of
this world, which men might dispute in about the things of Nature, and the
world, were utterly unsuitable to the seriousness of the things of Christ, and
the Gospel, which were most effectually delievered, for so Paul chose to hold
them out, in all plainness of speech, and most commonly hid from people by the
Logical terms, and Methods of man's invention; and that the wise and prudent
men after the flesh, Doctors, Schoolmen and Casuists had clouded the truth from
the world, for ages and generations together, by these their artificial
composures, Fourthly, that Christ and his Apostles, the most of which were
unlearned, and ignorant men, though they were scarce ever out of disputes about
the Gospel, did yet never dispute by the way of Syllogisms.

Fifthly, That this way was fitter for the Schools, and very unfit for that
Auditory, where the people, for whose sake we were chiefly come together to
discourse, knew not what belonged to mood and figure. Sixthly, that we our
selves were now countrisied by our long non-residence in the University, and so
might very well be to seek on a sudden, and so I found some of you were, to
Syllogize so handsomely as we should do: these were the heads, though it is like
not the very words and order of that, which with mighty much a do, I had leave
to return to your proposal: Notwithstanding, all which you standing still so
stiffly, to have either your own way, or none, I said I would not decline it,
and so it was agreed to proceed in it. Howbeit, give me leave to tell you now,
as then I did not, since you deem it such a wise way of Disputation to keep to
the Rules of the Academies, that for men of gravity, in conference of matters
of such eternal concernment, it is a most Pedantick, toyish and boyish piece of
business to stand fabling about moods and figures, which are but the A. B. C.
or first rudiments to a Scholar, and as inferior to judicious discourse
indeed, as spelling with the finger is to reading in full perfection, and that
which is as fit for a wise man to forget, as it is for a fresh man to remember:
besides, it is the next way round about to the discerning the whole of any
matter; for all you then said for your way in Syllogisms, which in substance
was no more than this, viz. That infants have the Spirit, faith, holiness, many
commendations in Scripture, are such of whom to doubt their having the spirit
is a breach of Christian charity, whom to deny baptism to, makes the Covenant
of the Gospel worse than that under the law; destroys all the hope that
parents can have of their salvation, crosses the practice of the universal
Church, which one would think you should be ashamed to make a book of; might
have been exposed to the consideration of your Respondent, in much less than
half the half quarter, and given out plainly enough in a few positions for him
to have replied to with your leave and silence: but time was so spin'd out by
your long productions, and his Repetitions of your Syllogisms, that there was
but a very long-little, in comparison of what else might have been delivered;
and Sirs, I assure you of this one thing, I beseech you to lay it to heart in
time, the generation of you Disputers is rejected by the Lord, and a sort of
plain English men raised up, who notwithstanding the curiosity of your
cudgel-play, and those fine forms of your Fencing-schools, whereby you shield
your selves from the truth, will by their upright downright dealings with you,
and the word, be empowered to beat your cudgels to your heads; and though you
seek to lap up the nakedness of your ways, from the sight of the people for a
time, in a pair of Logic breeches, yet these are wearing out a pace, so that
you shall see within a while, what now you will not, that all your
Syllogisticall forms, will not secure your Sylli-popicall matters.

Report.
Fifthly, you tell us 'twas agreed that I should be respondent, which though
there was little reason for, in regard I invaded the practice of the Church,
whereof you the Ministers were Defendants, and ought to have showed upon what
grounds I did it, the confuting of which would havt tended more to the
satisfaction of the Auditory, was by you the Ministers yielded to at my
importunity.

Reply.
O yes! all manner of persons that were at the Disputation at Ashford give
attendance, here is as pretty a prank as you shall likely see played by any, save
a Classis of Clergymen, and among them you may likely see the like again, viz.
a tale told transversim, a thing storied out Archipodialiter, or with heels
upwards: and you of the Clergy that were there, you specially that fingred out
this Article, heed what I say: That I who invaded the practice of the Church,
for so I did, not of God but of Rome, England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
etc. in the point of Infant-sprinkling wherein they are all Romishly devoted,
should come before 1000s of people, before you Mis-ministers also, professing
my desires, and the very end of my being there to be no other then (because I
was counted an Heretic for denying Infant-sprinkling) to give account, or (to
speak in your own Terms) to show upon what grounds I did it, moving, urging,
earnestly claiming by the very University orders, which your selves stood
strictly to tie me to, that I might have two hours, or (if not so) but one, or
(if not so) but half a one, wherein to lay down upon what grounds I denied
Infant-spri^kling, that you the Minist^rs, Defendants of that way of yours
might confute those grounds of mine (if you could) as that which would have
tended more in my mind (as well as yours) to the satisfaction of the Auditors,
then any thing else (for even all this I did that day at Ashford) and that you
the Ministers should be utterly against my giving this account, and showing my
grounds, which I would so fain have shown, rather then heard yours (for no
less then this do you confess your selves, saying page 2. that before the
Dispute I moved to make a position, and page 10. that after the Dispute I made
a motion that you would hear me preach, that is, give account, or show the
grounds of my dissent (for so I spoke, leaving you a liberty to take your
exceptions when I had done) and that your selves only concluded it
un-necessary, yea, opposed it, and made three or four [frivilous] pretenses
against it, for even this also you confess your selves, page 2. page 10. That
you (I say) the same Ministers that did thus ponere obicem by your own
confession, should yet in the same paper write thus, Namely, that I ought to
have showed upon what grounds I denied your practice, that you might have
confuted them to the satisfaction of the people, as if your selves had been
very forward that I should give account, or show my Arguments and Reasons,
only my self was against it, and opposed it, and that with importunity, as if
I had urged, that at any hand I might not give account of what I did, it is such
a cunning contradiction to your selves as I never saw penned by the hands of
prudent men since I was born to this day; Sirs, if I should have said so much
as this of my self, that I ought to have showed my grounds upon which I denied
Infants-sprinkling, but was at that time importunate with you that I might not,
my own conscience, which is Mill testes, and a thousand witnesses besides,
would condemn me as no ordinary self-belyar, for I profess before the Lord, and
those many people that then heard me, many of which (unless willingly) cannot
be ignorant hereof, I was most forward that day to give out the grounds of the
way I walk in, but that your selves (not the people) were most froward against
it: but the people have believed you so long at a venture in other cases, that
though both you, and they know the truth to be contrary to what you say, yet
you hope they will believe you so still, but the Lord grant them to find out
your forgery for the future, and to be no more guld by your ghostly glosses.

Report.
Sixthly, That there should be no tumults, no interruption of the Disputants
that no provoking terms, whereby offense might be justly given or taken, should
be used, that if any such were, warning should be given and satisfaction made,
or the Disputation to break up, and the blame to ly upon that side which did
transgress.

Reply.
You might as well have given Account who they were that did violate this
agreement, as of the Article it self, but then you had brought no little blame
upon your selves, and thereupon very likely you forbore it: for as when you
propounded this Article (little considering that your selves were most likely
to grow regardless of it) you made a Rod for your own tails, so you had
assuredly slashed your selves soundly therewith had you told all the truth
indeed, for though this (as all the rest) was your own by- Proposal, your
Antagonists only by assent, yet verily even you the Lawgivers were the the men
that did most grossly transgress it, yea some of you seemed to sit there for
nothing else but to blur, and blunder the proceedings by some impertinent
interposals, or other, so that after questions asked me three or four times
over, by your selves, and leave as often asked you by me to answer, yet the
anticipations of some or other of you either forbad me to begin, or at least
cut me off before the end: This Article therefore being broken by you in the
other parts of it must be kept in the last clause thereof at least viz. the
blame of the breach ly upon you.

Report.
Seventhly, That after the Disputation ended it might be lawful for any one of
the Congregation, leave first obtained of the Ministers, to ask questions, and
to propound his arguments not being tied to any Syllogistical forms and to
receive satisfaction.

Reply.
'Twas the faculty of the Pharisees of old to affect the chief seats in the
Synagogues, and it is the fashion of you Masters in Israel now, to take upon you
to be the Chair-men still, and to bear such sway in the public places, that
the people may not meddle there to speak a word, or urge an argument, or ask a
question, or without leave from you Masters of the Synagogues so much as once
to quack in your presence: but Sirs the best on it is you have now in this year
of Iubilee 1650. (for so does your book bear date) given not only toleration,
but advice and invitation too to all people to Ask the Priest p. 27. and
therefore though formerly they might not do it at all, and even now they do it
often to little purpose, yet I hope you will have them excused (for do it they
will, by your leave, now, and then) when they ask you questions in your
Cathedralls without asking you any more leave so to do.

Report.
Next you tell us, That it was also moved by the Ministers, that two Moderators
might be nominated, and also Clerks appointed for the writing down both of the
Arguments and Answers, the Originalls to be left in the hands of the
Moderators, that so no mis-reports might be raised concerning them; or if any
were, the truth might be made appear to any that should desire satisfaction, by
repairing to them, which I utterly refusing, the Ministers superseded from
further urging of it.

Reply.
I did indeed refuse to choose any Moderator my self save the whole Auditory) as
knowing how basely the truth has been captivated, and kept under for Heresy by
the Claws of the Clergy, when subjected to their determination; yet did I not
deny to have any chosen, for I left you the liberty to choose whom you would,
who very goodly (but how justly let all men judge) made choice of one to
determine as judge in his own cause, who was the only opponent almost
(altogether if the True Account were not false, which sets down no Arguments
but his) but however the prime Plantiff in the Disputation, and as finely he
fitted your sancies, that are affected so much with falsity, and foppery; of
both which there was great store in his Recapitulation. As for me, could I
easily have suspected there would have been such immoderation amongst you as
was, striking up so many of you together sometimes, that neither I could be
heard by any of you at all, nor your selves very well by one another, it had
not been amiss to have admitted of Moderators to have kept you in some better
order; for Clerks also for the setting down of things truly, had I thought you
would have taken such advantage for want thereof, as to raise (and that in
print too) so many mis-reports as your selves have done, I had probably closed
with you in that motion, and though I refused to do it then, (as being better
opinion'd of you then you have since de served for) yet it is more than I am
like to do again, if e're I meet you in another Disputation for that slippery
tricks sake you have served me concerning this: Ictus Piscator sapit. But as to
this there is no remedy now, save my No, to your Yea, and the memories of the
people that heard us, my Supreme appeal for moderation is to Christ, the
Supreme Moderator of Heaven and Earth, before whom (as I told you then I hoped
I should speak nothing of which I should have cause to be ashamed) so I tell
you now, I hope I shall pen nothing of which I may be afraid to give account
when he appears, and we appear before his Tribunal: the same Lord come
quickly, and judge between us, even so Amen.

Report.
After these Propositions were agreed upon, you say, I moved to have liberty to
make my Position; which after debate of the unnecessariness of it, the question
being already stated, and the terms known, and understood by every one, was
yielded to, so I exceeded not a quarter of an hour, which was accepted by me.

Reply.
Though the question were stated, and terms known never so well, (as I deny
they are to every one in the question of Infants Baptism, for such as are used
only to sprinkling, take that to be Baptism which is not) yet the grounds were
not known upon which I held the Negative, and therefore 'twas not unnecessary
for me to make a Position: Moreover, I invading the practice of your Church, in
that point, whereof you profess your selves to be Defendants, I ought to have
showed upon what grounds I did it, that you might have confuted them, this
would have tended more to the satisfaction of the Auditory, than the omission
of it could do; if you will not believe me in this, yet at least believe your
selves, for these are no other words then your own, yet I confess you have no
great reason to give heed to your selves neither, considering how many offs,
and ons you are found in; for one while you assert it needful that I should
lay down my grounds (as above) another while (as here) that I moved (and had
you said with importunity too you, had spoken now no more than the truth) to
make a Position, or, which is all one, to lay down my grounds, only you saw
the unnecessariness of it: O pure stuff! at last through much importuning to
have an hour or two wherein to do it, and promising much more then you would
accept of, viz. That if that day were too short to dispute in, I would give you
the next day, and the next, and lastly pleading the equity of the thing from
the order of the Schools, where there is no Disputation without Position, to
which order you had by Article obliged us, such high condescension was acted by
you Presidents of the place, that I was allowed the large liberty of a quarter.

Report.
Next you go on to declare the sum of my Position, and that being come into the
body of the Church, you the Ministers entered into the Desk, and I standing a
little distance off upon one of the seats, leaning to a pillar, and the
multitude being silent, I made my Position.

Reply.
For your relation of my leaning to a Pillar, it being neither true, nor
material, what does it here I wonder in this your short, and true relation, as
you call it, of the most material things that passed? yet since it is
acknowledged by you to be a mistake in the margent of the copy that you sent
me, I Will not only excuse it for once, though an error, but lend you a little
toward the making of it truth, for I did lean indeed that day to a Pillar, even
the true Church of God, which is the Pillar and ground of truth, which would
you all lean as much to, as you do from it in these tottering times, you would
stand a little faster than you are like to do, and secure your selves from that
fall that is threatened in these words Babylon is fallen, is fallen, which
though your Tower reach as high as heaven, as that old Tower of Babell seemed
to do, the Division of language that is in these days will e're long
unavoidably bring upon you.

Report.
The heads of my Position you say are four, to which since you subject four
Answers of your own, I Will reduce each of them to the several head it relates
to, and so reply to both of them together. First, That I need not spend time
about stating the question it being done before at the Communion Table: to this
first you say, answer was made that herein I confirmed the Ministers reasons
against my making of a position.

Reply.
Though there was no need to spend time in acquainting them with the question
over again because that was done before at the Table, yet there was need, and
so I expressed my self often enough, to spend time, yea four or five times more
than I could get of you, in stating the question, i. e. of making a Position,
for even with your selves these two are Synonima's, for what you style stating
the question in the first head the very same you call making a Position in your
answer, yet such is your subtilty that you here represent it as if I, who was
so earnest before to have liberty to state the question in a Position, and
moved it as a matter most needful, were already so altered in my judgment, as
in the front of my Position to profess it needless to spend time about it:
Sirs, what a sight of in^, and outs, are here? do you not remember, or if you
will not, yet some people will, that my chief complaint of you to them in my
Position was this, That though I so much desired it, though it was very
requisite, and the manner of the Schools, to which you tied me, and therefore I
ought of right to have had an hours time, yet you had crowded me into the
corner of a quarter? which shows that though you deemed it wast of time for me
to say any thing almost about the question, yet I judged it very needful to
speak more to it than your patience was pleased to permit me, and yet it is not
enough for you, in your Account of the Position, to leave well-nigh all that
little out which in that little time was declared as to the falsness of your
administration by the way of sprinkling, and other matters of your Ministry,
but you also falter and feign, and forge so fowlie in your sum of the Position
as to set down more in it than was ever thought on.

Report.
Secondly, That I came thither to defend the unlawfullness of Childrens
baptism. which an evil and adulterous generation did maintain against me: to
which you say it was answered, that I transgressed the Propositions, in giving
reviling and opprobrious terms, callng you a wicked and adulterous generation:
to which, say you, I replied that my intent was not to fasten those words upon
any there present, that I desired they might be so taken, which by you was
admitted of.

Reply.
I came not thither, i. e. to Ashford so much to defend as to prove, could I
have been licensed thereunto by your spiritual Court, the unlawfulness of
Childrens Baptism, yet not of Childrens Baptism so much, which though it is
easy, yet is needless to be disproved, because no where dispensed that I know
of, but rather of Childrens sprinkling, which as it is doubly unlawful, so is
universallie practiced: of this end of my coming I gave evidence enough in
debating the fourth Proposition, professing that I came to give account of my
dissent, and denial of the truth of your way, but when you denied me to give
my desired Account, wherein I would have been a Plantiff and a prover, I must
then defend, or do nothing, neither did I say of this evil and adulterous
generation that they maintained it against me, but themselves, for whether they
do, or do it not they cannot hurt me thereby, but if they do it the worst will
be their own, for as they of old that rejected the true Baptism for none Luke
7. 30. did reject the conncel of God against themselves, so do they that reject
it for a false one: as to the terms of evil and adulterous generation,
concerning which you first charge me, and then acquitted me as not intending
them to you, I meant them then in very deed of this Age wherein we live, yet
so long as you go a whoring from God after ways of men's tradition, and teach
people to do so, as you do, I see not how I could have been truly said to
revile, had I used them directly to your selves.

Report.
Thirdly, that though I had once been of that opinion, and a Minister of the
Church, and received orders from it, yet now I was of another, and did renounce
both the Church and her orders; to which say you, 'twas answered, that it was
no marvel that I, that had forsaken the Church, should afterward revile and
despise her, and that God having suffered me to fall into so gross an error, as
to deny and renounce my first baptism, did in his just judgment suffer me to
fall further and further, Heresy being like a Precipice, where after a man
has begun his run, he cannot stay till he come to the bottom.

Reply.
I was once of that opinion indeed, and practice too, together with your
selves, and had not a little zeal thereof (though not according to knowledge)
when I acted in your false function, by implicit faith, and made the
Directories, Canons, Catechisms, Creeds of the Clergies compiling my Rule (as
many more did besides my self) not comparing them so singly as I should have
done with that true Directory of the word; but I have since seen good occasion
to recant it, as you will undoubtedly do also first or last, (and O that it may
be yet in time to your peace!) notwithstanding, your now forwardness to uphold
it: I was also (in your sense) once a Minister of the Church, but since, going
about to look for that Ministry of the Church, and for that Church whereof I
thought my self a Minister, from thenceforth I could never find either the one
or the other: As for your Church of England, I confess I received twice her holy
orders, viz. once from the Bishops, in the days of their Dominion, by whom I
was ordained a Deacon, i. e. in Scripture-sence, to look toth'poor, but in
their sense, half a Priest, for in that capacity, we might sprinkle, if
allowed, and give the wine to people also in the Supper, but not by any means
the bread, unless very specially licensed thereunto, till we should come into
the full order of Priesthood, for so ran the phrase in the old English
horn-book, which as to that part, was styled, The book of the Ordination of
Bishops, Priests and Deacons, once also by the Presbyters (so called) since the
time of their Parricid, or cutting the throats of their fathers the Bishops,
that gave the being of Priesthood to them, and inducting themselves to reign in
their stead, as the Bishops themselves had dealt not long before with their old
father the Pope, who gave the being of Priesthood to them both, from whom not
as a Priesthood, but a true Presbytery, as they say, I was in orders to
practice their refined Popery more perfectly, which I might do before but by
the halves: but now I know not where this Church of England is, if you speak of
a true Church of Christ, unless you can prove things to have their true being,
without either their true matter or true form: for as the subject matter
whereof it consists is false, being not baptized believers, so the form into
which the Pope cast it some 600 years since, in to which also the Prelate and
Presbyter have new cast it, being and that subpaena too, National, Provincial,
Parochial, is utterly false, and her fellowship as good as none at all,
because not free, but forced: and as for the true Ministry thereof, I know not
where it is neither, if that only be a true one, as you were wont to say it
is, that can derive it self by a line from the very Apostles; neither can you
make good your interrupted succession from them, unless the Pope, from whom
your Series comes, was even then a true Minister of Christ, when he was also an
Antichristian Deceiver; and unless Apostasy and Apostolicy, can so stand
together, as that Rome was even then an Apostolic Church when 'twas palpably
apparent to be an Harlot; neither if I could tell where, can I tell very well
which is the Ministry of your Church of England, there are so many Ministries
in it now, namely, Prelaticall, High-Presbyterian, Presbyterian-Independent,
each of which lay claim to that title, but being both themselves, and their
adherents for such different forms of government, cannot all three be the
Ministry of one Church, unless your Church of England, that was of old so full
of uniformity, is now become capable of tri-formety in its discipline and
Ministry; and yet to be entirely but one Ministry and Church of England still;
which if it be, its a ^r-iform monster then indeed.

As to your answer to this third head, I wish you to weigh how rawly you utter
your selves, whilst just after your selves had cleared me from the guilt of
Reviling, and before I had used any new terms, that could have the least savor
of reviling, you return to charge me of it again; but no marvel when every
round reprover, and renouncer of your Romishness, is as much a reviler with
you, as your selves are at Rome, for renouncing that grosser Popery that's
there. Howbeit, in truth he reviles your Church no more, that calls it a very
Harlot, if it be so, then your selves revile Rome in calling her a Harlot
because she is so: you hint at my renouncing my first baptism: can a man
renounce that he never had? for what was dispenc't when I was a child, as it is
no sign to me now, for I remember not that I ever saw it, so I learn by the
hearsay of it, that it was not baptism at all: as for this last, which is also
the first baptism that ever was administered to me; I see no cause to renounce
it as yet, nor yet I am well assured ever shall. As for heresy, or believing
and doing besides the word, it is a Precipice indeed, where after men have begun
their run, unless the Lord mercifully prevent them, as he has done me, and
many more of late, and I desire may your selves in due time, who are all gone
astray from primitive truth, after the doctrines and commandments of men, they
cannot well stay till they come to the bottom, even the bottomless pit it self,
into which that Arch-Heretitk the Pope who opened it, and that numberless crew
of corrupt Clergymen, which by the advantage of that smoke of errors, with
which he darkened the Sun, and the Air ascended from it, will fall again; for
out of the bottomless pit those Locusts came. and into the bottomless pit they
must return.

Report.
Fourthly. That I was a fool and an Ass, and the weakest of many, to defend the
doctrine of Jesus Christ, yet doubted not but to make it clear against every
opponent: to which your answer was, that that which I said of my self out of
voluntary humility, you the Ministers did acknowledge out of the sense of your
wants.

Reply.
As to secular literature, I did indeed acknowledge my self to be a Dunce and a
Fool, but as to your bringing me in here, as branding my self with the name of
Ass, I must protest against it as one of those scandalous and false aspersions,
with many more of which this story of yours is stored; in trial of which, I
appeal to a letter sent to me, some few days after the Disputation, from an
eminent gentleman then of your party; my answer whereunto you cavil at, but
care not for answering at all your selves: wherein he writes thus to me as
concerning this present passage, viz. If any man should ask my opinion now,
notwithstanding your seeming modesty to term your self Dunce and fool, I should
be apt to conclude with the proverb, that to me you did appear by much more
knave than fool: either therefore this gentleman's memory was better than yours,
or else your faculty of forging is greater than his, and this is most likely of
the two; for though he reviles me through ignorance of what I am, yet I think
he spoke plainly what he thought, and repeated no more than what I spoke of my
self, but you (oportet mendacem esse memorem) whether wittingly or no, it
concerns you to examine, have most grossly falsified my words, that you may
fasten the fouler blemish upon my person; this language you learned be like
from Dr. Featly, who very often, al-to-be-asses the Anabaptists calling his
argument from circumcision to Infant Baptism in respect of the Anabaptists
Pontem Asinorum a bridge which these Asses could never pass over, p. 40. also
in his preface to the Reader, wherein rating the russet Rabbis for preaching
against the errors of the Priesthood, what (quoth he) are all the Prophets
become mad, that the Asses mouth must needs be open by miracle to reprove them?
nor does he say so altogether without some reason: for verily we were all once
Ass-assinated so far (as most Christ'n creatures are still) as to yield our
selves up to be ^id by Balaam the false Prophet i. e. Assemblies and Classes of
the Clergy, who love Tithes, the wages of their unrighteousness, and take toll
of all people for deluding them; till upon a time we saw the Angel of the Lord,
with his sword ready drawn in his hand to destroy him, as he was riding us to
defy Israel, since when, refusing to go with him any further though he smites
us, of Dumb Asses (as we were before) we are become (the Lord opening our
mouths) a people speaking with man's voice, and forbidding the madness of the
Prophet. Moreover, I may well excuse your calling me Ass by craft, whilst you
condescend to call your selves unawares by the same name of Fools and Asses,
for do but mark what you here say of me, and how you make it agree with your
selves; he said (say you) that he was a fool and an ass, and that which he
said of himself out of a voluntary humility, the Ministers did acknowledge i.
e. of themselves, out of a sense of their wants: fallere fallentem non est
fraus.

Report.
You tell us further, that you prayed the Congregation that since you were not
the men appointed for the Disputation, but only undertook it, that the truth
might not be wholly deserted, and the current of slanders, which was likely to
rush in against it, might be somewhat interrupted by the seasonable interposing
of your selves, they would not suffer any defects of yours to prejudice the
cause, that it was the truth on your side did animate you to undertake it,
which you were ready to evince by the Arguments following, leaving the success
to God, to whom only it belonged to convince the understanding.

Reply.
Here Is much talk of the truth, and the truth, but the truth is, your
undertakings have been ever a deserting of the truth, as it is in Jesus; and
causes of a current of flanders that rush in against it in every parish, from
the mouths of your Priest-rid people, who living under your constant outcries
of Heresy, Schism, and such like upon all that suits not with your covetous
interest, have learnt exactly to speak in your tongue, as if they had been spit
out of your mouths: as for your seasonable interposure, it is by so much
unseasonable, as it will prove successess to your ends; for though, while the
Clergies will was the worlds law, their interposings did interrupt all arisings
of truth, yet now it is the time of the end wherein men will run to and fro, and
you labor in the fire, and weary your selves for very vanity, to uphold your
threadbare traditions, for the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

Report.
The sum of the Disputation held at Ashford in Kent, July 27.

Reply.
Had these two brief businesses which you style above [the sum of my position]
and here [the sum of the Disputation] been stilled [some of the position] [some
of the Disputation,] or a little of one, and a little of the other you had bin in
the right on it, for there is scarce so much as some of either: As for the
Position you have disposed on it out of the way, and diminisht the Disputation
into nothing almost, in comparison of the true proportion of both. Now as to
this piece of business which you style the sum of the Disputation, I must talk
with it two ways, and deal with it under this double notion, First, as it is a
Relation of the then Disputation.

Secondly, as it is your Disputation for Infant Baptism: I shall show the
falsness of the one, and the foolishness of the other; and then come to review
your Review. your relation (so you term it) is most manifestly false, if not as
false a one as was ever pend, or printed concerning such a matter; since the
Pope and his Priests, perceiving their kingdom to decline by the breakings
forth of truth from under their smothers, began to be-lye its witnesses to this
day: I shall take notice of a few more of your figments, and two or three
passages in the Disputation, which passed by the memories of you Accountants,
least by telling the whole truth you should shame the devil and your selves,
which may suffice to prove a disproportion between your Tattale, and its Title
of true Account, and so leave it to the unprejudiced auditors of our Discourse,
and impartial per-users of our Relations.

Report.
First, you assert page 3. and that point blank, that I confessed that at three
or four years old many began to be instructed in Principles of Religion, and
that at that age they might be baptized, but afterward that proof being
offered that infants of a day old were as capable of baptism, I would have
recalled it.

Reply.
Sirs, why has Satan filled your hearts to ly thus against the truth, and by
filching out of the way (purposelie as may be supposed) what was of most
moment to the making out of my true meaning, to wrest, and represent my
expressions and intentions in them as croslie and contradictorily to what they
were intended, as yea, and nay are one unto the other? that children at three
or four years old (as your selves then affirmed) may be instructed, I granted,
and do still acknowledge with you, but that I said at that age they might be
baptized, upon that account of bare instruction unless apparently effectual to
their true conversion to the faith, so that by Profession they give good ground
to our consciences to believe that they believe, I here disclaim it, as either
a mis-conception, or rather a mere conception, and birth of your own brains;
and profess it in the sight of God, and all men to be that which (in the sense
you here insert it in) came not so much as into my mind, much less out of my
mouth at that time; and though I find you so un-ingenuous in your dealing, that
I wonder how you can wish me to deal ingenouusly with you^s you do, yet can I
not conceive you to be so unjudicious as to conceive I confessed as you have here
accounted; since my speech, to all that were not dull of understanding, was
most plain to a very contrary purpose, and tended to show the utter unwar
rantableness of baptizing, at any age at all, whether in Nonage, Middle-age,
or Old Age, unless it be found in the way of Faith, and therefore of baptizing
any Infants, in respect not only of their incapacitie to believe, but much
more to make profession of belief: I shall therefore give you, and the world
too, wherebie yours must needs appear to be a juggle, a more true Account of
the Dilation that was then between us: on this wise it was: I confess I granted
(for it is the very truth, though not of a straws weight to your purpose) that
by (...) Mat. 18. 3. was meant children in Nonage, to which Christ says his
Disciples must be like, although bie the phrase v. 6. viz. (...). I asserted
then, and see no occasion of saying otherwise to this hour, that he means his
Disciples, whom he likens to the other, and not little ones in age, and bodily
Stature; in proof of which I referred you to Mat. 10 42. where under the self
same greek phraise viz. (...); he expresses no other than his Disciples, there
being no little child then among them of which he could be imagined to speak:
moreover I showing how that (...) [whence (...)] did properly signify not such
an Infant as you sprinkle, which cannot speak (called infans, quasi non fans)
but a child capable at least to be instructed (and so you are to seek still for
Infant Baptism) 'twas bolted out bie you that at three or four years old many
began to be instructed even in principles of Religion, and that then at least
they might be baptized; whereupon I replied, that 'twas neither this nor that
age, old or young, gave right, yea that no age could make a fit subject for
Baptism, but that wherein a person is apparently instructed to conversion, and
that when so instructed they were to be baptized, whether old or young, so that
if you could so effectually instruct children at three or four years of age as
to bring them to make such profession of faith; as I could not but judge to
proceed from the reality thereof within, I could then for my part baptize them;
yet I thought it was a thing very seldom if ever at all visibly effected; to
this effect, and much what in iisdem terminis did I then deliver my self, yet
so willingly were you mistaken in my meaning, as downrightly to set me out for
such a Childish Novice, as met you before thousands to maintain the unlawfulnes
of Childrens Baptism, and held a Discourse of 6 hours to that end, and yet
confessed the lawfulness of it so soon as ever we had well begun: but Sirs,
suppose I had confessed (as I did not) that children of three or four years
old, because capable at that age to be instructed, might without respect to the
begetting of faith in them, by that instruction, even then, and thereupon only
be baptized; yet will you not at last be ashamed think you of that ignorant
assertion of yours, namely, that infants of a day old are as capable of baptism
as they? for grant it should be granted you (as it is not) that bare
instruction without any success thereof to conversion is a good ground to
baptize persons on at three or four years of age, yet is it a ground whereupon
to baptize Infants of a day old, that are not capable of so much as that bare
instruction? a man may in much wisdom, and some hopes (if not of present yet)
of future conversion thereby begin to indoctrinate his children at three or
four years old, and instill the principles of truth into them, as preparative
to their obeying it hereafter, and also to baptism it self in due time; yet I
judge him as very a Child as his Child, that goes about to instruct, and
baptize it so soon as it is born; yet after your own assertion, by which you
would make men believe I asserted that children of three or four years old are
capable of instruction, and consequently of baptism so young, you second it
with another more absurd, and false than the former, namely, that children of a
day old are [as] capable of it as they: Say you so Sirs? are infants of a day
old capable of Baptism, that cannot so much as be instructed in principles much
less be begotten to the true Religion? or if you say you hold not their right
to baptism from a capableness of instruction from which you plead the other,
but upon other grounds, upon what grounds? I beseech you Sirs, upon what
grounds? as you offered to show them then so show them now if you can, for none
of the Arguments in your Account can possibly prove such a thing. What Infants
of a day old? I Will say it again that you may consider it, for sure you did not
consider what you said when you said it, what children of day old? fie for
shame, Sirs had you said infants of eight days old it might have held some
proportion with that grand ground you go upon, viz. the Analogy between Baptism
and Circumcision, but this opinion does not cotton at all with that, for the
subject of Circumcision, which you all say, though falsely, is one and the same
with that of Baptism, was one of at least eight days old, and an Infant of one
day only was not a warrantable subject thereof, nor an infant of seven days
neither, though likely to die before the eighth; but as for you, though your
chief plea for your timely untimely rantizing Infants be grounded upon that
timely dispensation of Circumcision, yet, as if you had a mind to proclaim your
selves be-blinded, so that you cannot walk by Christ's Right rules, nor your own
wrong ones neither, you take the liberty to out-stand, or anticipate the eighth
day at your pleasure: hence the birth day is as warrantable with you, as the
eight, yea, in case of imminent danger of death (in which case circumcision
might not alter) it is a learned question among some Infant-sprinklers, whether
the midwife may not sprinkle it before its born, i. e. while is hangs yet
between the womb, and the world; but too soon is too soon in all conscience)
and again when it fits better with your plum-cake occasions, the tenth,
twelfth, or eight and twentyth day must be as acceptable to God as the eighth,
yea, when it seems good to the wisdom of the Church, i. e. the Clergy, it may
be deferred for no less than two or three hundred days together, witness the
old Rubrik, which says, that in old time baptism was not ministered but at two
times in the year, viz. at Easter and Whitsontide, but that custom being grown
out of use for many considerations (I know not any but the Clergies good will,
and pleasure) cannot now well be restored: Thus you ride people to and fro as
you list, and run many miles from your own rules as well as Christ's, for if
Circumcision be your Rule for the time of Baptisms administration, keep
punctually to the particular time of the eighth day, as well as to the general
time of Infancy, or else (you may tell me the eighth day is a circumstance not
to be regarded, whilst I tell you'tis such a substance that Moses was like to
be slain for overslipping it, yet) by your favor, Sirs, and by the same reason
that you take an inch, i will take an ell, yea if you can acceptably go a fingers
breadth besides the rule of Circumcision, I may go an hundred furlongs, and by
the same Authority that you delay the Dispensation beyond the eighth, to the
tenth, twelft, or the hundredth day, I may delay it (unless belief withal the
heart do engage to it before) to the ten thousandth day or more, nor can you
question me why do you thus?

Secondly, whereas for my undertaking to rectify you in your gross
misapprehension, and reduce you from the misconstruction I saw you make of my
speech (which leaves you without excuse in this rude recording) you record me
as recalling what I said, I protest against that as another of your sigments,
which you had need both to recant, and repent of: there was but one thing
recalled all that day that I know of, viz. that John Baptist spoke so soon as
he came out of the womb; that being rashly uttered by one in a Black coat was
indeed as readily recalled: as for my self what I said then, I was so far from
recalling, that i will give you the advantage of saying the same over again: hear
therefore you deaf that you may understand, bring me the children of three or
four years old not instructed only (for so the wickedst heathen may be) but
instructed to conversion, and profession of faith (not verbal only (for a
Parret may be taught to prate) but Expedias pers^ta co suum (...) picasque
doceas verba nestracanari.
real (as may seem at least) and to desire baptism In Christ's name) yea more,
bring me the Infants of three or four days old thus truly discipled, and blame
me for ever if I be not as forward to baptize them, as your selves are to
rantize them undiscipled. This is the sense I then spoke in, the Lord knows my
heart to whom I appeal ultimately to judge between us. I have spoken it thus
over again, you have now my mind more fully among you, mistake it not, but take
it dexterously and make your best on it,

Report.
Next you relate (and that most fictitiously) that I having asserted
circumcision to be a seal of the righteousness of faith to Abraham only, and
not to his posterity, and being urged to show any Scripture that did import a
change in the signification, and told that such a change must needs intimate
that the same covenant was not made with Abraham's seed, that was made with
himself, I was so foundered, that though you engaged to become Anabaptists if I
did it, yet I answered nothing that carried any sense or reason to the purpose.

Reply.
This I say is another of your your sigments: for first to let pass the
Sophistical terms you used whilst you asked how or where Circumcision ceased to
be a seal of the righteousness of faith even to Abraham's posterity? as if I had
granted that Circumcision was once a seal of the righteousness of faith even to
Abraham's posterity as well as himself, and then was changed, ceased, and left
off to be so, whereas I told you then, that though 'twas so to Abraham himself,
yet it never was so to them at all, and do also tell you now, that when a man
says of a thing that it never was so, it is but an illiterate kind of quere to
ask him again, when it ceased to be so? Secondly, confessing that I then
affirmed, and also still affirming the same, viz. that Circumcision was a seal
of the righteousness of faith to Abraham only, and not to his posterity; I
profess thirdly, before the world, appealing to your own consciences to
witness, that as it is most plain in the Scripture, so I then made a most plain
discovery of it from the Scripture, that there were other ends, uses, and
significations of Circumcision to Abraham's own person (though in some respects
there were also the same) then those for which it was dispensed to his seed,
and that notwithstanding many things, which were promised to Abraham, were
promised to all his seed together with him, yet there were somethings also
promised to Abraham in the Covenant of Circumcision, which his seed had no
promise of at all, as namely, First, That he should be the Father of all
Believers. This I am most certain I then instanced in, and according to your
then demand cleared by Scripture, even that very Scripture which was then
quoted by your selves, Romans 4. 11. and repeating the whole verse, whereof you,
for your own ends, mentioned but a part, I told you it was evident even thence
that Abraham had one pre-eminence, and privilege that none of his posterity
had ever after him, which he obtained of God by his pre-eminence in believing,
viz. the Fatherhood of the faithful; of which eminent faith of his, which was
imputed to him for righteousness, as well as of that eminent prerogative, the
Fatherhood of the faithful, which God gave him upon that great faith,
Circumcision was given him as a seal, in such a sense, as it was never given to
his seed, a Seal I said, for it was a sign only but no seal to his posterity,
to honor the greatness, not to strengthen the weakness of his faith, i. e. to
confirm him, that was so great a believer, even beyond hope, in that honorable
title, which God put upon him; therefore I told you it runs thus, viz. he
received the sign circumcision, i. e. circumcision, (which in its ordinary use
was a sign) a seal to him in this special sense, i. e. as a seal of the
righteousness of that eminent faith which he had, that he might be, i. e. to
that very end and purpose as to ratify him in that royal title, The father of
all that believe; to this purpose I then spoke, showing withal that in the
same sense in which the father is said to seal the son, John 6. 27. to be the
giver of that meat that endures to eternal life, (...) him has the father
sealed, i. e. authorized to that business, honored with that office, and as
Pharaoh honored Joseph, with the sole Dispensation of all the Corn, and
Government of his Kingdom, and as Kings under the Broad seal do seal men to,
i. e. honor them with, and settle them in great Places, Trusts and Titles,
etc. in such a sense is God in that place said to give Circumcision to Abraham,
whereby to seal him up, and settle him for ever in that glorious title, viz.
the father of all that believe; in which sense Circumcision (though a sign of
some things in common to him with his posterity) was never given to any one of
Abraham's posterity at all: this as it is clearly held forth in that place, so
was so clearly held forth to you from that place of your own naming at that
very time, that as I wondered you could be ignorant of it then, so I much more
admire, that you are not ashamed to bewray such dissembling in the recording of
it as you do, and such wretched ignorance of it still; besides, I know not
whether I instanced then in any other, but I am sure (as shy as you seem to be
of it) there were diverse more promises made, and privileges made over to
Abraham under the great Seal Circumcision, which were neither made nor given,
much less confirmed by Circumcision as a seal thereof to all his posterity,
viz. that his seed should inherit Canaan, this though it was made. and made
good to Abraham, and that seed of his to whom it was promised, yet not to the
seed of all his seed, for many of his posterity (as Ishmael, who was
circumcised, and his children by Keturah also, and their whole race) had none
of all this sealed to them by Circumcision: Again, that Christ should come out
of his loins, that in his seed all Nations should be blessed, these were made
to Abraham, and were (as the rest also) great Privileges to the honor of
which he was sealed, yet though 'twas signified to all his seed by
Circumcision, that Christ should come of him after the flesh, all of them had
not that privilege by promise that Christ should come of them after the flesh:
by all which it undeniably appears that the same Covenant of Circumcision, in
every of those respects in which Circumcision was given him as a seal of it,
was not given to all the Jews, and their children, and that forenamed place
speaks of Circumcision only in reference to Abraham's person, and in that
sense, and respect in which it was given to him only as a Seal of his faith. i.
e. that strong faith he acted, and gave glory to God by, Romans 4. 20. for which
God also gave that great glory and dignity to him, viz. the father-hood of the
faithful: All which notwithstanding, and much to the same effect that was
uttered then, to show that Circumcision had more ends, and relations to
Abraham's Person, then to the Persons of his seed; yea, and though your own
paper, which lastly I appeal to, does testify that I I multiplied words, that
is to say, spoke much about other ends of Circumcision to Abraham then to his
seed, yet you both be-lie me, and give the lie to your selves so far as to say,
I was extremely foundered, which to say, and yet to say in the very same line,
that I multiplied words about other ends of Circumcision, the very point your
selves had urged me to speak to, if it be not at once to say, and uns^y, then
verily I know not what is; for these two are contradictory to each other: but
perhaps you think to salve all with this, that being called to speak punctually
to that end, viz. whether Circumcision were a seal of the righteousness of
faith to Abraham's posterity at all or not, or if not to show it, I answered
nothing to that particular, that carried any sense or reason in it: but really
Sirs, I said no less to that very end, but rather much more then I have said a
little above, which whether it have any sense or reason in it or no, yet was it
both senseless and reasonless in you however to leave it wholly out, and you had
dealt far more ingenuously and judiciously in your own Account, and in every
rational man's also, had you set down what I answered, and so put your Reader
into a capacity of discerning, whether it were to the purpose yea or no: but
that its like you were very loath to do, least (as nothing as it was to your
purpose) it should have been more serviceable then you desire it to be to ours.
As for that engagement whereby (how wisely a fool may see) you bound your
selves to become Anabaptists, in case I made discovery of what I did abundantly
discover, I freely dis-engage you from that double performance, and shall
accept much more of your single submission to that That's the dreadful phrase
whereby you also term your selves ghostly fathers (to awe poor ignorants into
the greater observation of you and yours) express the holy spirit, else the
word (...) might be Englisht by theword spirit at all times, as well as some,
both in translations, treatises, and discourses.
ordinance, it being no matter of rejoicing to to me to see any man translated
from A-no-baptist to be an Anabaptist for that is from one extreme to another.

Report.
Next you relate p. 5. that I said I did not deny but that little children
might have the holy Ghost and these texts of Scripture, viz. Mar. 10. 14. Mat.
19. 14. Luke 18. 16, 2 Cor. 13. 5. did seem to intimate as much, but that it
could not be made appear that they had it to the making of them subjects of
baptism.

Reply.
To this which is another (...) falsity, and connterseit resemblance, I reply
thus, first that (...) children might have the holy spirit, if God please
extraordinarily to infuse it. I might then possibly not deny, nor dare I yet
deny but that possibly they may, but it is more then God has manifested if they
have, to either us, or you: nor will this grant either prove the propriety of
your Position, who down-rightly declare they have it, or warrant your baptizing
them thereupon, so long as still it is unapparent to you that they have it: for
first, a posse ad esse non valet consequentia; it follows not because it may
be, therefore it is: yet such Country-clearing of things is seen now and then
among you Country Clergymen, that if from may-be to must-be, may not pass for
good reason, there must be no more given at all; witness the yery last Argument
used by the first opponent at this Ashsord Disputation, whereby to prove
infants to have the spirit, who having urged the example of John Baptist,
(whose example is also hinted in your Review p. 16. of your Pamphlet) just
before to this effect. viz. John had the holy spirit from the womb, therefore
children have it, and being answered to that thus, viz. Ex puris negativis, et
particularibus nihil sequitur universale, claps in this consequence to close up
his discourse with, viz. It does not appear to you that children have not the
spirit (as much as to say they may for ought you know have the holy spirit)
therefore they have it. To whom 'twas replied, that it would not follow that I
was at Canterbury such a day, because it did not appear to him that I was not:
and this as I remember (though your Account does very freely forget all this,
but I hope you will remember to be ashamed on it) was the very period of that
man's Disputation with me, saving what he added after in his recapitulatory
moderation, and after that in other emergent conferences with me and others, to
whose non-sequiturs, as I have in faithfulness set down what I returned then,
so (pace vestra) I say thus much more now, viz. that if I should go about to
prove from the Possibility of things to be so or so, or from their
nonappearance to be not so, though not yet appearing to be so, that therefore
they are so, viz. more worlds then one, or another world of men in the moon,
or, as he from the particular case of John Baptist to other infants, so I
should syllogize from the particular and extraordinary case of Balaams Ass to
other creatures of that kind, viz. Balaams Ass, by a special power of God upon
him, did speak and reprove the mad^ess of the Prophet, therefore very Asses can
speak plain enough to reprove the madness of the Priests, though I have learned
Christ better then to record him as such a one for the like deduction, yet I
know who have so well learned the Featlaean language, that in their Account I
should have been an Ass for my labor. Secondly, and this I told you then too,
but your Account had no mind to mention what makes against you, Tum d^mum i. e.
proprie et quoad nos dicuntur res fieri cum incipiunt patefieri, then things as
to us are when they appear and not before, and to talk de non entibus, et non
apparentibus, is one as frivolous as the other: yet such lazy learning and
lowzy logic is at Rome with the infatuated Pope, and such of his Creatures, as
trouble themselves so much about Tyth, that they have no time to study Truth,
nor understand either sense or reason, that whilst wise men indeed, whose
wisdom is not as theirs is already turned into foolishnese, do argue from the
Appearings of things to be to their being; from the evidence that they are to
their existence, they magisterially impose things to be received as truth,
because Ipse Dixit, and both assert them to be, and make men believe they
appear plain enough so to be, when their say so shows them, though no
inquisitive sincere self-denying Christian can in the word find either how or
where: of but a very little better stamp is your way of arguing here, who being
housed by custom under a cloudy confidence that insants have the holy spirit,
will needs have it appear whether it does or no: but for my part it appears not
yet to me; yea, I reply Secondly; to this part of your Report, that I did
indeed then say as you have here truly related, that it could not be made
appear that Infants have the holy spirit to the making of them subjects of
baptism; yea, I testify the same still that it cannot, notwithstanding all
your undertakings, which of what little force they are to such a purpose I
shall try more at large when I handle your Account over again, not as an
Account, but as your Argumentation for Infants having the holy spirit, and so
right to baptism. Nevertheless, Thirdly, that I acknowledged any such thing as
this in the least, that the Scriptures above named, did seem so much as to
intimate such a matter as that infants might have the holy spirit, as it had
been most contradictory to that which here you say I said immediately after it,
and is most contrary to my Judgment to this present, so I deny it, disclaim
it, and testify again it, as another of your abominable abuses of your selves,
my self and the world, into which you have feigned forth this Account, and as
an opinion that neither then, or ever since, nor everbefore (since I found the
way of truth) has had the least entertainment within my bosom. And so I pass
on to your other juggles, among which Nigro Carbone notandum est, this would
not be let slip without a Selah in that some few lines below this you relate
thus.

Report.
That my Answer was that in Scripture children were indefinitely taken, but
concerning this or that particular child no proof could be made.

Reply.
Which thing I confess I said, yet take notice, I must, how you let slip (your
memories being wilfully weak, as I find them very often to be) something more
of my then speech, which had you not declined to set down, would have showed a
little more plainly, and yet its pretty plain as it is, but hardly quite so plain
as the nose on a man's face, how you strike quite besides the iron, stear to a
wrong point, and in your following undertaking upon that my Answer, stickle
clearly to another purpose then that proposed by me, for my speech was not
concernng this or that particular child only, but of this or that particular
child above another, viz. proof could not be made of this child in its infancy,
suppose a believers, more than of a Heathens, if one of these, and one of those
be looked on together; whereupon also I then added, but you have absented it in
your Account, that if two Infants, viz. a believers, and an unbelievers, as yet
unknown which is which, should be presented to you whereof but one secundum to,
(o Sacerdos) may be baptized, It would put you very shrewdly to it to disce^ of
your selves which of the two is the believers Infant, by any more manifestation
of the spirit in it than in the other; yea I now tell you over again, that such
a presentment would fumble, and puzzle both the Priest and his whole Parish, to
find the Spirit more in one infant then in all; but you have omitted all this
least it should do you too much right, and too much lay open the rottenness of
your Principles, and yet you have set down enough to show to any clear
capacity how you syllogiz'd besides the business I engaged you in my speech to
speak to, as well as merely bawbled in the very business you found your selves,
yea how odly did you shuffle over the thing you undertook to make Appear,
showing not an inch more of ground to prove it in one or two or three little
Infants, then your own Argument affords to prove that it is in all Infants in the
world? but this being more proper to be discovered when I meddle with your
Argument, therefore I shall let it pass in this place, where my drift is only
to take notice how you have either counterfeited, or curtailed most of that you
pretend truly to Account for.

Report.
Another, and that no small abuse both of me, and your Reader too, is a little
further onward in your Account, page 6. where after your relating of your
selves asking, and of me answering you to three questions thus, viz.

1. Quest. how those men and women whom I had baptized did make it appear that
they had faith, and the holy spirit?

Resp. By their profession.

2. Quest. Whether their Profession, since it is possible mightly, could make
it appear infallibly.

Resp. No.

3. Quest. What judgment then, I could pass upon them to be the subjects of
baptism, as I called them, whether any other than that of Charity.

Resp. That of Charity.

At last you leave me in the lurch, and bringing in your selves replying thus,
viz. that you would have me pass the same judgment upon these little Infants
of whom in general the Scripture has given so good a report, and against whom
in partilar no exception can be raised, and the controversy between us was at
an end. You shut me out from any share with you, at the end of this discourse,
saying, (but not at all showing what I answered) that to this I answered
nothing in the least measure satisfactory, as the most judicious Auditors,
being afterward inquired of, did affirm.

Reply.
You speak right as to my answer to the three questions, for so I then replied
as you say; and have somewhat more to reply to those questions, when I shall
consider them over again, as your Argumentative Conference, for now I deal with
them only as Accountative: but Sirs, what a piece of Legerdemain is here, in
that you record, that my answer to your last reply was not in the least measure
satisfactorie, in the judgment of the most judicious Auditors, with whom it
seems you consulted whether it were so or no, and yet show not so much as a
tittle of it? you intimate sufficiently to our understandings, first, that
there was an answer given, secondly, that you, who pretend to nothing more in
your book then to give A true Account of what was argued and answered, were so
well acquainted with that Answer, that you could have told what it was if you
would, else how could you, and they, of whom you inquired, so sentence and
censure it as not satisfactorie, unless you are, as I believe you are not,
those natural bruit beasts Jude speaks of that speak evil of that they know
not? yet you give us not in the least measure to know, no not so much as the
sum of what it was. Now as for my self, I must profess in the sight of the Lord
I do not well remember my self, nor can I yet clearly recall it to mind what
Answer I then gave to that passage, which if I did, I durst not but express it
here, were it weak or strong, but because I do not, I therefore dare not meddle
so much as to mention any, being resolved to repeat no more of either yours or
mine, then my memory assures me of the truth of: however I shall give answer
to it anon, when I come to note it under a second notion: but as for your
selves, who mind it so well that you pronounce it weak, I may well charge and
challenge you implicit Accountants to give Account more expressly what it was
that men may judge of it together with you, or else to acknowledge your selves,
to be evil speakers of what you know not, or else witting concealers of what
you both know, and pretend to be revealers and True Accountants of to all men;
or else that you here drive on your old design, which is to cry out Heresy,
Schism, Error, Weakness, Unsatisfactoriness, etc. leaving men without the least
leave, liberty, opportunity, or advantage of trying whether things are yea or
nay, as you call them; or else that you would fain have men to be still stunned
into that wonted blind belief of what you say at all adventures, or else that
you cause men what in you lies to be unjust in determining of matters before
they hear them, for Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera aequum licet
statuerit haud aequus fuerit, He that judges a matter before he hears it, it is
folly and shame unto him, Pro. 18. 13. or else that you have shamed your
selves, injured me, mocked and mop'd all men, in giving an Account to them of
things which yet you refuse to give an Account of; or else lastly, that you
have dealt, and I appeal to every ingenuous rational man whether you have not
so done indeed, most unreasonably, most perfidiously, m^st simulatorily, as
else where, and well-nigh every where else you do, pretending plainly in your
Preface, that you have rendered my Answers to my best advantage, whilst you both
falsify them for the most part where you mention them, and also mention the
major part of them not at all,

Report.
Another and that a most manifest misrepresentatoin of things in this your true
Account is this, in that immediately after your third main Argument, for all
the rest are but appendicular to the first, drawn from the hopelesness of the
salvation of Infants if their baptism be denied, I say immediately after that,
without the least mention of any more, or hinting so much as in the (...) that
there was any more, as if you would make all men know by these presents, that
there was no more, you report thus, that there was no other Answer given by me
to that Argument, nor yet to be expected, whereupon then one of the Ministers,
being desired by the rest* to put an end to the Disputation, spoke as
follows; and so after the Relation of a certain recapitulation of the
Arguments that had been urged, and the scribbling ore of something more in a
something more methodicall manner, and quaint composure then it was then spoken
in, to which also, as it is a further pleading of Infants baptism i will speak
more anon, in short you shut up the business, and record the Disputation with me
as then ended.

Reply.
But Sirs, will this be taken for A true Account think you, or A true
Counterfeit rather, by wise men that were there present, when they shall see
how you huddle over the matter in such have, as to leave no less then half of
it behind you? what dispatching and patching up of things to an end you make,
before your heads are half heated in the handling of them; for verily as Hanun
shamefully entreated David's servants shaving off the one half of their beards,
cutting off their clothes in the midst, and sending them away, 2 Samuel 10. 4. so
have you dealt by the Disputation, cutting off the business by the buttocks,
and so sending it out naked into the wide world: your [ THEN] Sirs is a word
out of joint: 'twas not [then] but a pretty while after [then] before the
Disputation came to this full point, which you have already brought us too in
your Account, after which you say there was no other Answer given by me, nor to
be expected, for as I often offered fuller Answer to all you urged in one
entire Discourse, but that 'twas an unseasonable motion in your Account p. 10.
and in no wise so pleasing to your Priestly patience, as 'twas to the peoples,
to expect so long as to hear it, so there was much more then this uttered by
some of your selves, though you give us not so much as the sum of it in this
your sum: Here Is but one particular man's influence toward the maintenance of
Infant Baptism inserted here in your Account, viz. only Mr. Willcocks; thi^
was he, who when had been the prime pleader in your cause, was afterward (and
good reason too, for he was the fittest for your turn, though not the truths)
very gravely desired by you (how justly judge you) to be judge in it, and to
determine his own Disputation, and be the main moderator of what came out of
his own mouth, and mine too; a thing never heard of in Accademicall
Disputations, the Rules of which you were so stiff to have us steer by, this
was he, who (if he were (as not I but Report says he was) your special Penman
in the Account, as he was your special spoks-man at the Disputation) se^s so
light it seems by every man's else as to set down no man's Arguments, but his
own: it is like they were not very much to the matter, and indeed they were not,
nor his neither, though his own are expressed for the most material: but better
or worse there were more Arguments urged then these, one by a Scotchman, who
then lived at Kenington, what he is called I know not, so well as whether, for
he had a call to Dover since that, from whence whether he is now called I know
not: he laid down his Argument in this form, viz. to whom the Covenant belongs
to them the initiall seal of it belongs, but the Covenant belongs to infants,
etc. but seeing me startle at his Anti-scripturall term, of Initial seal, by
which he denoted baptism, whether he urged more, or what more he urged I
remember not well, but I Am sure he was at Ne plus ultra in that, for I durst
not admit of that improper term, which made his Syllogism Sophistical, and his
Disputation ex falso suppositis, for he took it for granted by all men, that
baptism (as he called it) is an initiall seal, about which yet sub judice lis
est, it being doubted by many whether baptism be a seal at all, and denied by
some, of whom I profess my self one so opinion'd, who in its due place shall (I
doubt not) give good account on it: there was likewise another Argument urged by
Mr. Vahan, who from Acts 2. would have drawn the right of baptism to believers
infants, and being asked whether those Peter then spoke to were believers or
unbelievers when he spoke to them, and replying that they were believers, heard
the contrary both cleared by my self, and confessed by his Partner Mr. Prigg,
my quondam friend unless I became his enemy that day because I told him the
truth) who convening with me in that, though not in the true Consequence of it,
did however so contradict Mr. Vahan, that he came in to his help ore the
shoulders, There were also two more Arguments (besides these in the Account)
urged by Mr. Willcock, viz. one ex particulari, the other ex negativo (as I
took occasion to give a hint thereof above) which he, or whoever was the
p^n-man of these passages was (it seems) as little willing to own, as his own
name, or his handy work it self: sundry more Arguings there were, and some
Arglings also made by some who would have now and then a snatch and away, which
me thinks you might have given a transient glance at, at least in A true
Account, for your utter silence concerning which, you might justly be blamed,
yet I blame you not much, when I consider how sensible you might easily be of
liableness to more blame for the matters themselves, had you shown them (such
untempered mortar were they) then can well be conjectured by you, you are now
under, for letting them alone altogether.

Report.
Another flat falsification and abuse, of me and the world is this: you
misreport me, and that in two places, viz. at the bottom of both your sixth and
seventh pages, which makes you doubly guilty of that single fiction, as having
confessed that circumcision was the seal of the Gospel Covenant, and that
Ishmael who was that carnal seed of Abraham only because born in Abraham's
house had right to it and received it.

Reply.
That this is A true Account of what you then said I said, I dare not deny, but
do deny it to be A true Account of what I said: whether you understood, or
understood not my words I know not, but I uttered not a word to such a purpose;
and were you not men minded to mis-understand, when to und^rstand seems never
so little to make against you, I make no doubt but to make your own true
Account make you eat some of that you have here uttered: that Ishmael, who was
Abraham's carnal seed, even merely because born in Abraham's house had right to
Circumcision, and received it, as every male so born also did, I confess I
confessed, but denied all along that Circumcision was a seal (as to Ishmael) of
the Gospel Covenant, or that he had it under such a notion as a Seal at all; I
said it was a Seal to none save to Abraham, and that even to him 'twas a Seal
of not any thing at all save of the righteousness of the faith he had, which
words (in the sense I then expounded them) are not meant of the
Gospel Covenant, but of that particular personal Covenant God made with him
concerning his father-hood of the faithful, a peculiar privildege which God
gave to him, and to none in all the world besides him; as for Ishmael, yea, and
Isaac himself they neither of them had it in this sense, as neither had they
that Covenant, or promise of a father-hood which it was a Seal of; though even
Ishmael himself, and the lowest males in Abraham's house were all to be
circumcised upon this account only, if if there had been no other, as he was
commanded to circumcise all his males. As to a fuller account of my grounds for
this opinion, I shall suspend it till I take my other Account of these passages
in you^s, and take notice only here first of your sacred Sophistication, in
giving that out for granted which was so abundantly denied, Secondly, that
close contradiction you here give, not only to the truth but your selves also,
for you give out in the next page but one before, that I denied Circumcision to
be a seal of the Righteousness of faith, (which in your own sense is as much as
of the Gospel Covenant) to any of Abraham's posterity, and that I multiplied
words in proof of the contrary, and yet here in relation to that very Relation
of your own, in the weak wilfulness of your memories, you give out that I had
confessed Circumcision to be (even to Ishmael) the seal of the Gospel Covenant,
that is, with you still, of the righteousness of faith; thus for your own ends
fathering your own false-tenet upon me, ye have not lost all by the shift, for
you have fastn'd the fault of forgery upon your selves; and this puts me in
mind of another of your mis-reports, which because it is so suitable to this i will
give you some little sense of it here, though I find it far off hence in your
Review p. 13. l. 1. 2. where looking, or rather lacking over all your arguments
again, as somewhat rude and deformed in their first delivery, and among the
rest, this from Circumcision of infants to their baptism, you positively affirm
thus, that the Adversaries confess baptism to be the seal of the
Gospel Covenant; whereas, if by Adversaries you mean your friend my self, among
others, besides what else shall elsewhere be produced in proof of my dissent
from you in this point, your selves can bear me witness, or (if you will not) a
thousand others will, that on the very day of Disputation, when the Clergyman
of Kenington styled baptism an initial seal, I denied it to be a seal at all,
and am sure it would have found you all more work, then you are aware of, to
have made good that un-gospel like expression of it, though I grant it to be a
sign of the Gospel Covenant.

Report.
Another as flat a falsi^y as ever fell from the mouths or pens of men, who
pretend to truth, is that clause which lies in the last line of the seventh
page, and first line of the eighth, wherein consider it with the words before;
you say I confessed that the spiritual seed of Abraham and their children, had
under the Gospel as good right to the seal thereof, which is baptism, as
Ishmael who was that carnal seed of Abraham, had right to the seal of the
Gospel Covenant, Circumcision.

Reply.
Whereas, besides my constant denial of Circumcision to be a seal to any but
Abraham (as I said immediately above, and as your selves testify of me) and
besides my denial of baptism to be a seal at all, I either did deny the
children of the spiritual seed, i. e. of believers to have right to baptism, or
else to what purpose did you oppose me? for this was the very question between
us; which as you affirmed so I from the beginning to the end of the Disputation
all along most inalterably denied. Indeed I confessed ore and ore again, that
Abraham's spiritual feed, i. e. believers have right to baptism, but that the
natural seed of this spiritual seed of Abraham, are Abraham's spiritual seed (as
so born) or that believers children (qua tales) are semen fidei, as well as
their parents, is a most silly saying of your own, page 14. but that which all
the day long I most strenuously stood against, much more that they were the
subject of baptism, yet you say here in the Preter-plu-perfect tense, that I
had confessed their right to baptism, as good as Ishmaels to Circumcis^n, which
me thinks (if I had done so) would have been expressed some where or other in the
foregoing part of your true Account, or else it is not so true as't would be
taken for; but since it is not to be found that I confessed such a thing in all
your Relation of the most material things that past, among which this (had it
been confessed as you here say) had been the most material of all, for it had
been the full giving you the cause, and saving you the labor of more Disputing)
we will take it for granted (if you please) rather then charge your true Relation
of the most material things, as not relating the most material of all, that
this your Testimony of my confession of this matter, is most prodigiously false
and abusive: Sirs, I wonder you are not ashamed so palpably to speak contrary
to what you have here recorded: I know not well what you mean by so many foul
mis-reports, unless as a certain great Benefactor to the Romish religion,
perceiving it unable to stand by the Scriptures, bestowed a Legend of lies
toward its support, which is called Legenda aurea, so you supposing your
Infant Baptism incapable to be maintained any longer by principles of truth and
reason, have thereupon been so bountiful to the cause, as to give in this
golden-leaden-legend.

Another sorry tale, and strange story you tell is not of me, but of one of my
side (as you are pleased to speak) and this (me thinks) if I, be not mistaken,
with a kind of Emphasis of the Featlean strain, as if it were some presumption
for a Russet Rabby, or secular Artizan to climb so high, and slutter, and file
so near the pulpits, and pompous Belconies of the Priests, and as if he were a
man Sacerdotalis ambitionis, loving the uppermost Room, and chief place in the
Synagogue, more to be taken notice of himself, then that the truth should be
taken notice of by the people, in which things if you muse as you use, yet know
Sirs that we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God, of whom you say
thus.

Report.
That having placed himself on the highest of the pulpit stairs, to be seen of
all and craved the liberty granted by the propositions to ask questions, and
receive satisfaction, he professed himself a stranger, and to come thither by
accident, though both afterward appeared contrary.

Reply.
Though both will yet appear to be contrary to what you would have them appear
to be if you could tell how, viz. a couple of untruths, for verily he was a
stranger, and so I then told Mr. Prigg, who asked me of him, that had not been
long in the Country, and was unknown both by face and name, not to my self and
some others, yet however to most of that Auditory, in which I believe not one
of many could say who, or whence he was; as to his coming thither by accident,
so he did too, i. e. unappointed and unsent for, in which sense I Am sure some
of you came not by accident, but as specially bespoke in the name of a great
Patron of your Party, both to be there, and undertake the business, and
appointed, if not primarily, yet secondarily, or upon their refusal, for whom
some too confidently undertook they should undertake it, who yet say of your
selves page 3. you were not the men appointed to undertake it; if by accident
you mean thus, as well you may, for a man may come by accident enough to a
place though he does not drop out oth' clouds, or slide down thither from the
moon, that worthy friend and beloved Brother, under which name I the rather own
him here, because I had a letter from a prime one of your Party that speaks
somewhat scoffingly of that compellaton, and besides though with Dr. Featly,
and his faction he is one of the Clergy of Laics, and an Apron Levite, yet as
his name is Temple-man, so I take him to be a better Churchman then many a
one, who for not troubling his people with too much truth goes under the
Denomination of a good one; this man I dare say as far as he said he came by
accident so far he came by accident as he said, and this proves your hearsay,
for its like so you had what you here say, to be Heresy if an erring from the
truth may, as I know not why not, be so styled in civil matters, as well as
spiritual: And this conducts me to another figment wherein you father as false
a thing upon my self, as any of those you fe^ned of me before, which is at the
bottom of that discourse, which you record as passing between your selves and
him, concerning justification of Dying infants, whether it be by faith or
without it, in which discourse, though the folly of your opinion in that point,
and truth of his, which is also mine, namely, that dying Infants are justified
without faith, I shall show in due time and place, yet I cannot but take notice
by the war, before I speak of that which more concerns my self, of some
Legerdemain and illogicall dealings of yours with him.

Report.
Reporting him asserting thus, viz that there may be justification which is not
by faith, you report your selves replying thus, page 9, that it is the grossest
piece of Popery to hold ^ustification by works, and not by faith only, and the
greatest controversy between them and Protestants.

Reply.
What shameful Sophistry ^ave you shown here in foisting in a fool^sh phrase
and term that was neither used, nor touched on by him in any of his foregoing
speeches, nor yet in that which your reply most immediately relates to, viz.
Justification by works; whereas you know well enough even as well as he, and I,
and the rest that were there (for your wits could not be so far gone a
wool-gathering as to need Hellebor here) that he neither spoke nor meant of
Justification by works, whether without faith or with it, but of the
Justification of Infants without either faith or works, neither of which, as
your selves confess, they are in infancy capable to act, although you say, but
if a man will not believe you he may choose for there is neither Scripture, sense,
nor reason for it, they have the habit; this, I say again, you know to be the
sense of such as you call Anabaptists, witness your selves in two places, viz.
p. 8. where you give account of our opinion thus, viz, That way of the
presentment of the righteousness of Christ without faith is a figment of the
Anabaptists, also p. 15. thus, the adversaries are put to theirshifts to find
out a new way for the salvation of infants dying in their minority viz. the
presentment of the satisfaction of Christ without faith: in both which places
you give the world to understand, that you know our opinion to be that infants
are justified by neither works, nor faith, which is a work, but, if at all, by
that which your selves hold is the material cause of the justification of men
that act faith, and of whom, they being capable to act faith, it is required as
isntrumental, viz. the righteousness of Christ: secondly, you know that this
opinion is farther off, and more flatly contradictory to that Popery, that
holds Justification by works then yours can possibly be found to be, for the
very Jesuits may have some color for saying that you say the same with them
whilst their Tenet is justification by works, yours by faith, which say they,
and truly too, is a work, theirs by faith, and works concurrent, yours by
faith that has works concomitant, and necessarily consequent thereunto:
between which two doctrines, (neither of which need be so much condemned each
by other (for ought I find) as they are (provided that all merit on our part be
cashiered (for there Rome errs besides us all) for you will find them both true
in the end, viz. that both are instrumentally subservient, and not either of
them alone to the justification of (not Infants but) men, and women of whom
both as well as one are required in order unto life) be^ween which two, I say,
there is not so vast a difference as you deem there is, much less so great as is
between these, viz. Justification by works and faith both, which is that of the
Papists, and Justification without either faith or works, which is that of
ours, when we speak of justification with reference to infants only, for
between these there is not the least color of coincidence, yet this was that
justification that Inquirer spoke of, viz. of Infants by Christ without faith,
or any other work either, which you know is no part of Popery, yet first you
reply besides the business, which he spoke to, and define, it gross Popery to
hold justification by works, as if he had held it, yea secondly which is worse,
and down-rightly injurious, you are not ashamed to tell-tale him to the world
in the words below that he fell into this popery, and that for asserting of a
Justification of Infants, so far as they need any, neither by faith nor works,
but Christ without either, so much as isntrumental on their part, then which
you see nothing more fully contradicts it: if ye were blind indeed you had not
fined so much in this, but sure you cannot but see how you shuffle, therefore
without repentance your sin remains.

Another thing I take notice of by the way as I travel toward that fiction I
mention above, as referring to my self, is this.

Report.
That when the quere was put to you by the inquirer (as you call him) what need
infants have of being justified at all since they have no original sin (which
whether it were put for satisfaction in the thing, or merely to hear how
readily you would resolve it I cannot say) you bring in one of the Ministers in
the name of the rest crying out, as before of Popery, so now of Pelagianism,
and that he had not heard so much Heresy in so few words, that the inquirer
should take heed how he vented himself in public hereafter, for it became him
to suspect himself least God had given him over to the Spirit of error, and to
another that out of the body of the Congregation replied, That that way which
you the Ministers called Heresy so wershipt they God: you go on still in the
old tone thus, that you were sorry to hear him profess himself a Papist and a
Pelagian in saying he worshipped God that way, and that you appealed to me,
praying me to declare my mind concerning th^se things, whether they were
Heresy or no, which you charged the inquirer with.

Reply.
But not a word all this while was uttered either to prove the things to be as
you call them, or toward the satisfaction of the Auditory, or Inquirer himself
in the question: Sirs, is not this the clutter you commonly keep? is not this
the Clergies constant custom of confuting, and their wonted way of
withholding men from all audience of what ever comes cross to your conceits
when on the sudden you have not what to say against it, viz. to break out into
hydeous outcries of Heresy, Schism, a Spirit of Error, an Anabaptist, an
Arminian, an Antinomian, a Papist, a Jesuit, Popery, Pelagianism, Socianism,
Arminianism, and such like? when happily not five of fifty among you ever read
Pelagius, Fanstus Socinus, or Arminius so as to know what they hold, and why,
any more then by tradition one from another: mistake me not, for I am now
neither justifying, nor condemning these men, with whom, they being dead, I
have no great matter to do, nor you neither, but that you love to find your
selves more business then you need, for my part my business lies mainly in the
Word, which is the Rule, and being only attended to may (for ought I know)
sooner set us to rights then either Austin, or Pelagius, the Remonstrants, or
Arminius: for Regula est mensura sui et obliqui, but I here take notice of, and
take occasion to condem^ the Popish practice of most Priests in Damning down
for heresy in gross what they neither disprove, nor prove to be Heresy when
called to it; by their own calling it so before the people.

Report.
You relate upon your praying me to declare my mind concerning those things,
whither they were Heresy or no, which you the Ministers charged the inquirer
with, that I said I knew that what ere he said, yet he did not hold those
things, and that your reply was that the inquirer was a stranger, and therefore
you wondered his mind should be so well known to me, that whatever his opinion
was, the question being whether his saying that one may be justified without
faith, and that children are not born in original sin were heresy or no? you
desired me to answer positively to that but received no Answer.

Reply.
As to this Politic piece of your report, wherein I perceive how fallaciously
you represent me as tendering the inquirer as to my knowledge, speaking
contrary to his own mind, I have many things to say, and it matters not much
which I hebegin with first. First, me thinks I see (as you have set things
down, a certain Sophism of Amphiboly ly lurking iustar anguis in herba, in
these words [Those things] as you express them the second time in this parcel;
by reason of which if they be not understood by the Reader in a right sense, I
am set forth by you as guilty of a double crime, from censure of which I see a
call to clear my self, and my friend, whom you strive to stain together with in
that case, that truth may suffer damage by us in nothing: for if by [those
things] be meant in that second place those two opinions of Justification of
infants without faith, and their not having original sin, which were indeed the
things that he said, then I am falsely reported (not to say fowly belied) by you
in that passage, wherein you relate me saying thus, viz. that I knew that,
whatsoever the inquirer had said yet he did not hold those things, and am made
also to speak falsely against my conscience (as my conscience tells me not that
I did in all that day) for verily, as great a stranger as that inquirer was to
your selves, and the major part then present, yet he was not such a stranger
(saving all your wonder) to my self, but that his mind was so well known to me
in that, that I knew he held those things, viz. that infants have all the
justification they have need of without faith, and have no original sin, for I
hold them my self, in what sense, since you ask me, you shall see by and by,
and if I should have said thus, viz. that I knew, what e're he said, yet he did
not hold those things, I should have been both a belyar of that my friend, and
also as very a ^yar as your selves, Sirs, would herein fain make me seem to be,
but I was both well a ware what he held, and confident that he did not say
those things, and not hold them; But if by those things in that place be
understood not those two opinions, but those things which the Minister charged
the Inquirer with, viz. Heresy, Popery, the tenet of justification of Infants
by works, which were those things the Ministers so cried out upon him for, in
which sense it is in my speech to be understood, then it is no other then the
plain truth, which I spoke, and to give you all the advantage that is possible
to have by them, I here say it again, that I knew that whatsoever was then said
by that our brother, yet he held not those things, i. e. that Heresy and
Popery you then falsely accused him of.

And now since you complain that you received no answer when you desired me to
answer positively to that question whether Infants are justified without faith,
and have any origin^ll sin, yea or no, and whether the things, as we hold them
in contradistinction to your selves, be heresy yea or no, as you call them; I
must co^plain of your selves as the sole persons then in fault that you
received not as full an answer as you desired, for I appeal not only to the
whole people but to the ^ame page of your own p^pers also, wherein, in the very
next line but one or two below this, in which you charge me, with the fault of
giving you no answer, your own selves are witnesses to me that I offered to
answer you to all exceptions you had against us in an Entire Exercise, which if
you had heard, and not liked you should have had liberty enough to have
replied to as long as you pleased, but your selves only opposed it with all
your might: but to wave any further recrimination as concerning that at
present, and that you may have no occasion in future to feig^, as if we feared
to answer you so positively whether those things, viz. Infants Justification
without faith, and their freedom from that, which, not so much in Scripture
language, as by an Epithet of men's own coining is called original sin, be
heresy or no, I answer no: as to the first though, Justification of Infants by
works is the Heresy of a Romish Clergy, whether by works we mean the work of
faith Ioh. 6. 29. or any other, yet Justification of Infants without that work
of faith or any other work, either of their parents or their ow^, is the truth
as it is in Jesus, and such sound Doctrine as, notwithstanding your outcries of
gross popery, and I know not what upon it, you will never with right reason
refute while you breath: as for the other of those things, viz. infants not
having original sin, two questions may be asked concerning this, viz. whether
they have it? secondly, whether they ever had it if you ask whether they ever
had any? I answer, that, as to hold dying infants to be damned unless they
believe, which is your doctrine, is as to the poor little ones at least that
cannot be lieve somewhat too damnable a Heresy, so to say that inf^nts never
had the sin of Adam so much as imputed to them (how far forth it may possibly
be to a person, in whom yet is no inherent corruption, is seen in Christ, who
had the imputation of sin to him though none in him) is for ought I have ever
found, yet to the contrary not a truth: but if your quere be whether infants
have any guilt as from Adams sin abiding on them after birth? I reply, that as
in order of nature Infants must stand guilty by the first Adams sin, before
they can be said to be justified by the righteousness of the second, so in
order of time I believe them universally to be no sooner guilty, as from Adam,
then cleared by Christ, which Tenet, he that tryes it, will find it (I persuade
my self) so far from meriting to be cried out on for Heresy, (as it is at
random by the Clergy) that it rather comes as nigh to truth, as 4 pence to a
groat: but such a Bugbear makes the Priest, of what ere suits not with his
wonted imagination, that almost all is damnable that differs from him, and what
ere he meets out of the Kings highway, or sees Sectarizing from the common
Rode of his own Cloudy conception, and Clericall, Cassicall, Convocationall,
Canonical constitution, he draws at it presently, as a thief that comes to Rob
him, commits it to prison, and condemns it all to be hanged for Heresy before
he hears it.

Report.
You relate that after that none did propound any more questions.

Reply.
As if all men had been so astonished at your understanding and answers, as
they were at Christ's, that none durst open their mouths before you any more
that day; yet some would with the help of Christ have ventured to have told the
truth in your presence, but (to your praise be it spoken) as you speak below of
your selves, you would not let them.

Report.
So (say you) the Congregations was again dismissed.

Reply.
An argument of your itching after an end, and being well nigh betw^led to be
gone, if the people had not been more forward to quere after truth, then the
Priest was willing to Answer, for all his liberty granted in the seventh
Article, and his pretended forwardness to resolve page 27. where dissuading men
from going to seducers, you advise them (as from God) to ask the Priest: and if
others had not been more free to both, then the Preachers were either to Preach
or hear.

As for what follows, it is not so much a model of mis-reports, and
mis-representations (as thus far of your Account is, for the most part) as of
true reports and representations of some few more of the Ministers
mis-apprehensions, mis-affections and mis-actions, under a color of acting for
the truth.

Report.
You say that your Respondent hindered their departure by making an unseasonable
motion, viz. that they would hear him preach.

Reply.
Emphatically even to a scoff, that they would hear him preach, alias Sirs,
give Account in an entire discourse, and this too after his offer to hear any
of you first if you would, but you would not, of what he held, and why; which
was the very business he professed to come thither for, more then to dispute,
alias to show upon what grounds he invaded the practice of the Church of
England, Scotland, Rome, etc. in her infant sprinkling, which say you (in
words) in the fifth Article he ought to have done, but here in your deeds and
denial of it, that he ought not: Do you think that all (save such as have eyes
and see not) discern not your dawbing, your double-dealing, and your Egypt-like
requiring men to make brick allowing no straw, delaring that it is our Duty to
show our grounds, yet prohibiting our discharge of it, pressing people to prove
all things, yet not abiding they should hear all things, te^ing your Respondent
that in reason he should have been opponent, yet yielding him no opportunity on
that day to urge so much as one argument, though he offere'd it, much less
yielding to be responsible to him on the next; magnifying preaching as much as
any, yet withstanding it more then all, and making it an unseasonable motion
almost at any time, (save when time comes by course) to make mention of it; as
if any time were unseasonable for that which is strictly to be attended at all
times by Christ's Ministers, both in season, and out of season also 2 Timothy 4. 1,
2.

Report.
This required some time to debate.

Reply.
As well it might, being a matter of weighty concernment on both hands, viz. of
consequence too advantageous to truth, as well as dangerous to your falsehoods;
besides, the more time was taken up in debating against it, so much the less
time, if it fortuned to be cast that way, that it must be done, would be left
to do it in.

Report.
The Ministers opposing it.

Reply.
And lying in the manger, having no mind to hear themselves, nor yet that those
should who had a mind to it, having the key of knowledge, the keys and power of
that place, yet neither abiding there, nor abiding that others should abide
there to so precious a purpose; which is so much to their commendation, that
men must needs see them to be not like Christ's Ministers, for if they had, they
would have rejoiced in Christ's being preached, whether in pretense, or in
truth, of envy or good will, well knowing all should have tended to the
furtherance of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18

Ob. And if they object that preaching of error will hinder it.

Ans. I say that publishing whether of error or truth, gives that advantage of
t^ying all things, which as it is that duty men cannot do, unless they hear
all, so that which they might not do by any means in ages above, when the
Arch-Hereticks the Pope, and the Priesthood stopped the mouths of all Heretics,
save their own: besides, it puts people into a fairer capacity of right carriage
toward all things, viz. if they appear truth (though cried out on as error) of
embracing them, if error indeed (as much of the Priestly doctrine is under a
name of truth) of declining it, and all this upon none of that implicit, but
that explicit faith, which only becomes him that will be a Christian, not in
name only, but in very deed: and all this the Ministers know as well as I,
page 24. affirming preaching to be a better way to oppose the approach of
Heresies, then that of disputing; whereupon, though they stir up one another
to oppose in preaching the growth, and propagation of what they call
Anabaptism, to prevent peoples departure to the truth, yet are they (and I
cannot blame them, they knowing no better way, and seeing how fast their old
friends fall from them, by the late light that is risen up from under their
dark night of traditions) as careful to keep all from their pulpits, save such
as sing to the same tune with themselves, though we never speak, but we give
them leave, which is more then they give us in the like case, to take their
exceptions.

Report.
Saying, that the end of their meeting was to dispute.

Reply.
Which if it were, yet the foolishness of preaching might possibly have done
the Disputer more good then his Dispute; besides, the end of my coming was to
give Account of the way you call Heresy wherein we worship, and why I call
yours Heresy, and that truth: and since I freely granted the Ministers their
end, 'twas but unreasonable in them (their own turn being once served) to
frustrate mine.

Report.
That the Disputation was now determined.

Reply.
By its own opp^nent, and therefore that exercise being (as fully as foully)
ended 'twas (I told you) the more lawful, fair, fit, and seasonable to begin
another.

Report.
That it was near 7 of the clock.

Reply.
Yet not midnight, much less break of Day, as 'twas when Paul continued
preaching, and discoursing at a place, where he knew not whether he should ever
preach again, Act. 20. 7. 11.

Report.
That the Dispute had lasted above six hours.

Reply.
Whether there was so much as six hours dispute or no I doubt, however, i will
not call you to Account f^ this* but excuseyou, for since you counted every hour
seven till you were gone, it might well seem to you no less then 16. yet Sirs
give me leave, was there indeed six hours, and more past all in 'Disputation? I
pray Sir^, what is b^me of the odd five and a half? did you press them to death
in the Press, or lose them in the Ashes, whetein you had a design to have smothered
it all? for as clean as you would seem to have raked it out, here is no more
returned to give Account of it self then this small parcel, which is scarce
the tenth: See therefore that the rest be forth coming, for here is but mere
Pigmee semi-demi doings: and besides gentlemen, me things your tale hangs not
handsomely together with the thing told, for, if there were six hours work
indeed, how is it you repeat no more? or if there were no more then this half
an hours reading, how is it you give so large an Account of it here? or must we
conceive you to have two true Accounts, one in this cl^use, which stories the
length of the Dispute to be six hours, the other in your book it self, which
disputes ore all that long dispute again before the world, that it might have
the true cognizance of it, in little more then the sixth part of one? of which
two true Acounts (for so you would have us account them to be both) if the one
be a true Account then for certain (since they come not near one another, by
five hours, and an half) the other is a false true one, or a true false one
which you please, for howbeit, a man may of a six hours discour^e say in the
(...) in less then six mi^its that it was six hours long, and that there were
many Arguments, and Answers in it, yet if he take on him to relate ore the
Discourse it self, and the Arguments and Answers themselves, and account (as
you pretend to do) pro toto integrali, at least for the most material parts
thereof, he must either afford it more then six times six mi^its space to play
in, and that is more then you have allowed your Account, or else 'twas a long
nothing indeed. Some creepholes I see you make for your selves, whereat to get
out from the shame of that disproportion between your words here, which are
S^squi-pedalia, showing the work to be six hours long, and the work it self,
which is like a Span; for you tell us in your Preface, it is but a short Relation
you pretend to; yet know Sirs that too little is too little in all conscience:
neither can you lick your selves whole of all absurdity; whilst in two
seveveral sententious Descriptions you speak of no less then six hours, so
hoysing up your Reader into an Expecttaion of something worth looking after,
and then shut him off with this Skeleton, or short show of ^lf the sum, but
some of one half, some scra^s, and broken bits of the bu^ss, whereof the
fag-end of all, viz. how the bells began to play their parts against our
preaching, when you had done, by the appointment of who knows not whom? a
matter as well worth hearing as much of yours, is left out altogether: so then
Sirs, here is two Accounts of your Dispute, a long-short one, and a short-long
one, for it is Epitomized well nigh to nothing: since it is as it is, you might do
well, unless you can help's to that odd remnant of five hours and a half, which
is either shrunk away for shame, or else s^ipt off from the whole piece, whilst
you were cutting out of it this short-close-coat wherewith to cover your
nakedness, to summon it back to the press, and thence sign it out again for a
true Counterfeit: but supposing you will save your selves so much labor, as to
take shame to your selves for your Demi-dealings, I have here done it to your
hands, to save your Reader the labor of being cozened.

Report.
And many (say you) were wearied.

Reply.
And will be more, as well as more then your selves will be before this
disputation and the effects thereof have done working in their hearts that
heard it, or that con^unction which was July 27th 1649. which began its
operation most to'th'purpose, when you pressed it out, will cease to be ominous,
and of ill influence in the Clergies climate.

Report.
And many had far to go.

Reply.
And some so far that night, as was pretended, that in order there unto I
hear they took horse the next day in the afternoon.

Report.
One of the Congregation replied, say you, that he hoped you the Ministers
would not hinder the preaching of the word, or call any time unseasonable for
that, the Ministers answered, that they magnified preaching as much as any, yet
must needs tell them the Apostle makes it inferior to charity, and that when
cha^ity was in danger to be violated by it, it were but Christian prudence to
omit it.

Reply.
Antichristian priestly-popely-pollicy (if ye will) but neither Christian
prudence, nor Pastor-like pity, nor Peter-like piety, nor Paul's charge to
Timothy 2* Tim. 4. 1. 2. which was to preach the Word, and be instant inseason
and out too, to reprove, rebuke, exhort, etc. with all long suffering and
doctrine.

Ob. But some there would have been grieved at it, in which case better to have
omitted it in charity, then hazzar^ ^treds by performance.

A^sw. Some there (its like) would not ^ave endured it, yet is that no plea
whereupon to omit it, for then we must preach no more Gospel to the world,
which sets two against three, and three against two, and occasions (not causes)
by means of men's lusts opposing it, more sword then peace at present, Luke 12.
51, 52, 53.

Yea, the time will come (and now is) when men, (yea Ministers) will not endure
sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts, heap to themselves teachers, (and
what heaps upon heaps of false teachers are there in all Christendom? for the
Clergy have made themselves many as the locusts, many more then to every parish
one* tickling men up still with an omnia been in a bad condition, even when for
their sakes Isa. 24. omnia pene penitus peritura sunt) and will turn away their
ears from the truth, and be turned unto fables of men's feigning, but watch thou
in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an Evangelist, fulfill thy
ministry, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4, 5.

Report.
That the Congregation consisted of two sorts of men and women, whose opinions
were different, that there was a danger of a breach between them, that as they
came together, and had behaved themselves quietly all the time, so they might
be permitted to depart, that the mischiess which follow Division, are easier
prevented then healed, etc.

Reply.
Great indeed are the mischiefs that follow Divisions, they are more easily
preven^ed then healed, but as sure as the Lord lives, and his word has any
truth in it the Division^ of these days, the mischiefs of which (and that is the
best out') will light most upon the tripple Tower of B B Babel, even the
^ripple C C Crow^ and Kingdom of the C C Clergy, out of whose clutches God is
going to redeem his Captive Clergy, the height of which Tower he will bring
down to the Earth, even to the dust, these Divisions (I say) will neither be
prevented nor healed, notwithstanding all endeavors to that purpose, till that
be fully accomplished, which this Division of Languages truly tends to in the
Councels of God, viz. the u^ter shattering and disabling of these great
Babel-builders, so that their Ambitious projects shall come to a Perpetual end;
till then, breach upon breach cannot be avoided: while the Earth was, as in old
time of Priestly pomp it was, of one language, and of one speech all saying,
nemine contradicente, as the Pope said, all worshipping as the Priesthood
appointed, all believing as the Church believed, there was so much Chari^y to
the Churches peace, that all truth was choakt under the name of Schism for the
sake on it; the builders, by whom the corner-ston^ is still refused, saying one
to another, go to, let us build us a City, and a Tower, whose top may reach to
heaven, let us make us a name, and nothing was (...) from them, which they
imagined to do by advantage of this their unity and uniformity of speech, and
Religion; but now God is coming down to view the great Tower, this Po^pous
Kingd^m of Priests; and finding it swell up to heaven, above the stars of God,
over all, on earth at least, that is called God, he s^yes go ^o, let us go down,
and confo^nd their (...), that they may not un derstand one another speech*
whereupon, as the great City is split in three parts, so each of these will be
subdivided more and more, into Sectaries of all sorts, so that men understand
not now the language of the Pope and Priesthood, nor will Christ's sheep hear
the voice of those strangers, by which Division of tongues, if that Great City
cease to reign, and that montanous Babell come down, and become a plain before
Zerubabel, as it must, it is not so devilish as Divine a Division, which all are
not so sorry for as some, whose Alas is lamented back again with Hallelu^: yea,
let the day break more and more, and the shadows ^ie away, and my beloved be
like a Ro^ young heart, hasting ore these mountains of Bether, i. e. Divis^on,
Cant. 2. (...). And now as to the peoples being permited to depart, (...) know
none were held there against their wills, besides your selves, yea, both you
and they too that would, might have gone in peace, and those that would, might
have staid in peace, had you not troubled all with your oppositions: if such as
had a mind to stay, had been as peaceably permitted to abide, as you who had
such a mind to be out, were peaceably permitted to depart, for any hinderance
you had from us, all might have been full as well (for ought I know) as now it
is.

Report.
Next you relate, I not (...) to the Reasons of the Ministers, it was at last
refe^red to the Minister of the place being there present, and he desired to
declare whether he would give way to my preaching, which he refusing to do,
upon the reasons before said, one of the Congregation began to utter some words
tending to a Commotion, viz. that ^e had nothing to do with them, that they
would do it without his leave, and the like, whereupon the Ministers conju^ed
me, whose interest they observed to be so great in the people, by the bonds of
Charity, the candor, and Sobriety of a Christian, and ingenuity of a Scholar,
tha^ I would dissolve the C^ngregation, that they might part without professed
hostility, that there would great dis^race light upon their meeting, besides
dangers which they did fores^e, if I did not, that if I persevered in my
motion, they did p^otest openly before the Congregation against it, and ^id
charge upon me whatsoever inconveniency should follow, so being persuaded, I
went out of the Church with the Ministers, and the Congregation followed.

Reply.
I saw not so much as a grain of reason in all you spoke, in prevention of so
innocent, and in it self inoffensive a purpose as that was, to render a reason
of my faith to a people that expected it from me, and were (as your selves were
not) then and there so willing to hear it: whereupon I neither did nor durst
decline the doing of it upon any such account as convicted that by right I
ought not to have done it; nevertheless I must confess when I saw such
conjuring, such sensles scar-crows, such reasonles referrings, such rigid
refusings, such crooked constructions ready to be made by the Ministers of men's
words, as Commotions, when very parishioners, who pay Peter Pence both to the
Presbyter, and the place, only pleaded their Privilege to be there, without
his leave, such Emulous observations of the Ministers how great or little my
interest was in the people, such desires of me to dissolve the Congration,
rather then r^solve them by an exercise about the truth of baptism, by the
bonds of Charity, as if they were to bind us from other duty, by the candor and
sobriety of a Christian, as if this lay chiefly, in forbearing to publish the
Gospel of Gods grace to the sons of men for fear of displeasing, by the
ingenuity of a Scholar, which makes many a one forget his integrity as a
Minister, such a sense as professed hostility to them likely to be put upon it by
the Ministers, if I resused to go out with them, or tarried there to do service
to God, such fearful foresights of great disgrace likely to light upon their
meeting, and dangers of I know not what, unless of the downfall of their way,
which the Ministers had more then all others, if the Auditory were not dismissed
without a Sermon, such hydeous apprehensions as they had, and direful
representations as they made to the people of Chymaera's, non entities, things
that neither were, nor were like to be, and of they knew not what inconveniency
would follow, such chargings of all, lastly, upon my self if I offered to
preach there to the people, when I saw (I say) such horrible affrightments at
it, and such abominable deal of do made by Ministers against so harmless a
motion, as a Ministers preaching in one of their public places, to hundreds
that were then ready to hear him, who also would have spoken nothing but the
truth, or else have given them all or as many of them as would have staid free
liberty to rectify him if he had not, I was so ashamed to see it, that for
very shame I was persuaded to express that love which I truly bear to their
persons, though I contest with their corruptions, so far as in a loving
manner to walk out with them, and rather, then offend them further then needs
must, to perform that service to the truth without doors, which with their
leave might as well have been done within.

Report.
You relate that one of you then spoke to me as follows, that I would
seriously consider into what a dangerous Error I was fallen.

Reply.
Alias a Dangerous truth, that will danger the undoing of you one way or other,
and that whether you embrace it or no: for if you do, it will spoil you here,
and strip you stark naked of much of your earthly excellencies and enjoyments,
and expose you to such ridiculosity, as to be owls and fools among the rest of
your Cloth, that embrace it not, for though if you deny your selves, follow
Christ, and suffer with him here, you shall reign with him hereafter, and yours
shall be that Kingdom of heaven, yet you will lose your Kingdom here on earth:
but if you embrace it not, specially when spoken to your consciences, it will
judge you at the last day, and be your condemnation for ever.

Report.
And not only so, but that I was the cause of the fall of many others.

Reply.
And of the fall of many more may I be if it be the will of God, if they fall
no further then from the Scribes to the Scriptures, but if they fall away from
that truth we walk in, after they have known, and owned it, as it was foretold
many should do, and too many accordingly now do, separating themselves from the
true Congregations of Christ, since their separation from the false, sensual
having not the spirit, that fall will be on their own score, and not on mine.

Report.
That I would saddly remember what Saint Austen says of Arrius, that his pains
are multiplied in Hell, as often as any one departs into his Heresy.

Reply.
A sadd thing indeed, and seriously to be laid to heart by you, and me, as not
only Professors but Promotors also to our power of different ways, whereof
one only can be the truth, for the danger will ly on their side that hold the
Heresy, and hold it up, and not at all on the others.

Report.
That I would consider what arguments had been used, and how unsatisfactory my
Answers were.

Reply.
So I have done over, and over again already since you urged them, and, upon
occasion of your impression of them, am concerned to consider them more closely
yet then ever, and having now well-nigh finished this animadversion of your
Account it is the very thing I am to go upon by and by; and what ere my answers
were then, it matters not, if they were too short then for want of time, and
liberty from you to utter them, I shall take liberty to speak the more home to
your matter now.

Report.
That I would not resist the spirit of God.

Reply.
But I am to try the Spirits whether they be of God or no, a thing which you
are not yet too much guilty of, unless it be of neglecting it, or else I may
resist him unawares: if after trial, and experience of him, I with stiff neck
resist his strivings with me to own the truth he manifests to me, and leads me
to, as I know when I was ready to do, even when he began to enlighten me first
in that part of Christ's will ^e here holds out to your selves, and as they did
who stoned Stephen in malice, when they could not resist with clearer light the
spirit by which he spoke to them, it is hazzardable whether I shall have
forgiveness or no, in this world or that to come, or you either if this, as God
forbid it should, ever prove to be your case.

Report.
That I would remember that though in this unsettled and distracted Church I
did not fear being called to any Account for my doctrines, yet I must appear
before the dreadful judgment seat of Christ, who is the patron of
Paedo-baptism, praying God to give me a right understanding, you took your
leave and departed.

Reply.
Though your Church cannot call me to an Account at all, if it be a Church of
Christ indeed, I being none of it, the Church judging such only as are within
her, and not those without, yet I shall be willing to give it to the utmost in
the stricktest way wherein your Church could, as a Church, expect it of me, or
bring me to it if I were a member of it, which way is not haling to prison
hanging, and burning, the wonted way of your Churches dealing with falsely
supposed Heretics, and should that be the way I should I trust in God submit
to give Account in it rather then deny the truth, but it is demanding a reason
of men's different faith, and as they find it unsound admonishing, reproving,
and in case of non-amendment re^ecting, disowning, but if your Church, and its
Ministry be like each other, I find not your Church so forward to call us to
this Account of our says, for you her Ministry do utterly refuse to accept
when we offer it: how often have we been an hundred times more ready to give
reasons of our way; then you Churchmen whom she trusts are to receive them?
but if we durst not give Account to Christ for what we do, we durst not give
Account for it to your selves: Assure him to our consciences to be what you
here assert him to be, viz. the Patron of Paedo-baptism, (but this from Mar.
10. nor act. 2. nor 1. Cor. 10. nor from any other portion of his Testament,
nor from his patronizing Paedo-circumcision you cannot, much less can you of
Paedo-rantism which is your way) and then we are so sensible of our future
appearance before his Judgment Seat, and have gained so much self denial for
his sake, since we practiced Pisto-baptism, that we shall as readily lay it
down I hope as we took it up.

Report.
After the Ministers were retired, diverse Gentlemen and others, who had be^n
present at the Disputation, thanked the Ministers, expressed the satisfaction
they had received, assuring them that many were confirmed by their means and
the resolution of the Ministers, who were Auditors, was, that they would
faithfully in their several congregations, declare their sense of it, and
oppose the growth of An^baptism in their respective flocks.

Reply.
Here follows the Story of what event, and success your meeting had among your
selves, and you great friends after you were housed, of its powerful influence
upon you Ministers, and your Maecenasses, when you met together at your
Randezvous, which was on this wise, you had their gratulatorie expressions of
their own satisfactions, and assurances of many ones confirmation by your
means, and this reciprocally raised you Ministers into joint encouragements,
engagements, and resolutions to declare your sense of this happy efficacy, and
acceptance your endeavors had among them, and to stickle more stiffly then ever
against Anabaptism in your respective flocks, where you usually win all
because you play with none there but your selves, and that you do with such
ea^nestness and zeal, that for fear men should come to Anabaptism, i.e. a
second Baptism, you stave them off at a distance, and what in you lies forbid
them to own a first: thus while they doted on your Doo-little Disputation, and
plaistered it ore with their applause, you in requital agreed to new
White-lime, and daub ore their Babylonish Idol babyspr^ling with ^our
untempered Mortar.

Sirs, I half wonder at one rhing, for which (whether more happ^ly or unhappily
it befalls you I wot not) yet I however rather more pity then envy you, viz.
that who ere carries the thing, yet you still carry the thank, and who e're is
at loss in your holy wars against us Heretics, yet your selves take upon you
still to be Triumphant; you give the satisfa^tions, the confirmations, for
which you have gratulations from the great ones, as if the good issue of things
did run only, and always on your side, I find it so in all verbal Accounts, and
also in those printed Accounts that are extant of your doings, and disputations
with them of this way called Anabaptism, viz. Dr Featly's Account of his
Disputation with them in South-wark, and this of your own also with us at
Ashford, and another of Mr Baxters with M^ Tombs at Bewdley, pend all as is
supposed by the Opponents themselves, who whip them if they have not more wit,
and less grace then to disgrace themselves too much, whilst they continue
Clergymen. And now I name Dr. Featly, the man whom in the next page you turn
us over to for more furniture in this point, I cannot but note by the way how
finely you Featlisie throughout your whole Account, as well as here, as if
there were a certain Transmigration of Dr. Featly's spirit into that person
that was the inditer of your Account: for as most of the Arguments are found in
(not to say fetched and filcht out of) Featly's fardell, so how many things in
yours are after the very Image of his Account, as if one had been the platform
of the other? Dr. Featly pens and prints forth his disputation under the title
of a True Relation of what passed, and (how properly I appeal to all men) so do
you: Dr. Featly says it was the clamors of the Adversaries awakn'd his, or
else it had slept securely by him in a whole skin, so say you, the disgraces
the Adversaries loaded your disputation with rak^ it out of those ashes, in
which else it was designed to be smothred: Dr. Featly be-Asses us Anabaptists,
and so do you both us, and your selves too, (as is showed above) Dr. Featly
makes as if none of that sect ever troubled him any more after that, so ye that
after your handling of the enquirer, none did propound any more questions, as
if you had stopped the mouths of all: Dr. Featly relates that the dippers were
dipped, and plunged ore head and ears in disputation with him, so you that your
Respondent was extremely foundred, answered nothing in the least measure
satisfactory, or that carried any show of sense or reason to the purpose: Dr.
Featly relates the issue of his, as to himself, to be great thanks, so ye how
you were thanked, and as you from diversGentlemen, so he from the Knights,
Ladies and Gentlemen, of which rank few stoop so low, as to the plainness of
the Gospel, but neither of you from the poor of this World that are rich in
faith, and heirs of that Kingdom which God has promised to them that love
him, into which few, Knights, Ladies, and Gentlemen (except more of them
repent, believe, and obey the Gospel then mostly do) shall ever enter: thus you
flaunt it over the little flock, over this sect which is every where spoken
against, as baffled, non plust, worsted by you still: but Sirs, we can give
loosers leave to talk, you tell of gratulations, satisfactions, confirmations
of people in your ways by your means, but how comes it to pass that there are
so many Churches? the true Church, i. e. those you call Anabaptists, may say in
her heart after her long widow-hood, as Isa. 49. 21. who has begotten me
these, seeing I have lost my children? and who has brought up these? behold I
was left alone, these where have they been? thy people crumble from thee apace
(O P P Priest) for all thy satisfactions, and are captivated some more to
Christ, and some more to the Devil then ever before, while they served thee:
thy Divinity, (O Divine) is as the blood of a dead man, it has no life in it,
thy Common stock, and store of Religion, thou have treasured up to thy self out
of this Author and that, out of Harmonies of Confessions, Councels, etc. grows
stale, and begins to stink before the Scriptures, in a word gray-hairs are
here, and there upon thee, and thou know it not.

Report.
And this opposition of Anabaptism has been since done (say you) accordingly.

Reply.
And 'twere enough to make a man think (though I say it not) that '^was done
even immediately; considering what a Tom-boyes trick was served us so soon
after, whilst we were preaching besides the steeple, upon a Tombstone, (which
that it grieve you not, know Christ preached in a ship, on the shore on a
mountain, in the Synagogues, in houses, even any where where people were
willing to stay and hear, and so may his Ministers too for ought I know) for
while you were scratching, and clawing one another at your In^, we teaching and
convincing each other in the Outer Court, (for there was no room for Christ in
the Inner Temple,) we were cursed most bitterly with bell, though neither with
book nor candle; yea there a rose (who knows not whence? for sure 'twas either
from you and your party, or you in your party, or you without your party, or
(at least) your party without you) such a hot dispute of bim-bom-bell, which
put us to such a nonplus that (least we should perdere in contentione vocem)
we were fain to give over, and be gone, and were utterly Routed in the
skirmish, tell we could well Raylly together in another place. So here is the
upshot of the business of that Disputation, of which somewhat more might yet be
written, had my business been to give Account, and not rather to take Account
of your Account on it: but this is written, that people may believe your true
Account, to be a true Counterfeit, and believing it, may know the better how to
trust you another time.

One word more yet to the Disputers and Scribes OF THE ASHFORD DISPUTATION, OR
AN EPILOGETICAL POSTSCRIPT ON THEIR APOLOGETICAL PREFACE.
Pre.
THere was never any Intent this Disputation following should have appeared in
public, etc.

Post.
Like enough so Sirs, for the first appearance, or deliverie of it self in
public by word of mouth was with so little credit to your cause, that it
might very easily be as ashamed to show its face in print, as the Scribes that
penned it seemed to be to show their names; And doubtless so it would have
been, but that it came disguised; And yet even this false face, whereby you
have made it show fairer by far on one side (I mean your own) then at first it
did, is so black, so blind, so full of blurres and blemishes, that it cannot
choose, when it comes to review it self the second time, but color red, and
blush at its own blindnesses, if it be not Brazen.

Pre.
But that like Jonas's Gourd it should have died as suddenly, as it grew, etc.

Post.
Like Ionas's Gourd indeed; for Ionas-like (O that you were as like him in his
best, as you are too like him in the basest of his behavior!) you run away from
God O ye Priests, and refuse to preach the preaching that he bids you;
whereupon a mighty tempest is upon you, and upon the waters whereon you ride,
i. e. the tongues, nations, multitudes, and peoples, so that they are troubled
for your sakes; and upon the Earth it self, which is as it were the Ship, in
the bowels of which you have imbarqued your selves, ever since your fall from
heaven thither in the loins of your Father Abaddon, Revel. 9. 1. So that it
reels to and fro like a Drunkard, is moved exceedingly, like to be split in
pieces, clean dissolved, utterly devoured with a curse, for your sins
principally, O ye Priests, who have trangressed the Laws of Christ the only
Lord, and Lawgiver, changed his Ordinances, broken the everlasting covenant:
neither will the sea of the whole world cease to roar about you, and be
outrageous till the lot fall upon you, as it did on Jonas, to be cast forth,
though the Ship-Masters row never so hard to have you spared; nor till the
Tempestuous waves, on which you seek still to swim aloft, have overwhelmed you
so on every side, that you be fain to cry Alas out of the belly of hell. But
Alas though the ship rock, and is ready to suffer shipwreck, yet as if they
had made a Covenant with death, and with hell were at at an agreement, So rockt
asleep is Jonas, so sluggish are our Renegado Prophets, that they yet discern
not the mystery of the things that are upon them, but are stark senseless of the
stirs that are about them, and of the storms which themselves are most
concerned in.

And what the Gourd was to Jonas in his heat, even such is this Disputation
also to your cause of Infant Baptism, viz. as short, as slight a shelter, a
shadow (for there is no substance in it) under which you have rejoiced a while,
and received some thin refreshment, and defense against the heat of that truth
with which you were a while tormented: But God has prepared a silly worm to
smite the Gourd, sothat though it blossom like a Rose, and flourishes as a
chief flower among your followers for a time, yet it will die, even as suddenly
as it grew, so that, leaving you to your Evensong, to the Tune of [or like the
Gourd that Jonas had] men will begin to sing mattens ere-long, saying:

Their Rose withers, Their Blossom blasteth, Their Flower fades, The mor-ning
hastes. Their mour-ning hastes. Their Sun Sets, Their shadow flies, Their
Gourd consumes, The Dar-ling dies. Their sprink-ling dies.
Pre.
The truth is the disgraces that the Adversaries in private have loaded it
withal, have raked it out of those ashes, etc.

Post.
For your Respondent, whom you mainly mean here, (witness these words of yours
to me, viz. Sir, These short Collections of the Ashford disputation had slept
long enough, if your own private letters had not awakned them by a too much
sleighting your opponents, and their Arguments) not without a just occasion
from a friend of yours presented in a letter called a spade a spade, and
represented your Do back again in no worse wise then it deserved, Asserting
that your pleading of Infant-sprinkling from that nonentity of
Infant-believing was shameful and childish pedling, and that the miserable
rawness and rudeness of some, then and there engaged in Syllogisticall dispute
did savor as little of the Scholar, as that of the Christian; all which and
what more is there related was no other then the Truth when I penned it, and I
find nothing to the contrary yet in your Account: Howbeit 'twas so disgraceful
and loadsome, that you Disputers immediately became Scribes, and posted out a
piece of Print on a sleeveles errand, i. e. the Recovery of your Retrograde
Repute, being afraid (not more hen hurt) that if this man of war do not (what
is not to be done) maintain your Infant-sprinkling (which premi hand suprimi
potest, the more you tread the more you spread) your credit may grow so crazy
upon it as to die indeed, as indeed it does, and that daily, for as zealous as
you are to unlade your selves in your Romish ways of disgraces, yet what grace
(unless you have the Grace to Repent) in this juncture, wherein the Lord is
about to fill the earth with the knowledge of himself, and that glorious truth
which you have darkened, and to bring shameful spuing upon all your Ghostly
glory?

Pre.
In which it was designed to be smothered, etc.

Epil.
Scarce any Infant ever past alive (I think) under so many murtherous, and
Smotherous designs as this one poor Insant-disputation that was born at
Ashford: It has had two or three births or appearances in public, one at
Ashford the place where it was first held before many, two at the press whence
its forth-held before all, from every of which it should have been withheld,
so as never to have appeared at all to the view of any, if any of those whose
own, more then mine, it was could handsomely have smothered, and broke the neck
out.

The True father, Dr. Blechenden.
who first begat it by venting to a certain Gentlewoman, Mrs. Chute (as she
was then called) now Mrs. Dean
(further then he wouldhave done (as it seemsto some since had he thought she
would have proved with childby his dallying with her) his pretended desire of
some discourse with her seducer, so he was then pleased to style me by
Anticipation, having neither before nor since so much as said one word toward
the showing of me to be in error, when he saw his offer thrive so fast in the
womb of her desires, that there was like to be an Issue, i. e. a Disputation
fathered on him to provide for, would for ought ever I could discern, whether
to avoid the shame on it, or why else I know not, have smothered the very
Embryon in the womb^ but since that could not be done very cleanly it being
noised that there was a conception, he was minded I suppose, to have it smother
of it self at the birth, for want of help to bring it forth, for he would have
naught to do with it himself when the hour came, but threw it as Judas did his
business among the Priests with [see ye to it] not vouch-safing so much as to
see it himself or to send in so much as one Rag. or Ragged Argum^nt to hide
its shame withal in the day of its nativity, wherein notwithstanding all the
help and hand it had from such of you as were sent for far and near to ^he
l^or, who I dare say did the best for it you could, it was not so well ordered
bu^ that it pitied many a ones heart to see how wretched it was, and poor, and
miserably blind, and naked.

Howbeit I say to give you your due, you had bowels toward it far beyond him,
who was nearer kin to it then your selves, for whereas he should have bin by
right at all the pains and charges too that day, as being most concerned in the
business of it, yet he withdrew himself from both; but you, who, as you say
were not the men appointed for the disputation, drew near and undertook it, and
were at such pains about it, that how far forth you gnawd your tongues for pain
I cannot say, but I may safely say you blasphemed the God of heaven both then
and since, so far forth as to call his truth Heresy is to blaspheme him,
because of your pains and your sores, nor do I hear that you yet Repent of your
deeds: in a word though little to th'purpose, yet your cares concerning this
Infant-disputation were very great, when his, whose it was, were none at all
save how to keep far enough from it, that it might be strangled before ever it
came to light.

Thus it outlived one or two smothers, to which it was designed by its first
father, viz. both in and coming out of the womb, much laud therefore which you
love more then a little, to you the kind uncles for it, who so seasonably
interposing your selves, swadled it up as sairly as you could in such foul
shifts as you had then about you in such wise at least as to save the life
on it, or else it had surely miscarried, and come well nigh to nothing, before
it was well any thing at all:

Now in small process of time, perceiving perhaps that you had overcharged
your selves unawares in Adopting this Ashford-disputation, the fruit of another
man's loins, into your own future Tuition, by taking the Patronage thereof upon
you, so publicly as you had done that day before many people; and possibly
not more ashamed of its former poor appearance, then afraid that a further
appearance of it in public might put you to more charge and shame, even you
the foster fathers also, who had been so kind as to keep it from killing, and
to perform the mid-wivery und nursery thereof before, had a design now to
smother it your selves, in order whereunto you had buried it alive it seems,
and rak'^ it up in the ashes of oblivion, that it might live no longer in men's
minds, but rather return dust to dust, Ashes to Ashes as it was, hoping the
Sepulcher of your silence was so sure, that the Ghost would never walk about to
the cost, shame, and affrightment of its guilty Guardians any more.

But all this avails not yet, the Baby-disputation was not fully smothered for
all that; for people of all sorts were in a kind of Hue-and cry after it,
Adversaries talked how ill you handled it, friends were importunate to see a
copy of its countenance, so that there is no remedy, but it must be raked out of
those Ashes, in which it was then designed to be smothered, and appear again in
public at the Pr^ss, and so by chance it came to escape a third smother, by
which else in your intent it should have perished both out of mind, and sight:
per varios casus per tot discrimina rerum


Has this poor Infant-disputation had the fortune to escape those many
smothers, which in the fearful wrath of its own parents, that begat and brought
it out, it was ore and ore designed to, so that it rubs out still, and remains
in rerum natura, in vivis characteribus to this very day.

Pre.
And given life to it, etc.

Post.
And given death to it you might more truly have said, for verily under a
color of setting it free from the old intended smother you have subtily
smothered it ore a new (as it were) in another: yea, your very Impression is a
very suppression of it rather then otherwise, for you have Pressed it almost to
nothing in the Press, and made such a Thin-gut thing of it, that howbeit it
stands bulk't out with an Appendix, and other bumbles, yet it looks no more
like the disputation it once was (in respect of the Respondents Answers, which
you have robbed it of, as well as of your own weakest Arguments) then the seven
lean kine like the fat: you would have sneap't it all out of sight if you
could, but necessity urging to set forth somewhat, and shame forbidding the
sight of all things as they were, after some picking and stealing, and mincing
and making, etc. such Relikes of your Rakings as you saw most fit for your
turns you Trick't together on a bundle, threw them into the press, and so there
came out this Monstrum, Horrendum, Inform, Ingens, cui lumen Ademptum.


Nevercheless it lighted on a friend at last, that was well acquainted with it
from the beginning, who seeing it so lame, so decrepit, so mis-figured,
recovered it out of those Sophistical Glosses, wherein it was designed to have
been smothered in your Account, and gave life to it indeed, only to vindicate
the truth of it from your mis-reports.

Pre.
Only to vindicate its innocence from their injuries, etc.

Post.
Its innocence is a matter which It was never too much guilty of in one sense,
though it had enough of it in another, for howbeit (Deo prohibente) it neitheir
could, nor did ever do any, yet it wanted no will to have done a mischief to
the truth, and in that respect (as very an Innocent as it was) most honest men
do hold it guilry.

Pre.
Besides the importunities of many friends desiring copies of it, not without
much reluctance for a good while, proved the mid-wives to this hasty birth,
etc.

Post.
This hasty birth: me thinks indeed it looks like some untimely issue, that
brake forth in h^st into the world, as one born out of due time, order and
proportion; that slipped out at the rash request of some few friends, whilst
those whose work it was, and care it should have been to have looked better to
it were asleep, and therefore who ere were the mid-wives may I be one of the
Gossips I shall freely allow it among others, that are answerable to its
nature, this name of hasty birth, and had you signed it in the forehead with
capital letters, instead of A True Account, by the name of THIS HASTY BIRTH,
you had done the world more right by th'half then now you have, for then your
frontispice had been at least A true Account of your Book, though your Book no
True Account of the Disputation,

Canis festinans caecos parit catulos, hasty Bearers seldom bring forth other
then such blind businesses as this, which may not be seen for shame without
much Reluctance, nor when they must, without much Apology. This have Sirs,
makes you make wast in your Papers, as well as wast sometimes in your
practices, as Saul, who in have made havoc of the Church: you came in have to
the Disputation, and that made you leave Innumerable Arguments behind you, for
there might be innummerable Arguments brought but the have of the Disputation
forbad the Ministers to be so throwly provided, etc. say you p. 11, 12. you ran
in have to give Account on it, and for have left it all out but a little. THIS
HASTY BIRTH of yours was born about six months after it was in semine at the
Disputation, had you forborne three months longer, and spent more time in
recalling, raking, reviewing, there had not been such a miscarriage, your birth
would have had some substance more then now it has, some more suitableness to
sense and Reason, you would have accounted for some Answers, as well as but
some Arguments, and saved your selves that acknowledgement, which upon the
after sight of your have, defect, and oversight you are fain to make in most
parts of this Epistle,

But Insipientis est dicere non putaram, Sapientis discere per non putaram,
though it be no wise man's part to fall unawares into folly, yet is it a wise
man's part to learn wisdom by his own folly, and so I hope you will show your
selves wisemen at least, viz. in learning by the more have then good speed of
this hasty birth festinare lent for the time to come, and never to bring forth
so hastily any more.

Pre.
It had nothing to boast of but the sober and silent demeanor of the
Congregation while it lasted, it being a thing scarce credible, that so many
(some have guessed them about 3000) and so qualified, should attend with so
much devotion without any interruption by the space of six hours, etc.

Post.
T^s a thing scarce credible indeed, to him that has either seen or heard how
much commotion the Testimony of the true Baptism has been elsewhere
entertained, and attended with, that it should here among so many, and those so
qualifyed too, i. e. with great prejudice against it as Heresy, and that so
long too be attended with so much devotion: and therefore it has much more to
boast of, then such disputations as have been held in some parts of England,
which I am loath to shame so as to name, even of old England it self in this
juncture of its growing new, but specially of New England, that is now growing
old again apace (as old England did in the Bishops times) in order I hope to
its growing newer then ever, where (horesco Referens I tremble to relate it)
after many incivilities, and much barbarous behavior not long since used toward
them, this was added above all that three witnesses to this truth were shut up
in prison, and not only so, but (according to M^ Cottons Bloody tenet of
persecution for conscience, which even he himself abhorred in the Bishops)
merely for no other fault then that of the Apostles at Phillippi, Act. 16.
instead of a disputation with them which was pretended to be desired, but never
intended to be performed by the Anti-Baptists, the Baptists had a dispensation
granted them by the Court at Boston, either to pay one five, one twenty,
another thirty pound, or to be well whipped, which they pleased, upon refusing of
which fine to be paid, or by himself, or by others for him, who would as well
have set him free at their own charge (if he had accepted it) as they did the
others, one of the three submitting patiently to their cruelty in order to his
being restored in the spirit of meekness (alias Romish mercilessness toward
that Romish childishness of Infant rantism) received thirty stripes at the
whipping post in such wise as may well make the cars of every on that hears it
to tingle, and the hearts of Christ's Disciples to stand amazed, and bleed
within them that ever such a thing should be heard out of New England, as is to
be seen at large in a book lately extant, styled Ill News from New England:
Lord where shall thy Servants live at peace salva conscientia, if thou lend
them not a full liberty to declare against Tithes, and all other truth-voiding
traditions in Old England, when they are so bloodily handled in New? where
(Father forgive them) they know not what they do.

Nevertheless had the demeanor of you the Priests at Ashford been as sober and
silent as that of the people (as it seldom is when a Classis of you get
together, much less was it at Ashford, where you grew into a Chaos of
conference and a confused crowd of disputation) it had had much more to boast
of then it has.

Pre.
The Scandals that have since been cast upon it were expected etc.

Post.
And well they might (unless you reckoned without your Host) if you scand the
Scantines of the provision you made both for your credit, and the proof of your
practice: but what Scandalls I trow were cast upon your Disputation? here is a
great talk of Disgraces, Scandals, Injuries that its under as from us, but
(unless summum jus be summa injuria) we righted it rather a little too much in
reckoning on it as more then it is worth, or at least not setting so slightly
by it as well we might: But it is as usual a fashion among you Clergy men to
count your selves scandalized, disparaged, disgraced, vilified, undervalued,
etc: when you are but either found out in your falsehoods, or slandered of a
matter of truth as it is for you, under one vile name or other, to scandalize the
Saints most falsely, and slander the truth it self: yet if your repute be at
reparations, more then justly, through our occasion, when we know it we shall
make you satisfaction by submission, and amends by amendment, mean while have
patience with us, and in due time, and Christ's strength I trust we shall pay
you all.

Pre.
The men which were our Adversaries, and their driving was known before, etc.

Post.
Were it in respect only to your Infant sprinkling that you did so frequently
style us thus, we are no less then many hundreds of its old acquaintance, who
thinking once (as you do) that we did God service to be friends to it, could
now freely answer to the name of Adversaries, but we are the best friends in
the world to the Truth, and your Persons, could you once see wood for trees,
and no further Adversaries to your cause, then as we are well assured you can
never make it good while the world stands, by all the shifts you can devise,
from the law of Christ, whose cause you call it. As for our Driving, were it
like that of Iehu the son of Nimshi, it would excuse it self the better, since
it is only against the house of the Woman Iezebell, that has sat as Queen over
the Nations, and stirred up Ahab the Kings and Powers of the Earth to commit
fornication with her, and to do abominably, and to shed the blood of Saints: if
you be not she, then our driving is not toward you, but if you be (as I dare
not be sworn that you the C C Clergy throughout all Christendom are not) then
woe to your house indeed, not as from us, but from the Lord, who yet a little
while, wherein space is given you to repent, and if he cast not you and your
lovers into a bed together, and into great tribulation, except ye repent, so
that all the Churches of Christ shall know that it is even he that searches the
heart, and tries the reins, and gives to every one of you according to your
works, then the Lord has not yet spoken at all by me.

Pre.
It is no new thing with them to bespatter those Arguments with their tongue
which they cannot unty with their teeth, etc.

Post.
It is an old new thing with your selves, for it has been of old the custom
of the new Clergy, though never of the true, by common council to cry down (as
Heresy) what truth soever was too hard for them: as for us it is no new thing
with us indeed, for it is one of those old things which were in use among us
while we were all one with you, but since we sincerely sought the truth are
past away: so that I cannot but clear those men that say it is no new thing
with us, as speaking no other then the truth, and must needs condemn those who
condemn us of it now, as men condemning us of a mere new nothing.

Pre.
Thou have here a true, though short, Relation of the most material things
that passed, etc.

Post.
I was musing a while what of the Ashford-Disputation this True Account could
be truly counted a True Account of; for I found that it mentioned neither the
number, nor the names of the Scribes that scrap't it, nor the Disputers that
disputed it, nor the Arguments of more then one of those disputers, not all his
Arguments, nor half the Respondents Answers, nor many more things that should
be in it by right, nor many of those things rightly, that are in it by wrong;
at last I had resolution here that 'twas A True, though short, Relation of the
most material things that passed.

Yea Sirs? I assure you a good whipping is fitter for that disputation, then a
printed Account of it to the world, unless on purpose to be laugh't at, that
lasted ^o less then six hours, whereof five and an half past away mostly in
Immaterials, and the odd five and an half too in such Immaterials as these you
have here accounted for: and if these are the most material things that passed,
how Immaterial (may the world well think) were the most Immaterial that passed
in the Disputation, they surely were not worth one quarter of the while they
past in.

Moreover that your Relation is Short, yea far short of the Disputation Related
I dare not deny, but dare you say it ore and o^e again that it is a true one?
how true it is, is so apparent by the preceding Ezamen of your Account, that I
need not here so much as assert it to be false; I shall therefore say no more
but thus, viz. Had you said [false] where you say [true] both here, and in your
title page, where your -- etc. is styled A True Account, A True Relation, you
had then said true without all question, but your saying [true] in these two
places, where you should have said [false] has made you speak falsely in both
indeed.

Pre.
The adversaries answers being rendered to his best advantage, etc.

Post.
As for example; sometimes his answers are altered, and translated into a clear
contrary form, sense, and meaning then he ever spoke in; sometimes added to,
sometimes defrauded of such clauses as would have given every body to understand
his intent to be directly opposite to what its here represented, sometimes
invented as it were de novo; somtimesrendred not at all, but only related to be
nothing in the least measure satisfactory, nothing that carried the least show
of sense or reason to the purpose etc. and all this if men would believe you,
and if they do not, I dare say it is because they have neither sense nor reason
whereupon to believe it, to your Respondents best advantage; but it is utterly
against your wills surely Sirs, besides your intentions, and in some such way
as you never meant it, if it be, for 'twere a wonder if you should mind my
advantage so much, as to render my answers the best way in order thereunto, and
it is a chance had you intended my best advantage, but that you might have helped
me one lee-tle dram more then you have done; what not one syllable? not one
scruple? not one minits matter more of all that store that lies a smothering,
wherewith to mend the case of your Adversary, whom you seem so to pity too,
that if 'twere possible, even for old emnities sake, for old truths sake, which
he strives to tell you, you would do all to his best advantage? facile est
invenire baculum ad caedendum canem; you can easily pick a hole in his coat;
and could you not (resolving to render things too to his best advantage) find
some few shreds and old ends, or other out of all those cast clouts, you made
in the cutting out of your Account, wherewith to stop a hole, and hide the
shame of at least some of that silly silence you sometimes father on him, and
some of that foppicall nonsense, that you fain him, and would fain have him at
other times be thought to have uttered? was there not one grain more in all his
six hours answering to put in his end of the scales, whereby to have rendered
his answers a lee-tle more weighty then you have rendered them, and somewhat
more answerable to sense and reason? but in truth you may well be afforded a
pardon, for when hundreds of wise men, that were ear witnesses of the
disputation, shall see how grossly you have falsified what you pretend to give
a true Account of, the truth will be no looser, but yours the disadvantage
rather in the end: by Accident therefore, indirectly and in such sense as the
truth of God the more abounds through men's lies against it to his glory, it may
possibly prove true, that things are here rendered more to my best advantage,
then if they had been more truly rendered; but I suppose there would need no
more to make Democritus weep, and his dog laugh too, if he had one, then to
hear you say in sober sadness, that in this Ragged, and Rude Rendition you
directly intended any such matter, as to render your Adversaries Answers to his
best advantage, or that you intended any other then the very contrary.

Pre.
And the Ministers Arguments as they were delivered without any addition, etc.

Post.
Alack good men, you minded so much the mending the case of your Adversary, and
so singly designed by alteration, ablation, addition, etc. the rendering of his
Answers to his best advantage, that you durst not trangress so much as a
singers breadth by adding any thing to what you delivered you selves, toward
your own advantage in your Account of the disputation; but what ever
Additaments, figments, amendments, etc. are used for his alias your own best
advantage sake in the rendering of the Adversaries Answers, yet the Ministers
Arguments are set down even nakedly as they were delivered, without any
Addition for advantage, as if either the Ministers needed nothing to be done in
such a way in theircase, but might well spare all the advantage to go on the
other side, and yet be on the surer side too, or else were such self-denying
men, that they would rather represent the cause of the Adversary at the very
best, then their own in the least measure any better then it was.

And truly Sirs I must needs say that for you, that you have not advantaged
your own matter much by Addition to your Arguments, but what benefit accrues to
them as you manage the matter in your Account, is rather by way of Abdition
then Addition; for you have hid the most Immateriall of them from being seen at
all, and rendered them clean out of the way; the advantage they have, lies more
in their being rendered by the ablative case, then by the dative.

Pre.
Thou art desired to read them without prejudice, to let thy charity cover the
weakness of them, etc.

Post.
For my own part Sirs, as I heard your Arguments for Infant Baptism without
prejudice, i. e. not passing sentence on them till I had heard them, when you
urged them at first at the Disputation by word of mouth, so God is my witness
how often I have read them ore and ore again without prejudice, seriously
setting my self to weigh them most impartially, in the balance of both
Scripture and reason, since you urged them ore again in print: nevertheless I
cannot possibly (unless I speak against the light of my conscience) judge them
to be any other then what I said before, and what your selves are pleased here
to acknowledge them to be before all the world, begging of people in charity to
cover the weakness of them, viz. but weak Arguments; which ingenuous confession
of yours if it be not a giving of the cause, Iappeal notonly to all rational
men that shall happen to read this, who know that the truth or falsehood of all
causes respectively lies in the strength or weakness of the Arguments, that are
brought in defense thereof, so that they either stand or fall according as the
Arguments to uphold them (be they few or many) are either weak or weig^ty, but
also to your selves, who tell us truly and plainly, that it is the weight of
Arguments only (and he is a weak man that says weak ones are weighty ones)
that carries the cause: your own words if they may be of any weight with you
are these p, 12. viz. besides that opinion of Ovid, Et si non prosunt singula,
multa juvant, what ever it may carry of credit in other causes ought to have
but little in this, where we trust not in multitude, nor measure by number; but
substance and weight of Arguments are the foundation of our faith; the other
are for pomp and victory, these only for satisfaction and verity: so that if a
man might hope you would stick to this candid concession of yours and not start
from it, there need not be much said in discovery of the weakness, or
non-weightness of your Arguments, and consequently of the Rottenness of your
cause, for the world it self may hear what you say out of your own mouths in
this very vindicatory Account of yours, wherein you not only publish some of
your Arguments in that same weakness and nakedness wherein at first they
appeared, so that every eye may discern it, having leave now to examine them at
leisure, but also after not a few vain glorious vauntings, and ventings of your
selves concerning them, as of worth and weighry, in way of defense of them from
those sleightings, those disgraces, those injuries and censures of them as weak
and wanting, which they are under as from us, at last being sensible of their
weakness you sing a new song to the tune of cry you mercy, and fall a
beseeching the Reader in his charity to cover the weakness of them: by which
weak petition you may work upon some weak ignorants, that are not book learned,
or (if they be) stand bent to believe all things as you desire them, but on
none that are truly disciples, though only A. b. c. darians in the School of
Cbrist, but Sirs, what need so much peccavi and precari? if your ware were
current it would go off with acceptance without such a deal of cap and congee,
and pitiful entreaty to the Reader to cover the weakness of your Arguments,
the strength of which only should cause him to gather the goodness of your
cause, and not strong entreaty to take it for good, though the Arguments you
plead it by are but weak: Uino vendibili non opus est haedera: if your
Arguments and reasons for baby-baptism be strong and solid, your Reader (if
rational) will receive them; if weak (as you say they are) he is a Reader
scarce worth writing reason to, who will be prevailed with by your desire so to
cover their weakness as in charity to suffer himself to be overcome, and
carried away by them (notwithstanding that their weakness) to close with you in
your cause, and to be beaten into a belief of your baptism as good, though it
has but broken reeds and bulrushes to maintain it, by the force of bare
beggings and beseechings Habent artificium quo prius persuadent, quam docent,
veritas autem docendo suadet, non suadendo docet. Tertull. as cited by your
quondam ^riend Mr. G. C. in his second letter to me.
: or if in this request of yours to us, to cover the weakness of your Arguments
your meaning is, not that we should be so silly as to build our belief and
practice upon them, though weak by your own confession, whose they are; but
only that we should not publish, discover and divulge their weakness to the
world, but in charity be content to think our think, or to see and say nothing;
truly Sirs, what others will do at your request in this kind I know not, but I
assure you I cannot possibly for my part grant your desire in this case,
forasmuch as your selves have engaged me several ways not to be silent, on
pain of giving away the cause; which if it were only my own too, the matter
were so much the less, you should have it with all my heart; yea verily and my
own life too to do your souls good, for I know I could freely part with it to
be a means of effecting your salvation; but since it is the cause of God, which
he has entrusted me with the pleading of against you, who presume to enter the
lists against it, with such silly tools, and weak weapons, on behalf of a
Babish-baptism which is not from heaven, but of men, I dare not give place so
far as in foolish pity to spare the City Babylon, or in Charity not to
bewray a Breach or weakness in her walls of defense, when I spy it, for that
were in Charity to betray the truth of of God, and such Charity is more
Antichristian, by far then Christian, what ere you call it, and such as could
have small hope of acceptance before God, however esteemed of among men:
wherefore I desire you to have me excused, if I cannot in charity cover the
weakness of your Arguments, for in Charity to poor souls, that are led aside
from the way of truth by your piteous pious pretenses, and weak reasonings for
your way, and I am concerned in the very next place, after I have done with
this of yours to the Reader, to discover to the world the weakness of them:
besides since you have made so bold with your selves, as to proclaim the
weakness of your own Arguments for Infant Baptism (I hope the Counties of Kent
and Sussex will consider this, that their choice Ministry that stood up to
maintain Infant Baptism at Ashford, did after in their own Account theerof give
out of their own accord, that there was weakness in the Arguments they brought
for that purpose) men mutire nefas? I hope it shall be no offense to you for me
to second you in your own saying; it is you who have published your arguments to
be weak, my business shall be only publicly to prove them so to be as you
assert them: yet if it be offensive to you, it shall be no wonder to me, for I
know already that you can bear it better to have your Disputation ly under
disgrace and disparagement, under shame and censure of weakness from your
selves in print, then from your supposed Adversary, and true Friend my self so
much as in a private Letter only; and that some men (as the Proverb is) may
more safely steal the horse, then some so much as peep over the hedge.

Pre.
Not to suffer the cause to be wronged through the defects of those, who had
more zeal to maintain it, then abilities, etc.

Post.
It Is both usual, and lawful for us to judge of causes by the effects, that
naturally and necessarily flow from them, for qualis causa, i. e. naturalis,
and per se, talis effectus, and Retro; e. g. Infant-sprinkling has been a
cause efficient and per se, from whence much evil has necessarily crept into
the world, for it has been a means of confounding the Church and the World
together, of letting the Gentiles or Nations by whole sale into the outter
Court, of filling the world with mere nominal Christians, and carnal
Christianity, whereby they have got advantage ever since to tread down the holy
City, and true worship and worshippers, as Heresy, Heretics, of bringing the
nations into one Catholic Church whereof the Pope was universal Bishop, or
overseer for ages together, through the eyes of his creatures the Clergy, the
very Stirrup whereby he and his Ministers, who have blended themselves into a
blind and beastly uniformity, have become Masters of the Kingdoms, and have
got up to ride them; a plea and president for traditions, (it being one it
self) which ever make Gods commands void, and men's worship of God in vain; an
inlet of these and innumerable more mischiefs and absurdities, for posito hoc
uno absurdo sequuntur mill, therefore it is undoubtedly an ill cause: also it is
lawful to judge of a cause by the common Consequents which come from it, not
as caused properly, but merely occasioned by it, and in respect of which it is
called only causa sine qua non, i. e. that without which the other would not
be, and yet no other then the bare accidental occasions of those effects,
which flow from something else as the cause thereof perse; and most especially
when those consequents are declared by the word of God to be such, as will upon
that occasion universally and unavoidably come to pass; and thus we may give a
shrewd guess that our cause is good, viz. that our Gospel, Ministry,
Church Way and Baptism is the true one, because we see it is seconded now, and
ever has been with what it was of old seconded, and foretold also that it
should ever be even every where to the worlds end, viz. divisions in families,
two against three, and three against two, the Father against the Son, the
Daughter against the Mother etc. offenses of friends, and fleshly relations,
the account of Heresy and baseness, hatred of men, persecution, cavils, stits,
tumults about it, by which things Christ's people, Gospel, Ministers, and
Ministrations are ever proved to be his Luke. 12. 52. 53. Math. 24. 9. 2. Tim.
3. 12. 1 Cor. 1. 27. 2 Cor. 6. 4, 5. So that where there is none of this I avouch
the Gospel in its purity is not there though where these are the Gospel is not
the cause for that is men lusts and flesh fighting against the light, but the
only the occasion, whereupon they arise; when Satan the strong man holds the
house the goods are all in peace, but when Christ the stronger man comes to
storm him out, there is contention, in hearts, houses, Towns and Countries, as
when Christ came to Jerusalem all was in an uproar, and when Paul came with his
Gospel to Ephesus, Athens, Iconium, Lystra, Derbe lewd fellows of the baser
sort were set on by others to raise tumults, for truth tormented them into
rage; thus we often judge of Causes as good or bad, right or wrong, by the
effects that slow from them, but to reason upon a cause as good, or ill, true,
or false, right or wrong according to the might or meaness, the abilities or
defects of the persons that stand up for it is the right way to wrong it
indeed, since the Antichristian cause has the mighty, wise, and prudent
Priests, and Potentates of the world for its Patrons, when the poor only, for
the most part, receive Christ's Gospel and the strength that God ordains in
defense thereof against the persecutor is the mouths of Babes and Sucklings.
Causes are to be rejected as wrong and false according to the defects and
weakness that is discovered to be in the Arguments that are brought to
maintain, and not by the weakness and defects that may seem to be in those that
are more zealous then able to manage them, if there appear to be weight in the
Arguments: these if strong however weakly and babishly propounded will carry
the cause in the conscience of any, but such Priest-becharmed Christians, as in
Charity to their Churchmen, are resolved to yield themselves up to be carried
away with every wind of doctrine that passes from them, and, covering the
weakness of them, to be whisled any way by such arguments as the men
themselves, that make them are fain to grant to be weak to prove what they are
brought for; for no Argument is weak that is sufficient to evince the thing its
used in proof of, though it fall from the mouth of never so weak a man; if a
weak feeble hand let fall an heavy Axe upon it, or a sharp sword, even the
sword of the Spirit the word of God, that is quick and powerful it may serve
to cut off the Popes head, Tripple Crown and all, but if the Pope himself, and
all his children, which are the ablest Humanists in the world, come out to
war against Christ and his cause with reeds and rushes, blind non sequiturs,
weak and broken Consequences, they must ride back to Rome for stronger swords,
or else they may force fools into conformity to their follies, but never guide
wise men after the spirit to believe their cause to be good: as therefore it is
not good that an ill cause, that has but weak Arguments to uphold it, should
be owned for good, either in Charity, or upon pretense of ability in the
persons that patronize it, as the Clergies crooked cause of Infant-sprinkling
is, for what says the Parish to those poor ones in it, that entertain the
Gospel, are you wiser than a whole Synod of able Orthodox Divines? so it is a
thousand pitties that a good cause, that has strong Arguments enough from
Scripture, and reason to prove it right, should be wronged so, as to be
rejected as rotten (yet so Christ's true baptism is) through the defects of the
persons called Anabaptists, who are supposed at least to have more zeal then
ability to prove it; of which sin of wronging a right cause upon account of
such defects, even the cause of Christ's true baptism, which in his strength
those Babes that are baptized with it are not only zealous, but able to make
good against the Ablest Baby-Baptist that is among you, I know no men under the
Sun more guilty, then you Clergy men, who take your advantages to cry out the
louder against it as error, by the defects of Christ's Disciples that plead and
practice it, of whom you say commonly, as you say complementally of your selves
here, they have more zeal, then abilities to maintain it; yea verily you, who
seem here, whether more simply or more simulatorily who knows not? so to
implore the charitable benevolence of well disposed people to cover the
weakness of your Arguments, and not to suffer your cause of Infant-sprinkling
to suffer throw your defects, and inabilities to maintain it, are men so far
from teaching f^enda faciendo, from doing to others as you would be done to,
that you rather disclaim and proclaim those Arguments of ours as weak, which as
feeble a folk as we are, are strong enough to storm you out of your strongest
holds, and cause that cause to be despised, under pretense of our defects,
which though weak in our selves, and pretending to little of that outward
accomplishment, which you call ability, yet throw Christ's word assertaining it
to be his, and his spirit assisting us thereunto, we have both zeal and ability
to maintain: who is it I trow that trumpets about the eminency and learnedness
of their party and illiteracy of the Anabaptists, whereby to render the way the
more contemptible, more then the Priesthood, who charm their people against the
receipt of the Gospel, in such sort as the Pharisees of old when they said, are
you also deceived? have any of the Rulers of the Pharisees believed on him? but
this peop^ that know not the law are cursed Ioh. 7. 47, 48, 49. So brags D^
Featly and his fellows, despising the way of dipping viz. joint suffrages of so
many Bishops in such a Synod: as for the Anabaptists, they are a few, mean,
sylly men and women, an illiterate and sottish sect, the father and head of
whom, quoth he, was Nicholas Stock, and a very blockhead was he: p. 164. Simple
rude Mechanics, Russet Rabbis, Apron Levites, whom we own not, quoth he, but
detest and abominate p. 113, who know not how to dispute for truth, because
they know not the original, and cannot conclude syllogistically in mood and
figure p. 1. 2. Thus Featly defeats them in their cause by dilating on their
defects, and which of you almost do not confirm your people against their cause
by their infirmities of one kind or other? like flies you feast your selves
upon their sores, and let go their sounder parts; you make much of their little
to your purpose, you make your best out of their worst, and out of their
personal weaknesses strengthen your selves, and others against the truth, which
wise men know is nevertheless truth for the poors receiving it; you root in
their very excrements, whereby to find matter to make their good cause bad; and
yet here, oh how mendicant of other men's mercy, not only to spare sentencing
your cause as wrong, by your personal defects, and want of abilities, but also
in charity to cover the weakness of your Arguments? which is such an
unreasonable request, as was scarce ever put forth before by any Disputants,
who if they find their Arguments to be weak, ought rather to recant them,
specially after such public acknowledgement of the weakness of them, and to
desire people that they would not suffer themselves to be swayed by them then
otherwise.

But Sirs, do you think in your consciences that there is such weakness in your
Arguments, as is here intimated to us in your own book; and likewise that your
cause, which is so far from a good one, that it deserves to bear the name of
Abaddon, is in danger of suffering so much through your defects in disputing
it, unless men be so charitable as to wink at the weaknesses of both? I speak
seriously in my mind you had then better by far have concealed then revealed
your disputation in an Account, and had provided much better for the honor of
it, for now you have vindicated it from the disgraces, with which it was loaded
in private like him that fetches a frisk out of the frying pan into the fire,
whilst you publish it in the same weakness, (only robbing your Respondent of
the strength of his Answers) in which it discovered it self at first, and hang
it out against the Sun, so that all men may see clean through it (so thin and
threadbare it is) and that without spectacles, and not only so but make
proclamation of the weakness of your Arguments, with a petition to pardon the
weakness of them: that is an ill bird, which in have bewraies his own nest, and
leaves it to others to make all clean, and such are they that uncover their own
nakedness so far, when they need not, that they are fain to be beholding to the
benevolence of others to cover it, and yet are so inexorable as to hold the
cause of others inexcusable in the self same case, wherein they are earnest to
be excused by them; for our cause is at a loss among you for the sake of what
ere defects you spy in any persons that profess it.

But I believe you are not cordial in your acknowledgements here, for if you
were, you would surely have endured your Respondents private representations of
the weakness of your Arguments, and your pedling in your proof of
Infant Baptism with more patience then you did; but its evident by your
impatience toward him in that kind, that, what ere you say here of your selves
in a voluntary humility, yet you have so good an opinion of your selves, and
your work too that day, that (Tam nil as nothing as it here seems to be in your
Account as well as ours you take it ill that any should esteem so poorly, and
speak so plainly, though but privately, of your trifling doings, as you
dispense with your selves to do here in public before all (...) world; and
howbeit here is weakness, and defects, and defects, p. 3. overtly worded over by
you in a general way, yet it is an hundred to one, if a man take you at your
word, and yield to what you say as truth, and say it ore after you, that
there is much weakness in your Arguments, and that there were many defects in
your Disputation, and your zeal of Infant Baptism is great, and your abilities
but mean to maintain it, you will be half angry with him, and think he casts
scandals upon your disputation, and be ready to gainsay all this, and to stand
up in vindication of your Arguments as strong and sufficient, and ^ay all the
defects that were in the disputation at your Respondents door; and if you be
asked, what one individual particular Syllogism, Term, Argument or Scripture you
were out in the framing, uttering, urging or underctanding of throughout the
whole day of the disputation? I am persuaded you will sooner bite your nails
then assign any, or if it be specified by others that in this, and that you
were out, you misunderstood such or such a Scripture, such a speech or passage
you faultred in, I am afraid your pretended self-denial will be found so
little, that you will justify your selves in every bit and scrap of that which
past from you during the whole discourse, which makes your confessions deserve
but little of that favor, you so much implore, by how much they savor of
juggle and complement, more then of a real true sense of what is wanting to you
indeed, which verily is a right-baptism to maintain, rather then abilities to
maintain that right-none that you stood up for: nevertheless I must needs grant
it to be true that you say here, that your abilities were far short of your
zeal, yea so short, that howbeit you had a good mind to do it, yet you neither
did nor could maintain it at all; but wherefore was it, but because you had a
bad cause in hand? yea, had your zeal been as big as your cause was bad, there
had been no standing before you indeed: the defects of your cause was the cause
of your defects, and not your own defects the cause of your causes: had not the
fault been more in your faith, which was a false one, then in your faculty to
maintain things; and had that and your baptism been as good, as your parts are
great, and both these as probable, as you capable to prove, the meanest among
you might have done more at the disputation, then (as it happend) all of you
did per vim unitam, because though you fought with one, who was no more then a
flea in your ears, yet you happened to be fog'd so that you faced the wrong way,
and fell in unawares ^ainst the truth, which in these days of its return falls
upon inquisitive consciences with more force from the mouth of fools and
babes, then mere tradition does from the wisest Babists in the world: The
deepest defect is in the cause you defend, in the way you warrant, it is a
crooked cause, an unwarrantable way, and therefore those that will warrant men's
walking in it, can never do it without faultring and fumbling in the work, and
such after occasions of fawning on men for their charitable excusation.

Gentlemen (that I may neither seem to defy, nor yet to deifie your persons,
but put things upon a true Account) you are men that have some worth and
excellency, and yet some weakness and exigency too, but I impute your
miscarriage in the disputation not half so much to your own, as to your causes
indigency; your business was well manned, but ill managed, because there was but
an ill matter to be mai^tain'd; you were at the wrong end of the staff, and
therefore well might you be defective in the strife: this makes the least of
the flock draw you great Leviathans out now adays, and the feeble to be as
David before Goliahs, that have been Polemically exercised from their youth, in
that truth on their side does animate and assist them: you meet them with staff
and spear, and humane accomplishments, and they stand before you in the name of
God, and strength of that truth,, and true Israel of his whom you yet defy;
this makes Schoolmen like Schoolboyes under the rod, when they are taken tardy
in their exercise, and see they are like to be whipped for it, cry spare us, in
that their Schoolmasters the Pope, and Councels have overtaskt them, and set
them a Theme, which Scripture, whence only they must fetch all their proofs,
says just nothing of at all: This makes the Disputers, the Divines to come
abroad a begging in print among the vulgar (as you here do) saying cover, pass
by, bewayling the weakness of their Arguments, their defects in disputing,
their presumption in entering the lists, their non-preparation for the
disputation, because its not the true Gospel they disputed for, a very
stripling may make a Giant give back, if he have hold on the hilt of his sword,
and the other thrust hard against the blade; it is hard for thee O Saul to kick
against the pricks: a learned lawyer may be at loss in a lame suit; Asinus ad
lyram may play his part better, and make sweeter music then the most accurate
musician, that has nothing to beat upon but a board: it may well put any, but
the mere Sophister to his shifts, to prove the moons made of green cheese, and
so 'twill any, save the mere self-seeker, that is set to serve it out of a
sight that he can serve himself of it, and therefore is resolved to make any
Argument serve turn (even libet ergo licet) rather then leave it, to prove
Infant Baptism, much more Infant-rantism to be a good cause: and yet (the
more's the pity) this is the cause you have to make good, and have been so
bold as to stand up for, which though your wishes are here, that it may not
suffer wrong through your defects, yet mine are much rather that you may not
suffer your selves to be wronged any more, or to be wronged for ever through
its defects, for howbeit it flatters you into an opinion of its ability to be
maintained by you, by its appearing ability to maintain you, yet you will find
ith'end, that by its fair flourishes it has flusht you into more zeal, then
furnished you with ability to maintain it, when it shall have brought you to
your choice of one of these two, (ex quibus minimum est eligengendum) viz.
either of Repentance from it, and all other your Parochial dead works, tithes
and other traditions that depend upon it, upon a sight and acknowledgement that
you have been mistaken about these, as well as other Romish Remnants, that you
have seen cause through the Parliaments eyes to renounce since that long since
Lutheran reformation, which after longer standing out will be so much the
harder Chapter for you Clergy men to run throw, or else which is worse then
naught, of perseverance in your evil ways, and dead works against light, to
prevent the other, which last the Lord prevent from befalling any of you if it
be his will.

Pre.
Who would not have presumed to have entered the lists, etc.

Post.
It had been no presumption in you, had you been true Ministers of Christ, and
the cause you stood up in Christ's cause indeed: for grant it to be presumption
in Uzzah to meddle in the public service of the Temple, and in Uzzah to put
forth his hand to uphold the Ark, and consequently (for so you argue, not we)
for men to meddle, so as to minister to the Gospel publicly in your Churches,
that are not in holy orders; yet it is none (vos Apello) for the Priests, or
ordained Ministers of Christ to stand up any where in defense of Christ's truth
where its traduced, but rather duty, which in special they stand bound to; in
that therefore you accounting your selves Christ's Ministers, do grant it to be
presumption in you, to put forth so publicly when you saw it tottering, you
do no less then give the cause you stood up in to be none of his; as indeed it
was not but your own, and that was it only which made it presumption, and very
high presumption in you too, in that you durst enter the lists against the Lord
Jesus in in his own ordinance; and that with such weak Arguments, such flags as
slam'd like swords, but alas such as could not bear the brunt when it came to
blows here, how much less will they in that battle of the great day of God
Almighty, which is now marching space upon you.

It Is true therefore (as you here confess) you have been presumptuous, and
presumption, is one of the most desperate sins that can be against Christ, yet
for all that in his name, and as an Ambassador from him (though otherwise an
unworthy, and ^ver a contemptible creature in your eyes) as though himself did
beseech you by me, I am bold to beg of you that you would not despair, but come
in, and be reconciled to him, presuming no more to stand up against him with
such weak weapons as before, least he tear you in pieces, fall upon you, and
grind you to powder; but sit down and humble your selves, that you have stood
so long in the way of Sinners, so that they could not come to Christ through
your Blurres; lay down your arms, and yield your selves prisoners to him, stoop
to that golden Scepter he yet holds out unto you; own him as your King, Priest
and Prophet; list no more against him, but list your selves under him, for he
is gracious and will yet rec^ive you, and baptize you with his spirit, if you
turn at his reproof, and repent, and be baptized in water in his name for
remission of sins, Pro. 1. 23. Act. 2. 38. become little children in such a
sense as you should be, that you may be baptized, and then be baptized in
truth, and in token (for your memory has lost your traditionary token
sprinkling) that hereafter you will not be ashamed to confess the faith of
Christ crucified, but manfully fight under his banner against sin, the world
and the devil, and continue Christ's faithful soldiers to your lives end. How
happy had it been for you if you had took quarter from Christ before this time,
for he would have given it, and forgiven all your enmity against him in his
truth, but you are stiff-blades, and your words have been stout against him;
you Clergy men are Lords, you will not come near; but I beseech you become Lord
beggars at the throne of grace (as Brightman said truly the Bishop^ were for
earthly honor at the thrones of Kings and Princes) that you may have more of
that grace and holiness to worship God with reverence according to his own
will, which God gives to all humble Suppliants; then had you less learning and
living then you have, and more disgrace in this world, then ever any Synods of
you had reverence, or Archbishops grace, or Popes holiness, you would never
find occasion to bewail your losses, or repent of your change, or reject the
council of God against your selves, out of his mouth, who is a serious
Solicitor, bot^ from God to you that you would be, and to God for you that you
may be in the acknowledgement of his truth no less then happy for ever.

Pre.
Where there was so great expectation, etc.

Post.
There was great expectation indeed, though not greater then little
satisfaction: for first some were earnestly expected, (and one also evidently
engaged to be there, so that some durst have laid any money he would not fail
them) who what ere the matter was, were not there.

The two Doctors Dr. Austin and Dr. Blechenden.
A. B. were both Absent, yet to my knowledge both Adsen^, and good reason too,
for they were then not only as immediate neighbors to each other, in respect
of the vicinity of their houses, as A. B. in the ^ris-cross row, but also looked
upon for ability as two foremen in that whole Classis of Clergymen.

As for A, whom for his Age I truly reverence, and some other excellencies, in
respect of which many are inferior to him, if his prudence forbad his presence,
he may the more easily be excused, by how much the less he was engaged; but as
for B. the very beginner of all that business (ut supra) though I both loved
and honored his person, more then he did that truth of Christ I pleaded
against him, yet I must needs say, for him to beget this Infant-Disputation,
and then on its birthday father it per ^lios, and not per se, 'twas too like
them, to whom in that, and many more matters (if he were not) many more of that
leaven are like, who bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne on other men's
shoulders, and touch them not themselves with one of their fingers.

Secondly, as some were expected to be there who were not, so something was
expected by the people from those that were there, which yet could not be
performed; first (and last too since it might not be at first) from the
Respondent, that since he was declaimed against as an Heretic and Seducer,
that he should have given Account (that being the professed end of his coming)
of the way he walked in, that 'twas the way of truth; but he could not, because
it was not permitted by the Priests, who pretended to be most strict upon him
for it, neither before, nor at, not after, nor within, nor without (till he got
far enough from the Ringleaders) peaceably, publicly, perfectly, and plainly
to give it to them.

Secondly, from the opponents, that since they cried out error, error, heresy,
schis^, sedu (...), they would prove (for preach they would not neither) by way
of Argumen^, and by Arguments that had weight in them, that their
Infant Baptism was the way of Christ, but they could not neither, for whereas
strong Arguments were ^xpected, they brought none but such weak ones, that they
were fain to wish good people to let their charity cover the weakness of them.

Pre.
Without better preparation, etc.

Post.
Indeed your preparation was bad enough in all reason, and it will be expected,
that if ever you enter the lists again your preparation be far better then it
was; but yet (as it fell out) it was better then worse, and by so much the
better, by how much it was less then ordinary; for take this for truth Sirs
that your prepara^ion may easily be bigger, but never better, if your cause be
the same: preparation to any bad matter is ever (if the bigger the better) then
the better the worse, for vis est improba quae valet ad nocendum, a power that
hurts is best when least: and a little of that which is good is better, then a
great deal of that which is naught.

First, then make your cause good. Secondly, your call: Thirdly, your
conscience, as far as it needs mending, then all will be well enough ith'end;
and though men will fume and frown on you, yet shall you be backed so well from
heaven, as to need no man's patronage here on earth, nor yet so much time for
preparation, as you now lack, who are ever to seek when summond to sudden
service: for the preparation of the heart, and the answer of the tongue are
both from the Lord, Prove. 16. 1. on whom were you so intimately and immediately
dependent as his disciples are bid to be, Mat. 10. 29, 20. Mar. 13. 1. Luke 12.
11. you would not be so sollicious what to say before the proudest Princes, as
for want of that and somewhat else you commonly are before the plainest people;
nor when you stand up in his name, shall you need to excuse your presumption,
if you stood before as many Kings as there were people to plead for truth: but
alas deest aliquid intus (as one said who went about to make a dead man stand)
the Spirit of the father speaks not in you, you stick to a certain stock of
divinity, which you have stored up in your studies, and commonplace books,
which when you are but 40. foot off from, you are so far off from your harbor
and harness, that mere mechanic Scripturists may make you strike sail to them;
but you want that inward treasury, and through instruction for the Kingdom of
God, Mat. 13. 52. Luke 6. 45. by which the good Scribe is furnished (as occasion
is) to bring forth things new and old; this is one thing, which more then the
have of Disputations, forbids you to be so thoroughly provided as you should be:
besides deest aliquid ad extra too, for the truth is that small preparation you
make is more against then for the truth, as it is in Jesus, which who ever
implead, though with never so much acurateness, and acuteness of dispute
(whether it be you or we) can be but homines ob^use acuti (as a man famous in
your Account said well of such) i. e. Acute Block-heads at the best.

Pre.
But that they feared the triumphings of the Adversary, etc.

Post.
As far as the Adversary is minded to triumph, he has much more occasion
ministered by your undertakings, then if you had never entered the lists at all;
for then it might have been thought, that you could have said something in
proof of Infant Baptism but would not; but now it is known you would have said
something to that purpose, but could not: But Alas Sirs, as Adverse to you, and
desirous to triumph over you as we are Accounted by you to be, we had much
rather have occasion of rejoicing and triumphing in your sincere submission
thereto, then in either your dastardly disposition, or your weak opposition of
the truth, yet thanks be to God, whether you own or decline, or spurn against
the truth, he always causes us to triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the
savor of his love by us in every place, for we are unto God a sweet savor of
Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish; and as for our great
turn of triumphing truly over them, who have trodden down the truth, we are in
serious expectation of that at the Return of our Captain Christ Jesus, till
then we must be no otherwise triumphant, then as I said above, but with the
whole state of Christ's Church militant here on earth.

Pre.
And the unanswerable crime of deserting the truth to be charged upon them, if
they had not stood up to maintain it, especially when the not doing of it had
startled the strong, offended the weak, and confirmed those in their error,
which were fallen before.

Post.
To desert the truth is an unanswerable crime indeed, the sense of which I
believe may be the reason not only why some Priests are so loath to answer any
thing at all (as Dr. Gouge was to Dr. Chamberlain, and others, that shall here
be nameless, unto my self) but also why both they and their people have so
little to answer when they come seriously to be reckoned with about it, for
verily as for the people, now the Lord comes by the spirit and power of Elijah,
to restore things in the latter days, to that primitive purity, which has
been of old deserted, and to expostulate with them for that Baalitish worship,
which Iezebell the Queen has stirred up the Kings of the earth to set up among
them, they are either shiftless and speechless before his messengers, so that
we may say of them as of that be-Baalited people that stood before the old
Elijah; viz. the people answered him not a word, or else nothing is answered
that has any show of sense or reason to the purpose; and sometimes such a
miserable mess, and goodly Gallimaufrey of reasons is rendered in defense of
that one Babi sh Babi lonish
way of sprinkling In fants In fonts
(to instance in no other) the very naming of which (to name no more then has
been named, in way of Account thereof in my own hearing) is evidence enough,
that some men) for some are not so gropably blinded as some, though all too
grossly that go off from truth) are more then half minded, because they know not
well what to say, therefore to say they well know not what: viz. are we wiser
then our forefathers? shall we think that so many learned Orthodox divines
would practice it if it were not the truth? I am sure it was a custom before
we were born; how shall our children come to have names, if they be not
Christened? how can they be saved if they die unchristned? they are not Christ'n
creatures till they have their Christ'ndome, and such like: As for the Priests,
they have been so rubd up of late, that they have been forced to find more
witnesses, indeed more then the Scripture affords to stand by them at their
Bason-Business, and how eagerly they agree altogether in one Clashis is showed
hereafter: but the ancient standard of all, which is at hand to serve every
ones turn, as a Text in the pulpit, and as a Testimony to the truth of their
false way at every turn, is that which every one has by Roat, and by Root of
heart, and at fingers ends, more then the Root, heart, Right end, and sense of
those texts they take it out of, viz. They brought little children to Christ,
by his permission, that he should touch them, and to such belongs the Kingdom
of heaven, Ergo, Infants in infancy must be baptized, the consequence of which,
as it is no less then this, they brought sick folks unto Christ, by his
permission, that he should touch them, and to such belongs the Kingdom of
heaven, Ergo, sick folks must be baptized in the time of their sickness, so it
swayes not me, if it be somewhat more then that of the Papists, viz. they
brought an Ass for Christ to ride on, Ergo, Asses are blessed creatures, that
have a cross upon their crests ever since, and as for that in special that bore
him, happy are hundreds of people that can every one get a leg of him.

And now whereas you say you feared it; Oh that you did indeed fear the
unanswerable crime of deserting the truth to be charged upon you, then would
you return from whence in the uniuersal deluge you are departed, and stand up
to maintain that faith, Gospel, baptism, Church, Order which was once delivered
to the Saints; but now you stand up for error and man's invention, and though
you seem to salve all ore so surely, and to answer so handsomely that all men
cannot discry you, yet does not he see all your ways, and count all your
steps? if therefore you are stepped aside out of the way, and walk in vanity upon
fetches and far fecht consequences, despising the cause of God, when in
plainness he contendeth it with you, out of the mouth of babes, what will you
do when he rises up? when he visits what will you answer? yea, when he asks
who has required this at your hands? you will be as blank before him about
your Baby-sprinkling, as they about their Bawble Bell-sprinkling, both being
but limbs of the Idol Bell that serves the bellies of the Priesthood; your non
prohibition excuses one no more then the other. Though therefore you still
strive to startle men into a joint perseverance with you in that way, which you
are so disjointed about among your selves, yet when Christ speaks to you in his
wrath, for changing his laws, he will silence you, yea, he will startle the
strongest of you, who by your superstitions offend his weak little ones, and
instead of pulling them out (as you ought to do in all your preaching places)
confirm those whole parishes in their errors, who were fallen before you came
to them,

Pre. Farewell. Post.
So you say indeed, but your Reader may fare ill enough for ought you have set
before him in your ensuing Tractate; you feed him with a first, second and
third course, yet all such course fare, that his soul may starve, that takes no
other course then you here put him upon, in order to the salvation of it, which
is no other then under a pious pretense, and seeming notion of avoiding
Anabaptism, Heresy and Schism to keep off from ever owning Christ in his own
baptism, and to bid Farewell for ever to the only way of Truth and Peace.

The few faults that have escaped the Press in this foregoing part, the Reader
is desired in order to his better understanding of the Authors meaning to
correct as follows.

PAge 1. line 27. read volumninous, p. 15. l. 21. read indeed, p. 16. l. 54. r.
it p. 17. in the marginal note, r. psittaco, also r. (...), also r. cona^i, p.
19. in the marginal note r. you, who also term your selves, p. 23. l. 27, 28.
r. not, p. 21. l. 45. r. they mightly, also l. 30. r. when he had been.

ANTI-BABISME. OR THE BABISH DISPUTATION AT ASHFORD FOR BABY-BAPTISM DISPROVED.
AND now Sirs, having dispatched my Disproof of your first piece of Patch, viz.
your True Ac-count-erfeit of the Disputation, I address my self to a Disproof
of your Disputation it self, which I take all men to witness, is such a cloudy,
crooked, confused, self confuting, indefinite Mingle-mangle, and muddy mess of
Argumentation, as was seldom or never (I persuade my self) set forth to be
viewed, and reviewed from the pens of professed Disputers. I shall first say a
word to it in general, and then to each Argument in it is order.

The Generale praecognitum, which I would have you and all men take notice of
is this, first either that you do not dispute, but rather most miserably
mis-pute besides the Question, as stated between us, and the Position you took
upon you to prove, which was only that Infants of believers are to be baptized
(as is laid down in the second Proposition pa. 1.) for you run on all along in
such general terms, viz. Children, Infants, little ones, little infants,
little children, seldom or never naming the term of believing parents, which
ought of right to have been expressed in every Argument that past you, in order
to distinction of those Infants, whose cause only you plead, whose peculiar
right to Baptism you profess to prove, from all other Infants, viz. of
Infidels, or unbelievers; and this I observe is your manner in all your
discourses, for when ever you come to dispute this point, you state your
question still in terms too narrow, and such as are no more adaequate to your
proofs, then to your practice; for in your question you dare affirm no further,
then that such children only as are born of believing pa rents, are to be
baptized, but as your practice over reaches this by far, while you dispense
your Baptism Rantism
to all infants, even those of such parents, who in your preachings are noted
for no believers, so in your proofs you overlash as much, and shoot far more
wide from your Principle, and professed opinion, which is that no infants, but
those of believers, have right to Baptism, when yet you huddle over all in such
indefinite language as pleads the baptism of all infants as well as some.

Or else secondly, if ye will needs have us to understand you all along as
meaning believers infants only, in contradistinction to all other infants, to
whom your selves say baptism at all belongs not, then you and all may see how
curiously you come off, how egregiously your genius has gulled you all along,
for verily if mine own Minerva may be credited by me, there is not one inch of
Argument dictated to you, nor tittle of consequence brought by you for the
evincing the right of the one to baptism, viz, the Infants of believers; but if
it tended truly to such a purpose, it would tend as truly, and undeniably to
evince the other, viz. the right of baprism to unbelievers Infants also, to
whom (in pretense) you deny it as well as we: yea I appeal to all rational men
in the world to judge, whether you have brought one argument in either your
Account, or Review, which may not as well be used (though that's ill enough too)
on behalf of one of these sorts of Infants, as to the clearing their right to
baptism, as of the other?

There is but four general heads (for all the rest of your proofs are but
subordinate to one or other of these) from whence you infer not only that it
is lawful to baptize believers Infants; but also that it is wickedness to deny
it, viz.

First, The being, and appearing of the Holy Spirit to be in Believers Infants.

Secondly, The Deteriorty of the Gospel Covenant Comparatively to that of the
Law, if when little infants of the Jews were all circumcised, little infants of
believing parents may not now be baptized.

Thirdly, the Desperateness or Cruelty that is in the denial of Baptism to
infants of believing parents, or the destructiveness thereof to all hope of
their salvation in the hearts of their parents, and downright endangering
their Damnation (so dying) if baptism be denied them.

Fourthly, The practice of the Universal Church, which having for many hundred
years together administered baptism to infants, may not without damnable
blasphemy be once thought to have erred so long a time, in so necessary a
matter as baptism.

All which four considerations (not to speak as yet of their utter invalidity
to prove the baptism of any infants at all, for so I must do by and by) I am
now to show how they do not a jot more prove the warrantableness of baptizing
of believers infants, to whom we deny that Ordinance, then of the infants of
very Infidells, and unbelievers, to whom your selves Doctrinally deny it also.

As for the last, which i will begin with first, and so go back to that which is
first indeed, viz. the practice of the universal or Catholic Church; I
confess indeed that what you, and the Pope too do call the universal Church,
viz. Christendom, or to use your own phrase, the Christian world, which with
me rather is, and has been for many ages Antichristian, that vast voluminous
Church body, and Ecclesiastical Empire, or seven headed, ten horned universal
beast, that the Whore, or C C Clergy has so universally bejaded, this has
universally baptizid, or rather but rantized infants, universally I say, not
only in respect of time, and place, i. e. in every nation, province, and parish
within her Verg, in every age of her Reign, but also in respect, of the
subject, viz. all infants that are born in those several nations of what
parents soever, whether believers or unbelievers, without exception, and by so
much more to infants of very unbelievers then of believers, by how much (as
your selves witness in your pulpits) Christ's flock in respect of the rest, that
are none of his, even in Christendom it self, is but a little flock, yea and
the number of unbelievers, in the very Protestant, and most reformed nations of
it, which dispense baptism to infants as universally as the other, is even many
to one surpassing the number of believers: But Sirs, what is all this to you
purpose, I say to your purpose, which is to prove by example of the universal
Church, the practice of baptism to infants of believers only? Suppose this,
which you mistake so to be, were the true Church of God indeed, and that her
practice were set for our example, and such a true Topic, as Priests and
Papists make it, from whence to fetch good warrant to do the like, yet I pray
Sirs, does it not as well warrant the baptism of unbelievers infants, against
which you plead, together with us, as of such infants as are born of believing
parents only, the baptism of which infants only you plead against us? will you
argue from the universality of the Christian worlds doings to the particularity
of your own sayings, as if the universal baptizing of all unbelievers infants,
as well as others in all Christendom were an Argument ^b exemplo, and a plain;
As for Example, that the infants of believers only are to be baptized? Sirs,
what if a man were minded in jest to become a fool so far, in order to the
convicting you of folly, as to maintain against you, who deny it, that not
believers infants only, but those of unbelievers also must be baptized, and
should argue this ab exemplo, might he not (as D. Featly says to us in another
case) kill you with your own Dudgen dagger? for seriously Sirs, as far as that
example is of force, it overturns your turn, who use it, in the thing in order
to which you allege it, and overthrows you clearly in your question, as you
state it, and in your tenet of a right to baptism, for only believers infants;
exemplifying rather, if the example were to be heeded, the baptizing, not of
such infants only as are born of believing parents, which we are against, but
such as are born of unbelieving parents also, who se baptism your selves are
against, as well as we.

Ad hominem therefore I conclude, and ab exemplo on behalf of unbelievers
infants, as your selves do from the same head on behalf of believers infants
only, thus, viz.

To hold that the universal Church, or Christian world has erred in so
necessary a matter as baptism, for so many hundred years, is little less than
damnable blasphemy.

But to hold it an error to baptize the infants, that are born of unbelieving
parents, is to hold that the universal Church, or Christian world, which has
baptized in suo genere such as well as others, has so longerred, in so
necessary a matter as baptism.

Ergo to hold it an error to baptize the infants that are born of unbelieving
parents, is little less then damnable blasphemy.

Another Argument whereby you strive to evince your opinion, viz. the baptism
of believers infants above other infants, and to evade ours, viz. the denial of
baptism to them both alike, as desperate and ungodly, is drawn from the danger
of their damnation if it be denied them, and the destructiveness of that denial
to all that hope, that else may be had of their salvation, which if it be of
force, does it not cry out as loud against your desperate, and ungodly cruelty
on behalf of those millions of innocents of infidells, dying infants, to whom
in opinion, and doctrinally you deny baptism as well as we, as it does on
behalf of believers infants, who are no more innocent then the other, to whom
we deny it also? for if it be such a business, as not we, but you, and the rest
of the right Romish Priests seem to make it, the denial of which, de jure and
facto, damnes so down-rightly the infants dying without it, that there is no
hope to be had of their salvation, so you say, or else my shallow noddle cannot
reach the profoundity of your purpose, in pettering out that pure pious piece
of sense which with this Argument of yours is stuffed page 13. then its high
time, as high a degree of charity as you would be thought to have toward a few
infants, viz. one of a hundred, for scarely so many are true believers infants
to the rest, to plead for the baptism of unbelievers infants too, and stand up
in the cause of those innumerable poor babes, that cannot speak a word for
themselves against your Cruelties, who deny baptism to them, and deny all hope
of their salvation to whom (they so dying) it is denied: yea verily Sirs
persuade us to that once, and make us believe that popish trumpery, that the
denial of baptism to any infants does so much as doctrinally damn them, and
then I Will plead for baptizing of infants in a larger way then you who confine
it to believers infants only, viz. for the baptism of all babes and sucklings
in the world, and that least they die, and so be damned before it be dispensed
to them so soon as they are well out of the womb: so far are we from that
cruelty to infants, which you (commonly, though not properly) charge upon us,
that if we thought as you think (but Sirs mistake us not, for we have good
ground to act more charity then your selves do to all dying infants) could we
think I say that their salvation did so depend upon their baptism, that their
damnation would be the issue of denying it, we durst not be so desperately
cruel as your selves, nor limit it to some one infant of an hundred, know Sirs
we are tender in our construction of the condition of all that die in such
minority as you sprinkle in, before they have known or done eithe rgood or
evil, and are well assured there is no damnation to such, of what parents soever
descended, and as little need of your Rantism to their salvation; but for you
who are so seemingly compassionate and charitable to a few, how churlish are
you to a hundred to one, whilst your cruel doctrine (excepting such as are born
of believers only) curses all the rest unavoidably to hell? you talk much of
your own charity to infants, and our cruelty; but truly Sirs I dare tell you
that your tender mercies to that age of infancy are mere cruelty, so long as in
your childish dotage on some, you send so many packing to perdition; and as
unchristian as our cruelty is, it has more tender mercy in it to the whole
infancy of the world, then all your Christian charity does yet amount to; for
as you prescribe it p. 5. it is our rule indeed, but not your own, presumere
unumquemque bonum, nisi constet de malo, to presume and hope well, even the
best things, and things that accompany salvation of all infants, as well as
some, specially since it cannot appear that any of them have yet by any actual
sin bard themselves, or deserved to be exempted from the general state of
little children declared in Scripture, which is a right to the Kingdom of
heaven: but your Christian charity has not carried you out so far yet, as to
hope and presume well of infidels infants, unbelievers infants, or any
unrantized infants, though it cannot appear that any of these have by any
actual sin more barred themselves, then the other, or more deserved to be
exempted from that general state of little children declared in Scripture then
the infants of the best believers in the world. Whether therefore we, who
though we baptize no infants at all, nor see warrant in the word so to do, yet
believe, and that not ungroundedly, nor as being more merciful then God shows
himself to be to them, the salvation of all that die in infancy, or one who
imagining as sillily as your selves, that no baptism, no salvation, should
thereupon for pity dispute against you limiters of Gods grace, for the
baptizing of all infants in the world, or your selves, who supposing the same,
i. e. no hope to be had of their salvation to whom baptism is denied, have yet
no more pity in you, then to dispute for the baptism of believers infants
only, excluding all other infants from it (in doctrine though not all in
practice) which are no less then an hundred to one, whereby not a moity only
but all, save a small moity of infants in the world, yea, in the very Christian
world, in which the most by far are unbelievers, are cut off at once from not
the Church on earth only, but all share in the Kingdom of heaven also, which
of all these I say, viz. we, he, or you, are most cruel and desperate, and do
most justly deserve the censure which you Priests put upon us, p. 15. of your
pamphlet of damning infants dying, contrary to evident testimony of Scriptures;
and of damning innumerable innocents, such as infants of infidels are, whose
right to the Kingdom of heaven our Savior declared; I propound it to be
considered by your selves, and all other men at leisure; at present, seeing
this Argument of yours makes also more against then for you, whose plea is for
some infants against other, if your Minor in it, viz. that denial of baptism to
infants destroys all hope of their salvation were true, as it is not, and
speaks for a necessity of baptizing all infants, and not a few only, I Will
Syllogize it back upon you in much what your own terms, and so pass hence to
the other.

That opinion which destroys all hopes of the salvation of many dying infants
to one in the world, yea, in the very Christian world too, is a most desperate,
ungodly, uncharitable opinion.

But the opinion of you Priests, who deny all hopes of salvation to those to
whom baptism is denied, and yet deny it doctrinally your selves to all
unbelievers infants, which are many to one in the Christian world, and dispute
for its dispensation to believers infants only, is such as destroys all hope
of the salvation of many dying infants to one, as well in the Christian world
as elsewhere, Ergo, the opinion of you Priests is a most cruel, desperate,
ungodly, uncharitable opinion.

Another fine fancy, whereby you would fain juggle men into a belief that
believers infants and these only are to be baptized, runs thus, else (say you)
the Gospel Covenant is worse then that under the law, forasmuch as then little
infants were circumcised: Now Sirs, when I come to meddle with this Argument
ore again I shall show you plainly the imbecility of it to prove the baptism
of any infants at all, and the meliority of the Gospel Covenant above that of
the law, though infants be not now baptized as Circumcised then; at present I
am to show how, if it would prove any thing, it would prove the right of
baptism to unbelievers infants, to whom you deny it, as well as to believers
infants, whose baptism only you seem to plead by it: I say suppositively that
this is to make the Gospel Covenant worse then that of the law, to deny baptism
to infants now, since they then admitted infants to Circumcision, then the
denial of it to believers infants, which is your own opinion, makes it worse
then it was under the law, as well as the denial of it to infants of believers,
for under the law the infants of unbelievers, which were many to one believer
among the Jews, Is. 53. 1. were both de jure and de facto circumcised, as well
as those of the believing Jews, and so by your own rule ought the one to be
baptized now as well as the other: Again by the denial of baptism to the
infants of unbelievers, not only a moity but the most of Christendom, as in
which are by far more unbelievers infants then others, are cut off at once from
baptism and membership, I conclude therefore thus.

If tha^ opinion which denies baptism to little children, makes the
Gospel Covenant worse then that under the law, then the opinion of those
Priests, who deny baptism to all unbelievers infants, whereby not a moity
only, but most of the Christian world, in which the most are unbelievers, are
cut off from being members of the Church, makes the Gospel Covenant worse then
the law.

But (though not veraciter, yet secundum te O Presbit^r) that opinion which
denies baptism to little children, whereby a moity of the Christian world is so
cut off, makes the Gospel Covenant worse then that under the law.

Ergo, thy opinion which denies baptism to all unbelievers infants whereby
more then a moity of infants is so cut off, makes it worse under the Gospel
then under the law.

Another curious conceit, whereby you undertake to clear the right of baptizing
the infants of believing parents above others, is the being, and plain, yea
more plain appearing of the holy spirit to be in these children then in others,
or then in men, whom we baptize that make profession, which plain and
sufficient appearance (so you style it p. 5) of the spirits being in these
children, is made (say you) many ways, First by these infants faith, Secondly,
by these infants holiness, Thirdly by those Eulogies that are given to these
children in Scriptures, not inferior to those of the best Saints. Fourthly, by
that Scripture in special 2 Cor. 13. know you not that the Spirit (that Christ
you should have said) is in you except ye be reprobates, lastly and mainly by
these childrens non-appearing not to have the spirit, by these childrens not
appearing to be evil; by these infants not appearing by any actual sin, to
have barred themselves, or deserved to be exempted from the general state of
little infants declared in Scripture, by all which on pain and guilt of the
breach of Christian charity, whose rule is praesumere unumquenque bonum, nisi
constet de malo, we are bound to believe that these infants of believing
parents (not of others) have evidently enough the holy spirit: Now Sirs the
Lord help you to your eyesight, if it be his will; for i will be bold to say
these Seers are as blind as a beetle, what ever they seem to themselves to see,
who by any thing at all that is here brought do discern the holy spirit to be
in any infants, but this which is to the present purpose may be more safely
asserted, that all this proves it not one jot more to be in the infants of
believers, then it proves it to be in unbelievers infants, to whom you deny
baptism as well as we, in plea, pretense, and prate at least, but not
altogether in practice, for verily these have as much promise of the spirit as
the other, those parents Acts 2. being yet unbelievers while Peter spoke to
them, saying, the promise is to you and your children, yea these have as much
capacity for the spirit, as much manifestation of the spirit, as much capacity
to believe, as much holiness, as much Eulogie in Scripture, for Christ commends
not the infants of some parents above the infants of others, but indefinitly
the whole age of infancy alike, as little appearance yet of being reprobates,
and so consequently as much appearance that Christ is in them as in the other,
as little appearance of evil, of actual sin, whereby to bar themselves, or
deserve exemption from the general state of little children declared in
Scripture, as is in the infants of believers, all which shall plainly appear
out of hand, and much of it out of your own handy work, in my handling of your
first Argument in particular, which now I am returned to again, I shall begin
with, and so pass through it to all the rest, with which I must deal once over
again as they ly in order, in your Relation, and Review: which first argument
of yours is laid down in this form, viz.

Disputation.
No man may forbid water to those that have received the holy Ghost, Acts 10.
47.

But little children have the holy Ghost.

Disproof.
In which Syllogism of yours how be it I then did, and do still deny your Minor
as the main matter that is amiss, the falsity of which I shall discover, yet
there is much fault to be found with your Major, in that you repeat the words
of Peter but lamely, and by the halves out of that Scripture whence you quote
it, which you adulterate and abuse, unless you had inserted the whole sentence,
the chief clause of which, viz [as well as we] which is most needful to be
expressed to the true proof of any ones right to baptism therfrom you whether
more forgetfully or fearfully least the falsity of your Minor should be the
more discried by it I say not, do yet leave out altogether: In the absence of
which clause the falsity of your Minor lies undiscerned, which upon the putting
in thereof would appear (if it be possible for it so to do) more palpably false
then now it does, specially to every common capacity, whereupon very probably
you left it out, for if your Major had been thus, viz. no man may forbid water
to those that have received the holy spirit, as Peter and other adult Disciples
had, i. e. visibly and apparently unto others, by the acts, fruits, and effects
of it, as the words [as well as we] do import, your Minor then must have ran
thus, viz. but little children have the holy spirit as well as Peter and those
adult Disciples Act. 10. 47. i. e. visibly, undoubtedly, apparently to others,
and then it had been more apparently false in the eyes of all, for verily how
perspicuous soever it is to you Clergy men, who for your own ends, seemingly
see what you see not, as well as sometimes see not what you see, and to your
implicit criditors, that will seem to see that you see, whether it be to be
seen or no, yet to such as are resolved to see with their own eyes, and not
yours, it is so far from being so visible, and apparent that infants have the
holy spirit, as it was that Peter and the rest had received it, that it is a
thing invisible to you, and more then ever did or yet does or ever will appear
to any, but the blind, and the blind leaders of the blind, while the world
stands, by all you have here stitcht up together to make it appear by; the
inefficacy of all which to any such purpose as you use it for, having thus
hinted the crafty quoting, and cunning coining of your Major, besides the sense
of the Scripture you fetch it out on, I shall (God willing) make sufficiently
to appear in my Examination of your Minor; the proof of which I now come to
consider.

As therefore to your Minor, which is this, viz. little children have the holy
Ghost, I lay two evils to the charge of it, first a faultering in the terms,
secondly, a falsity in the thing testified in it.

First its delivered in tam dubiis terminis, such a dubious and indefinite form
of speech, viz. little children, not at all expressing what children, nor
believers children distinctly from others, but all alike, which muddling
expression of the subject, of whom you praedicate this that they have the holy
spirit, is made well nigh every where else throughout your book, and possibly
on purpose to shelter that absurdity from being too apparent, which unless you
dreamed out this Disputation, a more determinate delivery of your selves all
along in these terms, viz. infants of believers, you foresaw would light upon
it; Nevertheless, as indefinitely and implicitly as you set down your subject,
you cannot hide the nakedness thereof let your meaning be what it will, for you
must take it in some or other of these senses, viz. all little children have
the spirit, or unbelievers little ones only have the spirit, or believers
little ones have the spirit, or some children have the spirit but we cannot
tell which; nor whether these more then those, or those more then these, the
spirit being neither bound to all the children of believing parents, nor barred
from any of the children of infidels: you cannot understand it of unbelievers
children only, nor yet of all children, nor yet of unbelievers and believers
children promiscuonsly, so as to say some of these and some of those, but in
particular it cannot certainly be presumed which, though he that reads your
eighteenth page, where you confess there can be no conclusion made, which have
it, and which not, can hardly tell how to take you handsomely in a better
sense, for then all men will say fie upon it, how miserably do these Logicians
labor all along besides their question, they propound the baptism of believers
infants only, but proceed to prove the baptism of all children, or of
unbelievers children only, or at least of unbelievers children equally with
the other; they plead to have none but believers infants baptized, yet affirm
the holy spirit, the supposed being of which in these infants is the main
ground on which they would have these only baptized, to be in all infants, at
least in other infants (for ought they know) as well as these; yea even in
those infants, even Infidels infants, whom yet they would not have baptized, so
partial and cruel are they to these, though the denial of baptism to poor
infants (in their own opinion) destroies all hope of their salvation: but if
you take it for little infants of believers only, concerning which only the
question was stated, then every wise man will wound you as much on the other
hand, and say thus how miserably do these men fumble about their business, both
proving and practicing more then themselves believe to be the truth; they
assert infants of believers only have the holy spirit, and undertake to prove
it in contradistinction to other infants, yet produce nothing more toward the
proof of it, then what tends, if it do tend indeed to such a purpose, to prove
it to be in all infants as well as those, how egregiously do these Priests gull
and cheat their people, they profess the holy spirit to be in no infants, save
those only that are born of believing parents, and that these only are
thereupon to be baptized, and yet practice (another thing under the name of)
baptism to unbelievers infants in their parishes, whom they truly judge not to
have the spirit, in common with those whom as blindly they judge to have it, i.
e. not the seed of true believers only, but the seed of true and apparent
unbelievers also.

The second fault I charge upon your Minor Proposition is an utter falseness in
the matter affirmed in it, for take the term little children for what little
ones you please, these or those, it is utter untruth to utter any such thing as
that infancy have the holy spirit, much more that believers infants have it
more then others, neither is there any strength in any one thing you have
presented the world with to prove either one of these, or yet the other: and
howbeit I say suppositively, that all appear to have it, if any at all, by what
you have here produced in proof on it, yet I Will positively prove, and partly by
way of answer to your own argument, that neither ^ll infants have the holy
spirit, nor any at all, in such nonage as you falsely supposing they have it,
do thereupon baptize in: to this end I would I wist what you mean by the holy
Ghost (as you call him, but I all along the holy spirit) I am in doubt you
scarcely well know your selves, o^ else you would not predicate him to be in
infants, in such wise as here you do; I Will endeavor therefore to search out
what your meaning may be, by a serious survey of the senses which the holy
spirit seems to be taken in in the word, of which I am confident, if you know
what you mean, you must mean one.

The spirit which is but one and the self same in substance where ere he is, is
yet spoken of in Scripture in two, and but two different senses in general, so
far as I find, and that answerably to two different offices, which he exercises
toward two different kinds of men in the world, viz. godly and wicked,
believers and unbelievers, Saints and sinners; these two several offices, which
that one holy spirit is found in toward these several sorts of men, are
either more common or more special, general or peculiar; the common or general
office of the spirit is to convince and inlightes, draw, move, persuade, strive
with men to bring them into the way of obedience to God, and of their own good,
and this he executes universally to all men, and in this sense is in all men
and women, good and bad, godly and wicked, Saints and sinners, Jews and
Gentiles, Christians and heathens, but not in the one day old infants of any of
all these (that I know of.) The will of man, even every man, so soon as he
comes to such capacity as to be able to discern between good and evil, stands
ever after, even all the days of his life, between two wooers that solicit
him, and seek to win him to their service, and which ere wins him (finally) to
its service will everlastingly and accordingly reward him with life or death
Romans 6. 17. to v. 23. Gal. 6. 7, 8. And these two are man's flesh, and Gods
spirit, which are evermore lusting in him one against the other, and between
them persuading him (each in their kind) in this sense he is in the blindest
heathens that breath on earth (natural fools and infants only excepted, of
whom as far as nothing is required, because nothing revealed, so far they have
nothing to answer for) yea the very Gentiles which have not any law in an
outward letter, as we have, are said Romans 2. 14, 15. to be a law unto
themselves, and to show the work of the law written in their hearts; and to
have their conscience and thoughts witnessing within, accusing and excusing one
another, which can be no other (though commonly called the light of nature)
then a light from God and Christ, who is said to enlighten every man that
comes into the world, and so does more or less, even such as never yet knew
his person (as the Sun sends some light in some corners of the earth, where the
body of it is not at all discerned) yea the very spirit of God shining and
striving in them, answerably to which Gods spirit is said Genesis 6. to strive
with man, even those evil men of the old world that rebelled against it, by
which spirit Christ himself is said to have preached to those disobedient
persons, while the long suffering of God waited on them, in the days of Noah,
whose outward ministry he also used, while the Ark was preparing 1 Pet. 3. 19,
20, the same spirit is said Ioh. 16. to be sent to convince the very world of
sin, righteousness and judgment, yea the stiff-necked and uncircumcised Jews
both in heart and ears are said Act. 7. always to have resisted the holy
spirit, which they could not have done had he not wrestled with them, yea
within them, thus far all men have him, even ill men, the worst in the world,
at some time or other, by which spirit the Son of righteousness is the light of
the Microcosme, or inward world of man's heart, as the Sun, by the beams that
stream from the body of it, is the light of the Megacosme, or outward universe.

In this sense I cannot conceive you take the holy spirit here, or if you do,
you mistake not a little, if you say infants have him thus, for howbeit, in
these ordinary ways of his acting all persons male and female may be said to
have him at the years of capacity to distinguish, yet infants of one day old
have him not in this sense, or if they had 'twill make no more for the baptism
of them then of all men and women in the world, much less have they him in
those special ways of acting, in which he acts in the Saints, till at least
they come to be so far past that minority as to be sensible of his acting
toward them.

Which special and more eminent acts and offices of the spirit are on this
wise, viz. special assisting in doing good, when by common strivings with them
men are persuaded, and prevaild with to set about it, and when in his first
motions he is obeyed; also comforting, supporting in and under troubles,
trials, sufferings, temptations, persecutions, which will assuredly light on
those that do obey him, assuring souls more and more clearly of Gods love and
favor, witnessing to their spirits that they are the children of God, enabling
them with boldness to cry Abba father, sealing them up to the day of
Redemption, confirming them as an earnest in their present confidence of a
future inheritance, kingdom, glory, revealing to them more plainly the things
freely given of God, so that they rejoice mainly therein, whilst others to whom
these things are foolishness, rejoice in the things of the world, lusts of the
flesh, and of the eye, and of the pride of life; lusting strongly against the
flesh, delivering from the law of sin and death, warring against the law of the
members effectually, which else would carry captive to the law of sin;
mortifying the deeds of the body, teaching all things, leading into all truth,
guiding and gifting persons for the Churches service severally as he will,
bringing all things to remembrance which Christ spoke, which are subject to be
forgotten, manifesting the Father, the Son, and many more things to them that
love Christ and keep his commandments, which he will not manifest to the
world, nor to any of those in it that do not, and other such like precious
performances, in all which he officiates peculiarly toward the Saints only
that submit to him, not wicked resisters of him; to which Saints, or true
Disciples of the Lord Jesus, he was promised to be given under the Gospel in a
fuller measure then in former days, and sent to be their comforter (whilst to
such as entertain him not, but a bare convincer) in which respect he is called
the spirit of promise, as being promised in this sense to all those that obey
Christ, that believe, repent, and are baptized into his name for remission of
sins, and ask the father for him; and to be set as by office to minister in way
of succor to the mournful spouse in the bridegrooms absence, to help poor
souls that give up themselves to be lead by him, and accordingly was, is and
ever shall be given to those that do not grieve, resist and quench him, and
that are found observing all things that ever Christ commanded, non-observation
of which disingages Christ of his promise, so that it fails not, though he be
not with men that name themselves his Church, for ages and generations
together: In which senses he is not at all in infants in their infancy, neither
does he at all, guide, or provoke them, how far forth soever he may guard and
protect them, till they come to such capacity as to have good or evil fastened
on them by persuasion, nor does he any of the aforenamed good offices for
infants, in whom there is yet no need they should be done, nor does he delight
ordinarily to be where either he must be idle (as he must in infants of one,
two or three days old) or (unless he work miraculously) employed altogether to
no purpose.

As to that of John concerning whom 'twas promised he should be filled with the
holy spirit from the womb, besides the singularness and extraordinariness of
the case, which renders it unfit for you to argue from, who deny that such
examples are to be drawn in as an ordinary rule to judge by, and confess that
ex particulari non est Syllogizari; I add moreover, that there is no necessity
for such an immediate acceptance of that word [from the womb] as to make the
sense of it thus, viz. [in the very moment of his birth] for it may well be
taken, as elsewhere the same phrase must be, viz, [so soon as ever he should be
capable to receive it, and be assisted and guided by it] which might be in his
tender years, but was not I believe in such mere nonage as you wot off, thus
the wicked are said, Psalm. 58. 3. ab alinare se ab utero, to estrange
themselves from God from the womb, to go astray as soon as they be born,
speaking lies, stopping their ears, not harkring to the voice of the Charmer,
which terms do all denote actual sin, by which your selves confess infants
cannot bar themselves p. 5. or deserve exemption; it must therefore be
understood thus, viz. so soon as ever they are capable to do this or that, to
take the right away or the wrong, or to know and act either good or evil.

I assert therefore once again, that the spirit in this second sense is not in
infants in their infancy, nor know I in what sense they can be said to have
him, as to have right thereby to baptism, unless you can assign me some more
senses out of Scripture, which if you can do, I shall tell you what to say to
them, and as I cannot find they have the holy spirit in them, so neither find I
any promise of the holy spirit in such nonage as you wot of, if by the spirit
you mean the spirit of promise, as you must if you plead a right to baptism
there from; and if you should refer me to Act. 2. I find there no more made to
any then to all; indeed its said the promise is to you and your children, but I
advise you to consider, first, that it is not said to you and your infants,
neither are children and infants all one in signification, the one expressing
the age or rather nonage, the other the Relation to the parents, of whom they
are born: Infant of non fan^ (...) of (...).
all infants are children of some parents or other, but all children are not
infants: Infants are at least such younglings as cannot speak, but children may
be children, in respect of their parents, though the parents be eighty years
old and the children sixty, so that the promise of the spirit might be to them
and their children too, i. e. their posterity, as well as to the Gentiles that
were yet far off, in both time and place, and their posterity to all succeeding
generations, and be made good too on the same terms, upon which, and the same
time in which its made good to the parents themselves, viz. the terms of faith,
and the time of their believing, and yet all this while not be made to them and
their infants, as in their infancy: moreover it appears most evidently that
these parents were yet in unbelief, and bare inquiry after what they should do,
having acted neither faith nor repentance as yet, when Peter said thus to them,
repent and be baptized, and ye shall receive the holy spirit; for the promise
is to you and your children; therefore it may seem rather to be to unbeleevers
children by that place, then unto belieuers children; but in very deed it is to
all men and their children throughout the world, as they and their children
should believe, repent, receive the word gladly, come to God at his call, and
that in all ages and places to the worlds end; and as children of unbelievers
have as much promise of the holy spirit, so as much manifestation of it as the
other, and that is just none at all.

But say you these appear to have it first by their faith, i. e. as other men's
infants do not, by their faith: Sirs this is no demonstrative Argument I am
sure, that they have the Spirit, for demonstratio est ex notioribus
conclusione, but this is Ignotum per ignotius, or at least per aeque ignotum
for now you have much more ado by something else (and hoc aliquid nihil est) to
demonstrate to us that they have faith, then before you had to demonstrate them
to have the spirit, yea this will puzzle you the more, by how much the last
error is worse than the first, and more confuted in other places by your
selves, however we will consider your Argument and supposing still that you
speak of the right subject, viz. infants of believing parents; we will cast
this your Enthusiasm into this Enthememe.

Disputation.
Little children of believing parents have faith.

Ergo little children of believing parents have the holy spirit.

Disproof.
First I deny your Consequence, secondly your Antecedent, as both stark false,
and that is as much as can well be false in an Enthememe.

First, I shall be bold to tell you Sirs, that your Argumentation from present
faith, to a present having the holy Spirit is most invalid, and unconsonant to
the Scripture, for if by the holy Spirit you mean (as you must else it serves
not your turn at all to the proof of baptism) the spirit in that special sense,
viz. the holy spirit of promise; the consequence from faith to the having of it
will not universally hold true, for as much as faith not only must be in time
before it (unless God be better than his word, and that he may be when he
pleases, and so he was Act. 10, 44. where the spirit by Anticipation was given
out before obedience at least in baptism, which yet by promise cannot be
expected till after it Ast. 2. 38.) I say not only must be before it, but also
may be a pretty while without it; this will be counted the mad man's mad
Divinity with you (I doubt not) but i will clear it to the Dimmest Divine of you
all, yea see if the whole body of the Testament of Christ does not tell you
plainly, that as faith must be before it in an ordinary way, before we have
warrant to expect it, so it may for some while be without it, and therefore
cannot prove the holy spirit to be always where it is; for the spirit of
promise is given after faith, if given according to the promise, and so long
after it too now and then, as is enough to make it undeniably appear, that the
having of faith, is no proof of ones present having the holy spirit: among
sundry others let those Scriptures be seriously searched into, Ephesians. 1. 13. In
whom after ye believed ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, Act. 19.
2. have ye received the holy spirit since ye believed? they answered no, also
Act. 8. 12. when they believed, etc. they were baptized, etc. but verse 16. the
holy spirit was fallen upon none of them, only they were baptized, Act. 5. 32.
The holy spirit which God has given to them that obey him: yea the gift of the
spirit though Gods ordinary way so limits not himself but that he may give it
extraordinarily before Act. 10. yet is it neither promised nor (as by promise)
to be expected but upon obedience in faith, repentance, turning to God, baptism
and prayer Pro. 1. 23. Act. 2. 38. Luke 11. 15. John 7. 38. 39. the places are
so plain to the purpose, that i will not disparage your judgment so much, as
like a fresh man to stand to frame formal Syllogisms to you out of them: to
conclude then as to your Consequence, had you argued from the holy spirit, in
the special sense, in which you take it to faith, it might have past for me
without correction, but since you began at the wrong end of your business, I
beseech you take it for a warning Sirs and begin again.

Secondly, I deny your Antecedent, which if your Consequence were never so
true, is most false, for infants of believers have not faith; if they have
unbelievers infants (for ought you make appear to the contrary) have as much,
and so (though that grieve and go against you, and cannot be owned so kindly by
you in opinion as it is in practice) must (de jure) be baptized, i. e. humano
(for Divino neither may) as well as they; but in truth as it will not appear by
what you here bring to evince it by, that faith is in either, so I trust it
will appear by what shall be said in disproof of your proofs, that faith can
possibly be in neither.

Disputation.
You prove infants of believing parents to have faith two ways (as you say)
first by express texts of Scripture, secondly Arguments of consequence.

Your express Scripture is Mat. 18. 6. Whosoever shall offend one of these
little ones which believe in me; (...): in the third verse (say you) they are
called (...), whence upon my confession and concession that in ver. 2. and 4.
is meant one in respect of age, because it is said there he called to him a
little child and who so humbles himself as this little child, you therefore
argue that little ones in respect of age are meant in that 6 verse also.

Disproof.
Sirs, let me ask you two questions, first are you sure these are infants
indeed? Secondly, are you sure they were infants of believers of whom Christ
says, whoever offends one of these little ones that believe in me? for my part
if there were any probability that he spoke of little ones literally taken at
all, as I know none there is, yet I am sure there is none that they were the
little ones of believers he then spoke of, in contradistinction to the infants
of unbelievers; for it is not specified either one way or other, and is most
probable that the child he occasionally called to him might be some unbelievers
child, or other, the number of believers, where e're he came, being few, and
not comparable to them that believed not, but what e're that child was yet this
is much more then probable, that by the term these little ones in v. 6. he
means not infants but his Disciples, whom, having first persuaded them to
become such as that little one, or as little children in such things as are
generally found in them, viz. plainness of spirit, humbleness, innocence,
freedom from malice, in which respects David says Psalm. 131. 2. my soul is as
a weaned child, from that Analogy that was and ought to be between little ones
and them, he here bespeaks (as it was very ordinary for him to do) under the
title of [these little ones] besides the plural number he speaks in implies he
spoke of such of whom there was a plurallity then present, for says he these
little ones, pointing as it were to more then one, but there was but one little
one then in the midst of them of whom when Christ speaks, he speaks, in the
singular, saying this little child: as to the term (...) which is used in the
third verse, whence you argue that they were children in age spoken of by our
Savior, by which you seem much to strenghthen your selves in your Dabling of
Infants foreheads, I must tell you that of the two you more mar than make
your matter, by so much as mentioning of it in this case, for first (...)
though by some philosophical or poetical license it may possibly be used to
signify [Infantem] some youngling of three or four years old, as (though
beginning to prattle) can scarcely speak plain, yet cannot so much as
poetically, much less properly signify Infantissimum, such a one day old
infant as you talk of, nor such a six days old suckling as you sprinkle, but
properly it expresses at least one capable of erudition, and howbeit it has
not its derivation from (...), as setting the cart before the horse, I say not
ungraciously, for many a gracious man is no good Grecian, but ungraecianly you
greek it out, yet (...) has its derivation from it, for to say the truth,
(...) is the primitive of the two, and though (...) be the diminutive of (...),
puer, which is the primitive to them both, yet this is enough to show that
(...) may be used, and yet not infancy meant by it neither, but childhood,
which is a distinct age from the other, for there is difference between
Infantiam and pueritiam, as inter adolescentiam and inventutem, all which have
their several and proper periods, yea in truth it signifies child-ship, at
least capable to be taught, not such mere babeship as you baptize.

Secondly if it did, yet what is that to your present purpose, which is to prove
by the word (...) in the third, (...) in the fourth verse, that Christ means
the very same, viz. little ones literally taken in the sixth? as much as if you
had said nothing at all, for verily as it follows not that he does, so its
evident enough that he does not mean the very same in this phrase, verse six,
viz. (...) whom he means in the third by (...): for who doubts on it but that by
(...) in the third verse, natural little children are to be understood, the
intent of Christ there, being to show how his discipl^s must be like them, if
ever they enter into heaven? but in verse six owning his disciples, to whom he
tells that they must be such, as already such in some measure as they should
be, he speaks of them under that very same name and notion; and this was no
unusual term for Christ to denominate disciples, nor yet for them to denominate
one another by; for besides that (...) it self is the title by which, though
not here, yet elsewhere all believers and new converts to the truth are often
styled by, yea and your word (...), i. e. sucklings too, which you make so much
of a little below, yea and the word (...) which is the very diminutive of (...)
a child, which word you make such a matter of when you find it Acts 2. 36. in
proof of all which consult John 21. 35. Gal. 19. 1 John 2. 1. 12, 13. 18. 28.
3. 7. 18. 4: 4. also 1 Pet. 2. 2. even this very phrase that is here used viz.
(...) is also used by Christ himself to his disciples Mat. 18. 42. and a place
wherein as no little infant (as here) was apparently present, so compare it
with the two foregoing verses, in which the same, who are called little ones
and disciples, ver. 42. are styled Prophets, Righteous men, and I Will say you
sell your selves to stark so^tishness, if you expound it of any other then of
such, as are (from Disco their having learned the truth as infants yet have
not) styled Christ's Scholars or Disciples.

But above all, the most undoubted reason of all the rest, which to me does,
and may to any one most plainly clear it, that he means not infants is even
this very expression, viz. [which believe in me] whereby he denotes and
denominates his disciples distinctly enough from all little infants, who are in
no wise capable to do that he here ascri bes to the other, i. e. to believe in
Christ, for this infants being utterly incapable to do, it shows plainly that
he means not them: whereas Mr. Willcock, whose argument this was, and whose
urging it ore again in print if this be, it shall not trouble my conscience, if
it do not his own, whereas he I say argues thus, viz. [These little ones which
believe in me] therefore infants do believe, I argue quite contrary from the
same Scripture thus, viz. these of whom Christ speaks M^t. 18. 6. did believe,
therefore they could not be infants, who cannot possibly believe.

And if you ask me how I prove it that infants cannot believe, I might answer
out of the mouth of Paul, Romans 18. 14. how can they believe on him of whom they
have not heard? but since you have a reply to this, p. 18 I Will only hint that
here, and handle it further, as I have occasion given me to do by your
answering it, as our objection, when I come to review your review, and at
present prove the matter out of Mr. Willcocks own mouth, that infants cannot
believe, for to believe is to act faith, and (...) credere (as (...) Docere
(...) legere, etc,) are speeches that point at the act and not the Habit or
faculty, denoting actum secundum, non primum: This Mr. Willcock knows as well
as I, yet the same Mr. Willcock, page 8. asserts as plainly and truly, so
clearly to the contradiction of himself in this place, that infants have not
the exercise and fruit of faith, have it not in actu secundo etc. but I spare
him, in hope that he will consider it of himself, verbum sat sapienti: but
suppose it were meant of infants literally; yet however it could be but a
Prosopopeia, i. e. a figure whereby that is attributed to certain creatures, as
done by them, which yet is neither really done, nor so much as capable to be
done by them at all, by which figure that is sometimes attributed not only to
infants, but even to but sensible and bruit, and sometimes to insensible
things, which can properly be done by none possibly but men at years, as not
only David is said to be made to hope in God while he hung upon the breasts,
because God indeed was, even then the God that did defend him, yea as well in
as from his mothers womb, though he was never sensible of, nor acquainted with
it, so as to hope it in the womb, but the whole creation also figuratively,
Romans 8. 19, 20, 21, 22. is said to groan, wait, hope, desire, expect
deliverance, because it stands in need of it, from the bondage of corruption,
and God also has determined the time wherein by Christ to redeem it, though
many creatures under the curse are no more sensible of it, or capable to groan,
then the fruitless fig tree Christ cursed, and the Ox, Ass, Horse, Sheep, and
sensible creatures that may groan are capable to hope for, and expect such a
glorious day as shall once come to the creation: thus figuratively indeed
infants may be said to believe on Christ because they have need of his
protection, and all the help they then have comes from him also, though in
infancy they knew it not, nor him, so as actually to hope and trust in him for
it, or properly to believe in his name, even more then inanimate creatures in
the other case, this is the first way, whereby you profess to prove infants of
believing parentt only (if you speak to your proposed purpose) to have faith,
which how weak it is the weakest eye may discern it, that is not disposed to be
blind, and the second is like unto it, which is as follows, by two arguments
of inconsequence.

Disputation.
Children of the Jews had faith,

Ergo, children of believing parents now.

The Antecedent is proved thus, viz. God himself did witness that the children
of the Jews had faith, by setting to his seal, which was circumcision, called
by the Apostle the seal of righteousuess of faith.

Disproof.
There Is but two things to be owned or disow'd at all in this piece of proof,
as also in the former, viz. the Argument and the Antecedent, and I Will deny him
to be a Seer that sees not good ground whereon to deny them both,

O fine! O fine! O fie: these you call your Arguments of Consequence, but
(saving that you say so) I am verily persuaded the veriest implicit Simpleton
that ever saluted the University, or swear Allegiance to your Crown and
dignity, or was ever implicitly canonized into the obedience of your faith,
will never see them so to be, when ceasing to see through your eyes, he shall
come once to behold things with his own, for really they are the most false,
absurd and inconsequent, that ever I saw with mine.

Sirs, give me leave to make an answer by these ensuing Interrogatories, and
I Will expect your Answer to them again; had the children of the Jews faith? and
did God himself witness that they had it, by setting Circumcision to them as
his seal of it, i. e. (for that's the sense in which you take the word seal) to
assure men that they had it? and is it the consequent that the children of
believing parents have it now? let me then ask you.

First do you conclude that all the children of believing parents have it now?
that I think for shame you will not say, since every experience witnesses the
contrary; or that some believers children have it now, therefore all believers
children are to be baptized? and if so, that is as silly an inference, as if
you had argued thus, viz. some people believe therefore all must be baptized,

Secondly, had the Jews children faith? first I wonder how they came by it,
since the word says faith comes by hearing, and how can there be believing on
him of whom they have not heard? and how can they hear without a preacher? and
how can they preach except they be sent? and how can they be sent to preach to
infants that understand not what is said? except you say (as you are fain to
do, not for want of blindness p. 18.) that infants have an hearing, and the
spirit works upon them miraculously, and yet not extraordinarily neither, but
in that ordinary way as he does on men, in the conversion of whom you say the
spirits working is but ordinary, and yet miraculous too, which Popish Bull
deserves well to be baited, but i will fotbear to fall upon it, till I meet it in
its proper place in the Review.

Secondly, when had they it begotten in them? in the womb? or if after birth,
on what day on the 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, or 8th? for on some of
these they received it, if on the 8th day they were (as you say they were)
circumcised in token that they had it; but I muse, and am yet to learn on
which, and so are your selves too I believe, for all your confidence in
asserting it.

Thirdly, was Circumcision Gods witness, yea Gods seal to assure men of thus
much, that those children to whom it was set had faith?

First, Risum teneat is amici? did you ever read or hear that circumcision was
set to infants to this end, viz. to testify to the world that they had faith?
was it set to Ishmael as Gods witness that Ishmael had faith? was it set to
Esau as Gods witness that Esau had faith, when God who would not witness a ly,
knew that neither the one of these had it, nor yet the other? unless they lost
it again, which sure you will not say; for shame leave such sorry Shuffles, are
you Masters in Isra^l and know not this that ^ircumcision was set to the Jews
children, not to show others that they did believe, but as a permanent sign
thereof to show them when they should be at years to take notice of it by sight
(as of that transient, unseen sign of sprinkling in infancy they cannot do)
what things they then should believe, viz. Christ to come of Abraham after the
flesh, and circumcision of their hearts by him, etc. was it ever set under this
notion as a seal of faith to any person in the world save to Abraham's proper
person only, to whom too it was a seal not so much to witness, or assure men that
he had faith, as to honor that faith, that more evidently, and eminently then
ordinary he had before, with that famous title i. e. the Father of the
faithful^ therefore circumcision as given to Abraham in Romans 4. 11. is not said
to be the seal of the righteousness of faith (as you corruptly rehearse the
words leaving out the residue of the verse, which makes them relate to Abraham
only, as if it had stood as a seal in such a sense to all Abraham's posterity)
but a seal of the righteousness of the faith, i. e. that famous faith which he
himself had, and to this end that he might be (as none of his mere fleshly seed
ever were) the Father of all them that believe. Secondly, if circumcision were
Gods witness that these infants, to whom it was dispensed, had faith, then
certainly baptism, which with you at least is of such Analogy and Identity with
Circumcision, that i^ has the same subjects and significa^ions, must also with
you be Gods witness to others that those infants to whom it is dispensed have
faith also, and if so then I must make bold to ask you two things:

First, Is not this round about our coal fire, to prove two things no otherwise
then one by another? for when you prove that children are to be circumcised, or
baptized (which with you is all one, who falsely call baptism (as Paul does not
in Col. 2. 12. for he means another thing by that phrase, viz. that of the
heart) the circumcision without hands) I say when you prove, that children are
to be circumcised either one way or other in answer to our why? you say because
they have faith and thereby right to the Covenant, and the seals of it; but
when you come to prove that children have faith, which we deny, you say it is
clear because they have circumcision, and baptism, which are Gods witnesses,
seals or evidences to us that they have it: this is not Idem per Idem, the same
by the same, that is too effeminate a probation, but it is eadem inter se, or per
se invicem, the same things reciprocally by each other, and well nigh as
womanish as that; for whether is it better to say they have it because they
have it, or to say it is apparent they have this because they have that, and
that being as much doubted to clear it thus, viz. it is apparent they have that
because they have this; and if these two viz. faith and baptism, faith and
Circumcision, did ponere se invicem, so that one could not possibly be without
the other, they might the better probare se invicem, but it is not so, for as
faith may possibly be where neither Circumcision nor baptism are dispensed,
witness the thief on the Cross, so there is neither of them but may be, and is
too too much dispensed where faith is not.

Secondly, let me ask you, is Gods witness, Gods testimony true, or is it
false? for say you God himself did witness it, that the children of the Jews,
i. e. in infancy had faith: false you dare not say it is, nay you do not, but
rather p. 5. that his testimony as to the truth of it, is to be preferred
before man's, yea I say let God be true, and every man a liar, but if it be
true, how then appears it to be so, if your testimony be not false? how then
came it to pass that the most of the Jews and their children sucessively in all
generations had not faith when they came to years? for it is most evident that
most of them were unbelievers, and therefore they could not enter into their
rest; but their carcasses fell in the wilderness; I know but two shifts you can
make, and it is much at a pass which you take, for you will contradict your
selves in either of them both, for surely, either they fell from that grace (as
those infants do also whom you sprinkle from that faith which (as you say and
seem to see) once they had) and this flatly contradicts your own doctrine of
impossibility of falling from faith, or else they never had any such faith as
you say they had in infancy, and then either Gods witness of such a thing must
be a lie, which what horrid heresy were it to think, and abominable blasphemy
once to utter? or else God by Circumcision never witnessed such a thing, and
that flatly contradicts your Antecedent, and so your selves will be found false
witnesses of God, because you have testified of him that he himself did witness
by Circumcision, that the children of the Jews had faith, when he never
witnessed it at all.

Fourthly, the fourrh grand Interrogatory is this.

Sirs, what children of the Jews had faith in their infancy witnessed by
Circumcision, were they the children of the believing or unbelieving Jews? for
you are shy me thinks of expressing too often which you mean, and proceeed as
indefinitely, that you may deceive as indiscernably as you can, if of the
unbelievers then is not this goodly disputing, viz.

Children of the unbelieving Jews had faith and circumcision.

Ergo, children of believing Gentiles only have faith, and must have baptism.

Secondly, Is not this goodly doing (if 'twere your practice as strictly as
it is your plea) to baptize only believers children now upon their own faith,
because unbelievers children of old were circumcised upon their own faith? this
straitens the grace of God under the Gospel, in comparison of the largness of
it under the law, for then all children of unbeliving Jews were circumcised by
his appointment, as well as the infants of believers; Answerably to which, if
you go by that rule, you should conclude thus, uiz. all the Gentiles children
should be baptized now, as well those of unbelievers as believers', but you
turn out unbelievers children from the privilege, that unbelievers children
had before, but if you say children of believing Jews only had faith then,
therefore of believing parents now, then first how does your Argument and proof
drawn from Gods witnessing by Circumcision that there was faith in the Infants,
hold any more to the proof of it in believers infants, then in unbelievers, for
he set Circumcision to the infants of the wicked and unbelievers among the Jews
as well as of the godly and believers.

Secondly, how does it appear at all that godly and believing parents children
then had faith more usually then children of ungodly parents? when good Ely had
two vile sons Hophni and Phineas, good David, wicked Absalom, good Solomon,
wicked Rehoboam, good Iehosaphat, wicked Ioram, good Josiah, wicked Iechoniah
and his brethren, etc. when contrariwise wicked Ahaz begat good Hezekiah,
wicked Abia, good Asa, wicked Amon, good Iosia, which shows that faith is not
entailed from parents to posterity as you would make it.

Thus I have spoken to your first way, whereby you prove Infants of believers to
have the spirit, and thereupon right to baptism, viz. their faith, and to a
first and second of those whereby you seem to prove them to believe, there is
yet a third way whereby you would make men believe that Infants of believers do
believe, viz. their Justification, without which there is no salvation, but
because that is not inserted here at all, but toward the end of the disputation,
and is prosecuted most vigorously in your Review, I will suspend the
prosecution of that head, till I come thither, and proceed next to a
consideration of the second, third, fourth and fifth ways, as they lie in
order, whereby you would prove believers infants to have the spirit, above the
infants of unbelievers.

Disputation.
The next thing whereby you offer proof of it that infants of believing parents
only (remember these still are the subject on which you pretend to proceed,
and predicate that these denominants, viz. the spirit, faith, holiness etc.)
that these I say have the holy spirit, is their holiness from whence you
confess here that there was no Argument taken, that is to say, 'twas not
proved, and yet a little above p. 3. in the fourth and fifth line of this sum,
alias some of your disputation, you as blindly as boldly bolt it out, that it
was proved by their holiness: the Apocaliptical beast that was and yet was not,
scarcely seems more Apocriphal to you, then this was and was not of yours seems
Apoplexical, or brainsick to me: This True-ly might have been rankt among the
rest in your true Account, but to let it passthus, this cannot but be granted
for a truth, that you made as if you would have proved it by their holiness,
that infants of believers have the spirit, but did not, because I wished you
(but (fool that I was) I have been sorry since that I did at all wish you) to
forbear it, for as I was not afraid to give way to your proof then (save only
that I was well aware you would but trifle) so since I marvelled a little more
upon the matter, I have found it of more facillity to prove (infants-sprin
kling by the popes holiness, whose mandamus it is, then by any holiness of
their own.

Disproof.
I Will muse a little if you will, now I am upon it, by what kind of holiness of
theirs you would have proved it: I deny not but there may be in infants of
believers a kind of holiness, yet there is neither that kind by which you
commonly conceive you can, nor any kind by which you possibly can evince the
verity of such a practice.

The holiness you mean certainly is either Matrimonial, Ceremonial, or Moral

Moral holiness, I call that which is opposed to sin, moral wickedness and
profaness of heart and life, but sure you do not mean this holiness, or if you
do, what do you mean by it? do you mean some inward quality, inherent habit or
principle of grace and spiritualness, as whereby these infants of believers may
be denominated as the true Saints or holy ones of God are viz. Partakers of his
holiness as Heb. 12, 10. and holy i. e. qualitative, though not quantitative,
in the same manner, though not the same measure? and if you do, is this habit
innat^s, acquisitus or infusus, by birth, or begotten in them by frequent acts
of holiness, or infused from above? for one of these three it must be, if it be
an Habit.

But it is not the first, for secundum te at least (O Priesthood) they are born
in sin, and are by birth this way as unholy as any others.

Not the second, for secundum te again, by your own confession these are not
capable in infancy to act either good or evil, yea instruction of the
understanding must go before any actings be, yea weigh but your own expressions
a little p. 18. of your Pamphlet where you tell us thus much in plain terms,
that instruction of the understanding in matter of faith in some sort, must go
before any act of faith can be discovered; to which I fully assent, and add,
that instruction of the understanding in matter of holiness, (and this infants
are not capable of) must go before any act of holiness can be discovered.

If you say the third, then pray tell me three things.

First, How its discovered to you, or how you know that theirs such a habit of
holiness infused into believers infants in that nonage whereupon you build
your boldness to baptize them? for by the fruits only it is that we can know
persons Mat. 7. 6. to be good or evil, and you confess page 8. that infants
have not the exercise and fruit of faith, and commonly in your pulpits that
holiness is the fruit of faith, and James challenges any one if he can to show
him his faith without his works, Iam. 2. 18. yea you say plainly that the seed
of faith sown after discovers it self when the season comes p. 8. and that no
judgment of science can be passed, till the acts themselves be seen, and
examined for a posteriore only (mark that word only) the discovery of habits is
made, these are your own sayings in your Review p. 18. whereby you plainly
unsay all that here you say of believers infants faith, and holiness, for if it
be so that the discovery of these habits is only a posteriore, i. e. by the
fruits, exercises, and acts, and that Infants have not these, then how I trow
have you the discovery of it at all, before the season, that these habits are
in them? yet such is your shameless inconsiderateness, and custom of
contradicting your selves, that you pretend to a discovery of it so far as to
attempt here the discovery of it to the world: will you allwaies feed the world
thus with your own groundless fancies, and fashion it in religion according to
your own careless conception? will you always affirm things so to be, and
venture to make them known, and yet confess they cannot be known too? O curas
hominum o quantum est in rebus mane!

Secondly, pray tell me how this holiness, which you assert to be in believers
infants whereby you would make it appear that they have the spirit, does appear
any more to be in them then the spirit it self; are they not both a like dark
to us, and unapparent? yet you profess to prove the one of these by the other
thus, they have holiness therefore the spirit, and if to one querying, how you
know they have holiness? you should say thus they have the spirit, therefore
holiness, 'twere a proof no more impregnant then the other, for you could do
more then leave the people, whose blind guides you are, as much in the dark as
before, by this, and by that I am sure you do no less: when men fall to proving
(as you have done hitherto all along in your Disputation) things undiscernable
by things as undiscernable as the other, and things that appear not at all, by
things that appear no more at all then those they would make to appear by them,
Nescio an anticyram ratio illis destinet omnem.


Thirdly, I pray tell me how this holiness appears to be in believers infants
whom thereupon you would have to be baptized, more then in unbelievers infants
whom (though in your practice you promiscuously admit them with the other yet)
in your proofs you except from your baptism? is there any more Specimen or show
of holiness in them then in these? the best spectacles that ever I beheld with,
could never behold it; Is there any more capableness of such an Infusion of
holiness, or of having such an habit infused? Is there any experience of it
when they come to years that the infants of believers had this holiness in
their infancy and unbelievers infants had not? if so, how is it that when they
are grown, the children of unbelievers have holiness very often, when as often
the other prove wicked, and have not? (have a care of your shinnes (good now)
by all means) do the children of believers fall from it? is there any promise
of God, whereby he stands engaged to infuse holiness into these infants in
infancy, when he will not infuse it into the other? and if so, how it is it
that we must necessarily hold (for so you say your own selves in your Review p.
18.) that God is not bound (for if he has promised it as you say he has Acts
2. then he is bound) to work it in all the children of Christian parents, nor
barred from working it in any of the children of infidels? Is there any
promptness to acts of holiness, whence only you can clearly argue ad positionem
habitus, in that infancy in which you sprinkle them, in believers infants then
in the other? all your skill in Physiogmony can never find it: or can you argue
ad negationem habitus, to no holiness in an infidels infant more then in
another? your very selves acknowledge you cannot: if not, why more I wonder ad
negationem spiritus? why more ad ne gationem baptismi? why more ad negationem
nugationis istius vestrae, viz. your trivial new way, or rather no way of
baptism? to which if it were baptism indeed, you must admit, if not all, then
not at all in time of infancy, or else your absurdities are unsuffrable, Sirs
suffer me to come cross to you, and hit you home with your own cross
interrogatory p. 18. are those infants of infidels, between whom, and those of
believers, you objectors will admit no comparison, inclinable to acts of
holiness? or not? if the former, it presupposes then that infidels infants have
the habit also as much as the other, and so the working in them, and those born
of believing parents may be one, and so their holiness, and faith, and
spiritualness, and baptism be one too, which all your Disputation does deny; if
the latter, I freely confess these are not inclinable, nor yet the other
neither.

These premised the Answer is in your own very words page 18. That unless it
could be certainly presumed what children have the habit, i. e. of faith,
holiness, what have not, the working of the spirit is not known to us, he is
neither bound nor barred there can be no conclusion made, and therefore Quis
nisi mentis inops etc. how justly may they be concluded by themselves, as well
as by others, to have hand plus cerebri quam cimax sanguinis, and no more
understanding then those whose right eye is utterly darkened, who premising
these sentences themselves, do for all that make this conclusion, viz. that
these infants have faith, Holiness, the Spirit, and thereby right to baptism
above all others.

Or secondly Sirs do ye mean by it some Negative holiness, consisting in their
being without sin, and having yet no wickedness, and prophanness, the thing,
which (and more properly by far) you style innocence in the next words? though
yet o curious criss-cross you will not hold them guiltless neither: if so, for
my part I give you in my assent to it, that infants are innocent, but I cannot
help it if it do you no good in your cause, for first are infants of believers
any more innocent in time of infancy then the rest? how so? not by birth, for
they are all alike born in sin, secundum te, not in life, for it cannot appear
that the one have more blurred themselves, or barred themselves by any actual
sin from baptism (if innocence be that which intitles to it) then the other

But secondly to say the truth Sirs so far is baptism from being intailed to
innocents, and holy ones only, as their only right, that it belongs rather only
unto sinners, for though Christ for examples sake, and for other ends,
submitted to it, who yet had no sin of his own, but he had ours by imputation,
yet the most proper use of it to all else that submit is to signify the
remission of their sins Mat. 3. 6. Luke 3. 3. Act. 2. 38. Act. 22. 16.

If believers infants therefore be so righteous, holy, i. e. innocent, etc. as
you make them, and I dare not deny but that they are, nor dare I say otherwise
for the world of other infants in infancy, having more charity than your
selves, even so much as to presume unumquemque bonum nisi constet de malo, they
are so little inrighted to baptism thereupon, that till they sin they are much
rather exempted from it: for if baptism be a sign to signify to him who
submits to it, the remission of his sins in plurali, (as Acts 2. 38. and in
all other places it seems to be) thenits utterly usless to such (and therefore
to infants) as, being yet under no Commission of sins, need yet no sign of
Remission of them.

Secondly. Matrimonial holiness I call that, which arises from the conjugation
of two viz, one man and one woman only into one flesh, according to Gods holy
ordinance and institution; the subject of which holiness is not only marriage
it self, and the marriage bed, which is said to be honorable among all men,
and undefiled, or which is all one, to be holy, Heb. 13. 4. but also the
married persons of what rank, quality, religion soever, when once come into
that conjugall relation, whether both or either or neither of them be
believers; and the seed or infants that are born of them in that condition,
which are called by God himself, Mal. 2. 15. a seed of his own seeking, a godly
seed, or seed of God, which he owns as truly, lawfully, honestly, holily
begotten, according to his own holy appointment, and not basely, beastly,
trecherously, adulterously, nor corruptly, as those are which arenot begotten
in the bed.

Opposite to this holiness, these holy ones (I mean the married couples, and
their holy seed) are all the lusts of concupisence, objected on strange flesh;
uncleanness, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7. adultery, fornication, and unclean agents, i. e.
adulterers; and the unclean issues of the adulterous bed, viz, the adulterous
brood, or the seed of the adulterer and the whore Isa. 57. 3.

This kind of holiness I dare say you do not mean, yea the most of you will
hardly be persuaded that there is any such kind of holiness at all, or if you be
it makes nothing for your purpose, for what if infants of believing parents be
(as infants of unbelieving parents also are, when begotten in lawful wedlock)
holy in such a sense, does this tend at all to prove them to have the holy
spirit, which is the thing in hand? yet this even this, and no other is all the
holiness meant by Paul 1 Cor. 7. 14. where he says, else were your children
unclean, but now are they holy, that very place which your selves so often send
us to, for proof thereof, when we deny your Antecedent in this consequence,
viz. Infants of believers are holy, therefore to be baptized: This that I say
as it is not denied (to my knowledge) by some that are for infants baptism, so
is it most undeniable to any that will but plainly and impartially consider the
direct drift of the Apostle in the verse, which is not any such matter as to
show that there is such a sanctity in the unbelieving husband, or wife of
believing yoke-fellows (for these are there said to be holy as well as the
children, with the same holiness) and in their children also, as inrolles them
all, viz. the unbelieving parties, and the children, as well as the believing
parties in the Covenant of grace, or in any such outward Church covenant, as
inrights them to baptism, membership and fellowship in the Congregation, but to
show such a sanctity or holiness, as clears both their conjunctions, and
conceptions to be pure and guiltless, such as frees their bed from the account
of baseness, and their brood from the account of bastardy, both which in the
sight of God and men would else be unholy, i. e. utterly unlawful and un clean:
his scope is (I say) to convince them of the lawfulness of that state, i. e. of
a believer and unbelievers being man and wife together, by the lawfulness of
the seed that proceeds from them, and by both these not only of the liberty
and legality, but the duty also of their continuance together in that civil
marriage relation, notwithstanding their different religion, as well as if they
were in Religion one and the same: The Corinthians had written to him (it seems
verse 1) about many cases; wherein they were scrupled, and among the rest about
this, viz. whether a husband or wife coming into the faith, and leaving their
yoke-fellows still in unbelief; might lawfully own and cleave to them still, as
their true and lawful yokefellows, as before they did, when they were both in
unbelief, or as they may one to another that are both in the faith, or whether
they must not rather leave them now, and disown them as to that old capacity,
because of this spiritual difference that now was between them, in answer to
which he tells them, that by all means if the unbelieving parties will be
pleased still to abide with them, as before, the believing parties must not
depart, nor put away; and to satisfy them further in so doing, he renders them
this good reason, viz. for the unbelieving wife is sanctified in, or to the
husband, and the unbelieving husband to the wife, which is as much as if he had
said, you are as true man and wife in the account of God as before, your
marriage is an honorable, your bed as undefiled as before, your unbelieving
husband or wife sanctified as a lawful companion to you as well as before, your
living and lying together is as holy, and unblameable in the eyes of God as
before, and to put this more out of doubt yet, least any should remain
unresolved, he minds them further by another argument (ab absurdo) the
absurdity which they it seems were too inconsiderate of, that would follow upon
it, if this were not so, for else (says he) your children are unclean; else
(that is) if you deny your selves in this case of different Religion to be
lawful man and wife together, you heed not (for wise men do not at all times
see the ill consequences of things at present, as Mr. Tombs well observes, and
as stark m^d as Mr. Baxter says page 87. of his Baby-book the Corinthians
were, if they did not mind this) you heed not what mad work you will make by so
doing, hereby you will deny your children to be a lawful issue; you will bring
the blame of baseness upon your begettings, and the blot of bastardy upon your
offspring; for all men know (though at all times it may not come into their
minds, nor then possibly when there is most need it should) that by the same
reason that the parents are not holy in their coming together, nor sanctified
one to another by the ordinance of God, viz. true and lawful matrimony, the
babes begotten and born of them, cannot be that godly seed, Mal. 2. 15: but
must be base born and unclean, and this the Apostle here hints unto them in
this clause, else were you children unclean, thereby evincing or evidencing to
them, who doubted of it, the warrantableness of their abode in their marriage
contract: but now says he, i. e. though you are one in the faith, and the
other in unbelief, yet your children are holy; and honestly born for all that
(as else they could not) and you consequently holy pure, and honest in your
communion.

And here I cannot but note by the way how egregiously Mr. Baxter pedles in a
long prate to Mr, Tombs page 86, 87. about an impossibillity of the
Corinthians knowing their seed to be legitimate, and yet doubting their
marriage to be unlawful, whereas they might in general know it, and yet in
special at this time not be so serious in considering it; and how impossible it
was for Paul rationally to argue from the effect to the cause, so as to go
about to convince them of the lawfulness of their marriage, by a consideration
of the lawfulness of their seed, which flows from lawful marriage, and is a
consequent, of which that is the cause: whereas in cognitione (praesertim
confusa) effectus sunt priore^ causis: in order to such knowledge as the
Apostle seeks here to beget them to, which was but as it were a certain
remembrance of what they might have easily gathered of themselves, had they not
been so forgetful as to need a memorandum, it is not irrational to clear the
cause by the effect, as to say there is smoke, therefore there is fire, yet the
fire is the cause of the smoke, these infants are no bastards, but legitimate,
therefore their parents were married is the very same.

This therefore I say again is all the holiness here intended. As for that
federall holiness you fiddle men in the ear with as the only holiness here
aimed at, I confess I once rawly uttered it in discourse my self, when being a
sprinkler of infants (as you are) and as stiff a stickler for that practice as
the blindest among you, I was made choice of to defend it against the Baptists,
who not by force of Arms (as the Priesthood once did) but by force of
Arguments at last overcame me totheir way, but as I was then pretty well
faulted for fastening such false constructions as of a faederal holiness on
that place, so upon a more serious search into its sense, I have found it my
self so faulty, that if I had said a fiddlestick holiness, i^ had been but
somewhat more ridiculous, so far is Paul from dilating on any such kind of
holiness in that Scripture, where to convince them of a mee^ civil sanctity,
and to show that different Religion destroies not any civil relation is verily
the very utmost of his errand.

To inculcate this yet a little more upon you, let me press you to lay to heart
these few considerations.

First that, as here in this fourteenth verse he shows that the civil
relation, or institutive holiness of the state between man and wife is not
nullified by a difference about the faith, so but that they may abide together
therein, though one be a believer, and the other an infidel, without any sin or
guilt contracted to the believer by such continuance in their contract, so in
the following verses he shows that the civil relation, or civil sanctity of the
State between Master and Servant is not nullified thereby, so but that they may
lawfully live together in that state, though the Servant should be a believer,
and the Master an infidel; or the Master a believer and the Servant an Infidel
ve. 21. art thou called being a Servant, i. e. to an unbelieving master, care
not for it, i. e. distract not thy self about it, scruple it not solicitously,
as if it were an unholy, unclean, unlawful, or sinful state for thee to
remain in, for v. 22. he that is called in the Lord, i. e. to the faith being a
Servant, i. e. in bondage to a Master not yet called, is Christ's free man, i.
e. acceptable to Christ, even in that state and relation to such a Master as
before; and in the favor of Christ, as also he that is called being free, or a
Master himself is Christ's servant, i. e. one whom he owns for his, accepts and
justifies, though happily he may be by covenant in relation still to
unbelieving servants, he is holy, honorable, and undefiled in his state as a
Master, and that by virtue of the Ordinance of Christ, who has sanctified that
condition and relation of Master, and Servant to each other, as holy for them
to abide in together, though in Moral respects the person of one of them may
be holy, and the other wicked.

The very like to which Paul's hints in his exhortation to servants, even of
unbelieving masters, 1 Timothy 6. 1. where he bids believing servants that are
under the yoke, though to unbeliving Masters (for in that he says and they
that have believing Masters inv. 2* it argues that he means such as have
non-believing Masters in the first) That they should count them worthy of all
honor because they are their masters still, by the ordinance of God that has
set and sanctified them in their place and s^ation as honorable and holy,
though in their persons and practice they may be contemptible, vile, and
ungodly; the like he says to Christians concerning civil Magistrates, though
infidels, Romans 1^. that being ordained of God and sanctified, or set apart as
his Ministers for civil good, they are to have a reverend, honorable, and even
holy estimation of them in their hearts, and to abide in their subjection to
them in matters civilly righteous, even for conscience sake.

The like he says to children that are in the ^aith (I mean not infants, for
the Scripture was not pe^n'd to such) concerning their parents, whom, as they
are their parents, they are to honor as those, who are by right of Divine
institution under a stamp of holiness, and civil sanction toward them as
Superiors to be respected in that Relation, whether they be believing parents
yea or no: for believing children such as are written to in Paul's Epistles
Ephesians. 6. 1. 2 Col. 3. 20. may and often have ungodly parents, as well as
believing parents ungodly children, or believing husbands and wives ungodly
yoke fellows, yet always to be owned in the Relations, as husbands, wives,
parents, children still; thus we see that persons may be vile, and so far to be
contemned Psalm. 15. 4. yet holy, pure and honorable in their capacities, and so
far to be so accounted on, they may be unsanc^isied in their hearts, and lives,
and yet be invested with such a civil sancti^y by a dint of Divine imposition,
and institution as may denominate them severally sanctified in their stations,
and natural or civil places of Relation, thus Magistracy and Subjection,
Mastership, and Servitude, Marriage, and Propagatio^* of mankind in that way
being all holy Ordinances of God, all sanctified by his word and stamp upon
them as honorable, and undefiled States and ways, to be and abide in, persons
may be unworthy, unclean, unsanctified in their manners, and yet be holy,
honorable, sanctified, true ^gitimate M^gistrates, sanctified subjects,
sanctified Masters, sanctified servants, sanctified wives, sanctified parents,
sanctified children, so as to be according to their several capacities
reverenced, submitted to, served, protected, provided for, used, owned, lawful
to be continued with each by other (side and infidelitate non (...)) without
respect to religion, yea though the Relata, Pu^a Masters, and husbands, etc. be
unbelievers, and the Correlata, viz. servants, wives, be believers in the
height. This to resolve the Corinthians in, who might possibly, and very easily
be gravelled herein, specially considering how that under the law, where the
dispen^ations indeed were different from the Gospels, they were commanded to
put away their wives, is the downright, and only business, and design of the
Apostle in the fourteenth and following verses, where besides his direction in
particular, in this difference of faith and unbelief, when it falls out between
man and wife, Master and servant, which two he instanceth in only in this
chapter, he gives a general direction to all sorts of persons in every
condition, quality, capacity, rank, or relation, to abide therein, if they
please, as sanctified and holy, i. e. by civil sanction to abide in, in these
words verse 17. viz. But as God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has
called every one so let him walk, and so ordain I in all Churches, and also in
these v. 20. Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called.

The Sanctification therefore or holiness here talked on is only civil sanction,
as to men, wives, and their children, a holiness only Matrimonial, and not a
faederal or Covenant holiness (as you dream) unless instead of the holiness of
Gods Covenant, you mean the faederall holiness, or holiness of the marriage
Covenant, or any civil covenant, or tie between superiors in relation, and
their subjects, which all indeed, when once solemnly contracted, and entered are
also Gods ordinance, Gods Covenant, which he owns, and will most severely
punish the pollution of, therefore as the Harlot that deals treacherously with
her husband is said Prove. 2. 17. to forget the Covenant of her God, i. e. the
marriage contract; and the Covenant whereby the man and wife are one is said to
be of Gods making Mal. (...). 14. 15. so God threatening Judah for her
whoredoms most terribly, Ezekiel. 16. 38. says he will judge her, as women that
break wedlock and shed blood are judged; so likewise did he plague Zed^kiah
when in the capacity of a Prince, he covenanted to give liberty to his
Servants, but did not Ier. 34. 18. so when in the capacity of a S^rvant to
Na^uchadnezzar that set him up, he covenanted and swear allegiance to him, but
slighted his covenant and brake it, which God calls his own oa^h and covenant,
the breach of which he would recompense on his head, Ezechiel chap. 17. verse
16. 17, 18, 19.

Secondly, let it be considered that the holiness and sanctification here
meant, and mentioned what ere it is, is said to be in the unbelieving parent,
whether husband or wife, as well as in the children, and therefore it cannot be
your faederall or outward Church Covenant holiness, i. e. such a holiness; as
intitles to baptism, and intailes Church Membership, Church privileges, and
Ord^nances, to the subjects to whom it is predicated, since the unbelieving
husband and wife are denominated by it too, for as of the children it is said
they are holy so of the non-believing yoke-fellows it is said they are
sanctified, between which there is no more difference then between (...) and
(...), which seem to me but a H^ndiadis, or double expression of the same
thing, and not more unlike then two 6 pences, and a shilling; and will not this
ab^urdity ensue, which I dare say you will evade if you can, if the holiness be
such as you say, viz. that the unbelieving husbands* and wives must be baptized
and inchurched also upon their yoke-fellowes faith, being sanctified thereby as
well as the Infants? therefore is it not rather think you a Civil and
Matrimonial then an Ecclesiastical, and faederall sanctity? Your usual evasion
is this.

Babist.
The Parents are sanctified by the faith one of the other, not so as to be in
covenant themselves by their sanctification, nor yet so as to be baptized
thereupon, but they are sanctified as a holy root, so as to bring forth a holy
issue, that has, by virtue of its holiness, a right to the Church Covenant and
Baptism.

Baptist.
Then it seems the unbeliever is with you a holy root as well as the other, and
gives holiness to the child, and makes it holy as well as the other parent, yea
so holy, that by that concurrence the child is in covenant and to be baptized.

First, do you not say sometimes that the child has its holiness from the
believing party only, as if there were no influence passing from the
unbeliever toward its holiness? why then do you say sometimes again, that from
a holiness which is in both they are co-contributers of holiness to the Infant?
which of the two is most undoubtedly true, for the holiness what ever it is is
such (and such it could not be if it were any but Matrimonial) as is in, and
equally flows from the unbelieving parent, as much as the believing to the
infant.

Secondly, if the Root be holy are not the branches so; and if the branches be
holy is not the root at least as, if not more so, in the same sense, with the
holiness of the same kind, which it conveyeth to the branches? and if so, then
must not this unbelieving parent being a Roo^, have the same kind of holiness
the child has? is he not as holy as the child is, and so as capable of being
baptized, and in covenant thereby? since you all agree that Nil dat quod in se
non habet, and Quodcunque efficit tale (id est) proprie, est magis tale,
whatever is a proper efficient to make another so, or so, must be more so it
self, so that if the unbeliv^g parent be as holy, with your very covenant
holiness it self, as his child, must he not as well by virtue thereof be
admitted to the same privileges? having though no more faith then his child,
yet somewhat else, viz. That holiness that with you intitles to baptism, yea it
is more eminently in him than the other: either therefore deny those old
received Axioms, and that I think you need not do, for they are truths, or
else deny that which is so commonly asserted by you, viz. that the unbelieving
parents are sanctified, so as to be holy Roots to their children by the faith
of their believing yoke-fellows, as well as the believing yoke-fellows are by
their own, and this you will be very loath to do, for you will hardly coin such
a handsome shi^t as that is in have again, if you let it go, or else deny that
the unbelieving husband and wife is sanctified or holy at all, but that you
cannot do for the text says they are hallowed as well, and in the same sense
as their children and believing companions are, in being married to them, what
sense soever that is, or else grant us they are holy with the holiness we stand
for, as that only which is meant in this place, viz. Legitimacy, freedom from
the least tin^ture of uncleanness, and baseness in their cohabitations,
generations, and issue, and this I believe you must do when all is done; but
then you lose such a supporter of your practice, that let go one more, viz.
Act. 2. 38. 39. which must be handled also hereafter; and Iachin and Boaz, the
two prime pillars that stand by the entry into your Temple, i. e. Infants
sprinkling, which is your entering ordinance, will be removed, a matter of no
small tendency to its ruin, or else lets see in you rejoinder, for I put these
things upon you by way of quaere, expecting to see (if by silence you give not
the cause) how well you will distinguish your selves out of the briars, which
your opinion upon the place brings you into, and how well you will wind your
selves out of those many absurdities, which you are led aside into from the way
of truth, by the extravagancies and cunning concavities of your crooked logic
lane.

Thirdly, let it be considered that the holiness here predicated of the
unbelieving parent and the children, is not such as is the result of the faith,
and faederal holiness of the believing parent, (as is so frequently asserted
among you) but of the marriage Covenant, which being holy by institution, and
honorable among all, and undefiled, gives the denomination of civil sanctity
to the unbelieving couple and their seed, as to a couple of believers, and
their seed, as also the denomination of honorable in an unbelieving magistrate
and master a rises, not from any praise worthy qualification in their persons,
much less in the persons of the Correllatives, as you say the holiness of the
unbeliever does from the faith of the believer, but from Divine ordination
which constitutes them as holy in their places, this will be evident,

First, if you consider the manner of speech here used by the Apostle, who
says, not the unbeliever is sanctified in the believing wife, and believing
husband but in the wife, and in the husband, i. e. in her being his wife, and
his being her husband, and howbeit its true, which is commonly returned to
this, viz. that it is the believing wife of the unbelieving husband, and the
believing husband of the unbelieving wife, when the marriage is between
believers and unbelievers, yet the believing party is not here preferred before
the unbelieving parent, as to the conferring of this holiness upon the issue,
but they are said to be both, and that by your selves, who confess they
jointly make one holy root, equal in this influence, and are sanctified, not
one by the faith of the other, as you suppose the unbeliever to be by the faith
of the believer, but both by the ordinance of God, viz. their marriage each of
other, so that they both alike do sanctify the issue.

Secondly, if you consider the true genuine proper direct tendency and weight
of this Relative particle [else] which if you allow it a right reference,
relates not to the faith or believing of either, but to their being true man
and wife, to the lawful wedlock of them both; for that which is the ground of
your error about this place is the forcing of this particle [else] the wrong
way, for Else, i. e. (say you) if one of the parents be not a believer, then
the children are unclean, whereas the sense of it runs thus, vix. else i. e. if
you be not holy in your copulations, if you be not sanctified one in, to, and
by the other as lawful man and wife, by your union formerly contracted,
notwithstanding your now disunion in Religion, then your children are unclean,
and this is truth, for so the children are in this civil sense, if begotten,
and born out of matrimony, whether the parents be believers or no, bu^ the
other is not truth, for whether both or but one or none of the parents believe,
the infants for that cause alone, and without respect to matrimony, are in no
sense ere the more holy or unclean.

Thirdly, and this will yet appear more plainly, if you consider that faith
alone in either one, or both the parents begetting out of wedlock cannot
sanctify the seed so begotten with this civil holiness here meant, no nor with
that faederall holiness you plead for, nor could it do so even then, when that
holiness or birth privilege you talk of was in force (as now it is not) viz.
in the days of the law; for if two believers came together then, out of
marriage their seed were not only base born See Mr. Blake in birth privilege
p. 5. 11.
and so unclean, in this our sense, but also to the tenth generation incapable
to be admitted into the congregation, and so consequently unclean even in your
own, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. whereupon (how Pharez and Zarah were dealt with it matters
not, since they were born before the law was given) Ieptha was exempted from any
inheritance with his brethren, because he was the son of a strange woman, Judge.
11. 2. and David's unclean issue by Bathsheba, that in the wisdom of God was
taken away by death on the seventh day, might not surely, without breach of the
law, have been accounted holy, and of the congregation, if he had lived beyond
the eighth, whereupon your selves also are much fumbled about the holiness of
bastards, and the baptism of base-begotten babies, so that you scarcely know
how to behave your selves about it, though the parents sinning be believers, at
least en-churched in your Churches, yea its generally known (says Mr Cotton P.
87, 88. of the way of the Church in N. England.
) that our best Divines do not allow the baptism of bastards and though he is
pleased to say they allow it not sine sponsoribus, without Sureties, yet I
wonder, since Deuteronomy. 23 (...) 2. Gods denial of such of old is made the ground of
their denial of such now, to enter into the Congregation as unholy, that our
Divines dare take on them to admit cum sponsoribus, and so to go besides their
own Rule, viz. the order of things under the law, wherein God gave no such
allowance, but to let that tolleration pass, which they take to themselves, you
may learn thus much of your selves if you will, that though wedlock without
faith make a holy seed in our sense, yet faith without wedlock in the parents
can make a holy seed neither in our sense, nor in your own, nor any at all, for
the infants of the married are holy; but believers bastards are both civilly,
and federally unclean; inso much that your selves see cause to refuse as
federally holy, the spurious seed even of those, whose lawful issue you
unlawfully sprinkle.

Fourthly, if you more seriously consider, that the holiness in the Infant
here must needs be the fruit and result of that, and that must needs be the
cause of the holiness here spoken of in the infant, quo posito ponitur
sanctitas, sublato tollitur, which being in the parents. a holiness must
necessarily be thereupon, which not being in the parents, a holiness cannot be
in the seed: for posita causa ponitur effect us sublata tollitur: abstract the
cause and the effect cannot be: suppose the cause and the effect cannot but be:
now that which if it be not in the parents the holiness is not, but being in
them the holiness is consequently in the infants, it is not the faith, but the
conjugal or marriage Relation of the parents, for as for the first of these,
viz. faith, it may be in one, yea in both of the parents, and yet no federal
holiness at all be in the infants, witness Ishmael the seed of Abraham the
father of the faithful, and his Sons by Keturah also, born of him after Co
venant made with him, and his seed in Isaac and Jacob, and yet neither of them
in that Covenant, witness the base born children of true believers among the
Jews, suppose David and Ba^hsheba, which for all the parents faith could not by
the law be admitted in the Congregation, nor have that birth-priviledge to be
reputed holy, which from the parents faith you universally intail to the
infants: moreover this birth-priviledge and Covenant-holiness by generation,
which did inright to Church ordinances, which once was, but now is a
nonentity, and out of date, might be then, when it was in being, in children,
in whose parents faith was not found at all, for most of the Jews were
unbeiievers, yet all their legitimate children were holy federally, therefore
faith in the parent cannot be the cause of such a thing: yea if you will
believe Mr, Blake himself, the strictest pleader for a birth-priviledge of
federal holiness in Infants that ever I met with, and that from this very
place, he condescends so far as to contribute one contradiction to himself
toward the helping of the truth in this case, viz. That faith in the par^nt is
not the cause of this holiness, whilst making the holiness in this text to be
a birth privilege, or Church Covenant holiness, and to be the fruit and
result of the faith of the believing parents, and consequently their faith to
be the sole and proper cause of the same, he confesses flatly elsewhere page 4.
that a loose life in the parent and mis-belief, which is as bad, in some cases
worse, then unbelief, (for which is worse to believe false things, or not to
believe true?) yea Apostasy from the faith, (which all if they be not
inconsistent with faith I know not what is) do not divest, nor debar the issue
from having that holiness which (himself says) is meant in this text.

Babist.
Perhaps he means not by faith strictly the parents true believing, but in
general his being in the covenant, and faederally holy himself, and so a cause
of this federal holiness in the issue.

Baptist.
First, Paul means true believing here, in 1 Cor. 7. 14. whether M^ Blake do or
no.

Secondly, what will he get as to the point in hand by his Synonamizing faith
and faederall holiness, for still neither the one nor the other is made here
the cause of the holiness of the seed, for the holiness here spoken of may be
where neither of them is, and may not be in the seed, even where they are both
in the parent, as for example in Ezras time, Ezra 10, 3. we find abundance of
the Jews, both Priests, and people, that were in the faith, or at least in
faederall holiness, yet the children were put away as unholy, as well
faederally as otherwise, because their marriage was unlawful, and that bed
adulterous wherein they lay with strange wives, Ezra 10. 3. and that both
parents possibly may be faithful, and faederally holy, and yet their seed be in
all senses utterly unclean is evident, for the child of two believing Jews
begotten besides the marriage bed, was both a Bastard, and also barred from the
Congregation, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. again this faederal holiness as well as faith may be
in neither parent, and yet the issue not be unclean, but holy still, and so are
all (Matrimonially, and civilly at least) that among Pagans are the issue of
the marriage bed; and with the holiness of the Covenant of Grace too, when they
come to years, and believe themselves, as not a few children of unbelievers do,
and sometimes the seed of Turks and Tartars, this therefore i. e. the faith, or
faederal sanctity of the one parent, nor of both cannot be the cause of this
sanctity, is here denominated of the seed, for holiness in the infants is not
always, when this is, and sometimes it is in the infant, when this is not in
the parent, which being of each without other, cannot be between a true cause,
and its effect; but as for the second viz. the marriage sanctity in the
parents, it is that which being in the parents, holiness is naturally and
necessarily in the seed that is born of them, whether they be both or either,
or neither in faith or unbelief, but being not in the parents, there can be no
holiness, no birth holiness in their infants, nor Matrimonial, nor
Congregationall neither: therefore this is that which is the cause of the
holiness of the issue in this Scripture, the result of which, and not of faith
in the parents, is this non-uncleanness in their posterity, and so I have done
with this kind of holiness, and with this Scripture which speaks of this
Matrimonial holiness and no other.

Thirdly, Ceremonial holiness, I call that same holiness which properly,
peculiarly, and pro tempore only pertained to the whole nation, and
congregation of Israel, denominating them all holy every one of them, and
distinguishing them from all other people, and nations; which during the time
of the Jews pedagogy, according to Gods own imposition were then accounted
sinners, common, and unclean by a certain ens-rationis, an extrinsecall, merely
notional, and nominal rather then either real, moral or substantial sort of
sin, and uncleanness to which the others holiness was directly opposite, and
answerable. The subjects of which Accountative holiness were not only the
people of the Jews themselves, which were a holy people Deuteronomy. 7. ver. 8. Exodus
22. 31. but also and more specially the Priests, and more specially yet, or in
a higher degree, but in the same kind of holiness (for degrees do not vary
nature) the High Priests, which were holiness to the Lord, Exodus 39. 30. also
their parents, which were not matrimonially only, nor often morally, yet (to
allow your own phrase here, because they were outwardly in Covenant with God,
concerning outward promises and privileges, on performance of outward
ordinances) every faederally a holy parentage a holy root, Romans 11. also their
natural (if withal matrimonial) issue, which were not at all in their infancy,
and but seldom when at years spiritua^ly, allwaies faederally holy branches, a
holy seed, also their land of Canaan, which was the holy Land, their
Metropolitan City Jerusalem, which was the holy City, their Temple, which was a
holy Temple, the Utensills, vessels, (...), and other accomplishments, which
were all holy, a holy Lavar, a holy Altar, a holy Ark, holy Candlesticks, holy
Cherubims, most holy place, etc. and in a manner all things belonging to the
Law of Moses, and that first Covenant made with Abraham, and his fleshly seed,
whether hollowed or consecrated by God himself, or dedicated to him by men at
his appointment, viz. the first born, the first fruits, tithes, offerings,
sacrifices, days, feasts, which were all holy, and had relation (as shadows
and types for a while) unto things Evangelically, Spiritually, and
substantially holy; that were to be there after: yea with this same kind of
holiness some meats were holy; some flesh Hag. 2. 12, 13. was holy, some birds,
and beasts were sanctified as holy, and lawful to be used, and eaten, when
others were prohibited as profane, common and unclean, not so much as to be
touched without sin, without contracting such an outward fleshly kind of guilt,
and impurity, as made their souls in that ceremonial sense abominable; yea with
an uncleanness oppositely answerable to this carnal holiness, those fleshly
purities, and purifyings, that then were, some actions, as the touch of a dead
body; some issues of men and women, some diseases as the Leprosy, some bodily
blemishes as crookedness, dwarfishness, blindness, lameness, yea the very
easements, and excrements that passed from them in the camp, without covering,
did defile and render them sinners, profane, unclean, unholy and guilty before
the Lord, Levit. 5. 2. 3. 5 -- 11. 43. to 46. also Chapters 14. 15. 22. also
Levit. 20. 25. 26 -- 21. 18. to the 24. Deuteronomy. 23. 12. 13. 14. which de^ilements
did then reach to pollute the flesh only, which the blood of Bulls and Goats,
that could not cleanse the conscience morally, did sanctify to the purifying
of Hebr. chap. 9. ver. 13. neither do these things defile any man now in any
such sense at all.

This is the holiness, which when you say infants of believers are holy; I have
ground to persuade my self you Ashford Disputants mean not, but rather some
inherent moral holiness, when I consider how you talk of infused habits in the
hearts of infants in your Disputation and Review; and yet again I have ground
to believe you mean this holiness, which was in the Jewish infants and their
implements, if I may imagine your meaning, by what is extant in the writings of
your brethren upon the subject, specially if I may measure your meaning by Mr
Blakes in his Birth-priviledge, or covenant-holiness of believers and their
issue, wherein he lays himself out at large, and yet is too short when all is
done in proving from the like under the law, among the people of the Jews and
their issue, that even now in the times of the Gospel also, a people that enjoy
Gods ordinances, convey to their issue a privilege to be reputed by birth, not
unclean, but holy persons, and thereupon to be baptized; the absurdity and
inconsequence of which doctrine (and so I hope to make it appear, now I am upon
it) is little less then if he had argued thus, as the Pope does from that time
to this, viz. there was an Hierarchy or holy principallity among the Priests
under the law, therefore there must be such another under the Gospel, and as
then the Highpriests, Aaron and his Sons who were holiness to the Lord, wore
holy garments in their ministration for glory and for beauty, viz. Coats, and
robes embroydered with gold and blew, and purple and scarlet, and fine linen,
and curious girdles of needle work, nnd miters, and holy Crowns upon the
miters, so his Holiness to the Lord, the High Priest of Christendom Appollyon,
and his sons must thus swagger in their service, and be set out in such a holy
manner for glory, and for beauty, with his Pontisicalib^, and most holy
sumptuous, superstitious attire: this holiness of the holy Priesthood that
then was, and its holy pertinances, that holy people, and holy seed you style
very fi^ly, and I agree with you in the term (for 'twas indeed the holiness of
that Covenant that then was, while the first tabernacle, and its worldly
Sanctuary was yet standing) a federall holiness, nevertheless though you call
it by no name but what I freely allow of, yet I call it by one or two names,
which though they be as true and properly due to it as the other, and Ep^thites
given ordinarily by your selves to the holiness of almost every thing else
under that Covenant, yet least it pluck you up by the roots as touching your
opinion in this point of infant-holinesse and baptism, I much fear you will
hardly allow of them as to the parents and the seed, if you can handsomely
evade them by secundum quid, or some such like cleanly distinction: these are
first, a ceremonial holiness, the rise of which denomination, and reason why
given, are (...) quasi ad tempus durans, for a time only, its non-continuance
to the end, or its non-conveyance down-wards from the Church of the Jews, to
the times and Churches of the Gospel: Secondly, a typical holiness, as being
but a show, shadow or figure of some more excellent holiness to come, for the
law and first Convenant had but the shadow of things to come, and not the very
image of the things, Heb. 10. 1. I say a typical, and therefore but a
temporal holiness, which stood and was seated only in diverse outward bodily
rites, sacrifices, actions, observations, ordinances, offices, officers,
places, gestures, vestures, ornaments, meats, drinks, and a certain fleshly
birthright, and title to certain earthly preheminences, dignities,
privileges, liberties, inheritances, a kingdom: and all this for the time
then being only, and to point out a true, more special, real, spiritual and
eternal excellency and glory under the Gospel in order to the manifestation of
which all the other was but a pageant, for as the M^p of that Jerusalem that
then was, delineates to our capacities the beauty of that earthly fabric, yet
is far i^ferious to the City it self therein deciphered, so the old Jerusalem
with all her holy things, were but a shadowy representation, and pattern of the
New Jerusalem, and the true heavenly things themselves, which the other is as
far inferior to in worth and real felicity, as any Mapp of it upon the wall is
to the City that is set out, and darkly described by it.

Thus did their Highpriests in all their holiness, yea and kings too (King
Solomon specially in all his glory) and their prophets also, in all their
materially holy unctions to those several holy functions, type out that one
spiritually anointed one of the father, our Lord Jesus, though a single person,
to his tripple office of King, Priest, and Prophet over his Church, so their
carnally holy meats, drinks and abstinencies, our spiritual meat and drink,
which they are said to eat of in a figure, And our abstinencies from fleshly
lusts, and moral pollutions; so their holy 1 Cor, 10. 1, 2.
washings the washing of Regeneration, and renew^ngs by the spirit; their holy
sacrifices, blood of sprinkling, which (as all the rest) could not make perfect
as pertaining to the conscience, but sanctified only to the purifying of the
flesh, i. e. the delivery of them from that outward imputation of impurity, and
uncleanness that would else have lain upon them, the blood of Christ purging
the conscience from iniquities, and dead works wherewith its defiled, to serve
the living God in true holiness and righteousness all the days of our life:
so Circumcision of their fleshly seed, which was outward, and in the flesh,
tipified, not Baptism (as is simply supposed from Col. 2.) but the Circumcision
of the spiritual seed, i. e. believers, newborn babes, begotten to Christ by
the word, with the Circumcision made without hands, i. e. sanctification, and
cutting of the filthy lusts of the flesh; so their outwardly royal
Priesthood, the spiritual royal Priesthood, i. e. the true Saints, who are
truly (as the other ceremonially and tipically) a kindome of Priests, made
Kings and Priests to the Lamb, and shall once reign on the earth, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
Rev. 5. 10.

So the outward holiness of their nation tipified, not the same kind of outward
ho^esse of any one Nation taken collectively in the lump, as the whole Nation
of England, Scotland, etc. and all their seed (as you ignorantly imagine) but
the inward holiness of the holy Nation of true believe^s themselves, whether
parents to wicked children, or children of wicked parents, scattered through
all Nations under ^eaven, these Peter writes to, and calls the chosen
generation now, i. e. the Regenaration themselves, not the natural generation
of these; also a R^ll Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people to God in
a spiritual sense, as Israel was in a certain carnal and outward sense before,
1 Pet. 1. 1, 2. 9. ^o their holy land our inheritance incorruptible reserved in
heaven the heavenly country, which we look for with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
with whom we are heirs by faith of the same promise; their holy City, our holy
City, which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11. Rev. 12.
Heb. 13. their holy Temple, Gods Evangelically holy Temple, where he will
dwell, which Temple ye a^e, says Paul to the Church, 1 Cor. 3. Their carnal
freedom, our spiritual freedom from sin, which who ere commits is but a
servant, for all the other: though born of Abraham, John 8. Their passover,
Christ our pass^over that was sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. Their Rock, our Rock
of refreshment Christ; their cloud, Christ overshadowing by day, and
enlightening by night his people, 1 Cor. 10.

Their Manna, Christ, our bread that came down from heaven John 6. their
delivery out of Egypt the worlds Redemption by Christ; and as sundry other
things, of which I cannot now speak particularly, so lastly (to draw yet a
little nearer to the point in hand) their holy seed, issue, infancy tipi^ied,
(...) ^as both corruptly and carnally you conceive) the ^leshly seed of
believing, or i^-churched Gentiles, for these are in no wise the An^itype to
the circumcised infancy of Israel, but as I hinted before, the truly and
spiritual holy seed it self, i. e. believers themselves; or if the seed of
believers, not their natural se^d, but their seed in a spiritual sense, i. e.
that are begotten by them, by their words unto the faith; for believers as men
beget men only, and no more in that way of bodily (...), but as believers they
may beget believers, by way of spiritual (...), by comunication of the gospel
to their consciences, thus Paul was the father of the Corinthians, in Christ
Jesus begetting them all by the gospel, 1 Cor. 4 15. t^us he traveled with the
Galathians till Christ was formed in them, who^ also he bespeaks, as John also
does his converts, 1 John 2. 1. by the name of my little (...), Gal 4. 19. thus
far if you will I agree with you, but your cause will be no gainer by this
agreement, that as ceremonially holy ones begat ceremonially holy ones under
the law, as a tipe in a way of carnal copulation, so spiritually holy ones
beget spiritually holy ones, in a Gospel sense, by their spiritual communion
and communication: for as Christ himself, who supremely begets, so true
Christians as agents, and instruments under him may be said to multiply, and
see their seed when in their endeavors to beget others to the faith, the work,
will, way and pleasure of the Lord does succeed and prosper in their hands; the
holy seed therefore that answers under the Gospel to that holy seed, the Jews
(...) under the law, as the substance of that shadow, that with all the re^is
(...) ^d away, is Christ, and his truly, morally and spiritually holy ones
only, (...) holy seed of the law, or that seed which was holy in the old
Covenants (...), were but as the leaves of an oak, which though they flourish
and make a show ^r a time, yet at last are cast off and fall to the ground, but
the holy (...) in (...) Gospel sense, i. e. the Saints and true believers, not
their natural se^ with (...), for they are only Semen carnis, and that not of
Abraham neith^* (...) the I^w is who yet has thereupon only no part, nor
portion in this matter) (...) of (...) Gentiles, these Saints I say are the
true Semen fidei, children of the faith, and (...) seed of Abraham, and also
the very substance thereof, as Isa. 6. 13* as the Prophet there speaks of the
truly Godly, so I say the substance of the Church of the Jews, now it has cast
it leaves, i. e. all its former figurative holiness, holy Priests, and holy
^eed, the substance thereof is still in them. For all things under the law and
old Testament, even the whole Covenant and Testament it self, as well as every
part and parcel of the ^ame, did but serve unto the example and shadow of the
New Testament, will and Covenant that stands ratified by the blood of the
Testator, (as neither was the first dedicated without blood) and the more holy
and true heavenly things thereof, yea as w^ll the holy promises that were made
to that holy seed, as the holy precepts upon performance of which they were
made, and the holy seed it self also to whom the promises were made, and of
whom these precepts were required, did exemplify a better Testament, and those
better promises upon which it is established, and the better and more spiritual
ordinances, which in order thereunto are to be observed, and that better and
far more holy seed that observing these ordinances shall at last inherit, which
all were to come in under Christ, and before which all the other were to vanish
viz.

First, a heavenly Canaan, Country, Kingdom, inheritance, substance, peace,
prosperity, plenty, advancement, rest, immunity; glory answering to all that of
Isreal's which was but earthly.

Secondly, the life of faith, and obedience to Christ's law, which is more
inward and spiritual Mat. 5. answering that law of commandments, contained in
ordinances given by Moses, which was more ad extra and carnal.

Thirdly, that holy seed which is not of the law of Moses nor of the flesh of
Abraham by generation, but of Christ by regeneration the seed or successors of
the faith of Abraham, and so heirs with him by that faith of all
Gospel-promises, answering Antipically to the other; for though the promise of
being heirs of the old Canaan, which was but a spot of the world and picked out
as a pattern for the time, was made to Abraham and his seed through the law i.
e. the children of Isaac and Jacob, which were counted for his seed under the
law viz. the natural branches of his body (for these only were the heirs of
that old earthly legal and t^pical land of promise, in token of which all the
males were circumcised in their ^lesh) yet the promise that Abraham should be
heir of the world; which is the Gospel pointed at, couched and exhibted
tipically in the delivery of the other was not made to Abraham and that seed of
his through the law (qu^tales) only, unless they were (as some few were) by
faith his seed in the other sense also, but through the righteousness of faith
i. e. to the branches grafted in by personal believing in Christ Romans 4. 13,
14. where the Apostle says plainly, that if they which are of the law and
circumcision only (meaning the fleshly seed of Abraham) as such, unless they
also walk in the steps of that faith which Abraham had, be heirs with him of
the world, which is the thing promised in the Gospel then faith, which is made
the only term intitling to Gospel-promises is made void, and the promise of
just no effect at all: much more may we say if the fleshly s^d of your Gentile
believers, most of which are no believers neither, be heirs of this
Gospel-promise, and Gospel-inheritance (as so born) so that they may be signed
for heirs by the Gospel-ordinance of baptism, upon that mere and simple account
of their parents being believers, without respect to faith in their own
persons, then the Gospel requires faith to be acted by us in order to
salvation altogether in vain, and to no purpose; ye^ if go^pel promises and
privileges be intailed to me upon my fathers being a believer, I need no faith
of mine own, as to the making of me an heir thereof, and if it were so as you
commonly say, but most horrible in considerately from Acts 2. 39. that the
promise of the Gospel is not only to the believers but also to their bodily
issue, as barely descending from them, qua sic simpliciter, and without their
own personal faith, which in infancy appears no more to be in them then infants
of unbelievers, and which if it appears (as often it does in unbelievers children
when they come to years and not in the other) declares them to be heirs
apparent thereof, when the other are not) then I say plainly that all believers
children must unavoidably be saved, if God be true in his promise, though when
they come to years the never believe, and live never so profanely, the terms
being still fulfilled upon which you say the promise is made to them, which is
this being born of believing parents, for the prophanness of their lives, and
nonbelieving themselves, Non est causa quo minus, etc. is no cause whereupon
they are a whit less the seed of believers after the flesh, and if so (and also
that that only gives a title to the promise) then he that made that promise on
those terms, viz. being the fleshly seed of believers, the terms of being so
born being fulfilled by all the natural seed of believers, be they never so
ungodly in their own persons, must be faithful to fulfill his own part, and
(their ungodliness non obstante) make it good to them concerning their
salvation, which drives you often to such a Dilemma in discourses, that for your
ears almost you dare not answer distinctly to us, when we ask you what that
Gospel promise is, which is made (as you say) to believers infants, and upon
what terms it is made to them, beyond the infants of unbelievers?

Babist.
We do not say that being born of believing parents only, intitles persons to
the Gospel promises, but they are heirs thereof, and of all the glory, and
privileges, and salvation held forth therein as they shall hereafter believe
themselves also, and live godly, when they come to years, and not otherwise.

Baptist.
Yea say you so? then pray how does the promise of the Gospel appear to belong
one jo^ more to believers children, then to unbelievers? for the believers
child (it seems by you now) cannot by promise be saved upon his parents faith,
unless he believe also himself, and then he may, and what is this more then I
can say to the full of all unbelievers children, yea and as well of all
unbelievers in the world? for even the children of Turks and Pagans, and all
the children of all the men upon the face of the Earth shall be saved, upon
these terms, viz. believing and obeying the Gospel themselves, when they come
to years, whether their parents ever obeyed it, yea or no; where then is the
pre-eminence of your believers seed above unbelievers, if you go this way to
work? either therefore grant the one, or else the other, viz. either that
believers children are heirs of salvation upon their fathers faith only
without their own, or if you say, not so but by their own faith it is that they
must be saved, then that the Gospel promise belongs not to believers children
beyond other men's, and that one man's seed has no such birth-priviledge and
pre-eminence as you dote of about another, for unbelievers children may as
well as they by promise be saved upon their own faith, when they come to age
without their Fathers.

Babist.
We can easily answer you to all this by distinguishing upon the promise, thus,
The promise of the Gospel is either of salvation, life remission of sins, the
holy spirit, as the earnest, and the inheritace it self to come, or else of
external privileges only, and participations of Ordinances, as Baptism,
Churchmembership etc. the promise of the eternal inheritance, life, and
salvation we grant is not made, much less made good to any upon terms of the
parents faith, but upon our own personal belief, and obedience, but the promise
of outward privileges, and of right to participation of ordinances, as to be
baptized, and inchurch^, this belongs to children upon their fathers faith, so
that believers children are children of the promise in this sense, when others
are not, and in this last sense it is that Peter says the promise is to you,
and to your Children etc. i. e. you and yours have the privilege of right to
baptism.

Baptist.
Then it seems you quit the former sense, I pray therefore let us here no more
of that till next time however, but let me tell you one thing by the way
concerning that first sense, before I say ought to your second; viz, that if
the promise of salvation belong to persons upon their own personal belief and
obedience (as undoubtedly it does, according to the whole tenor of the
Scripture as to men at years) and such only, then as very a sigment of ours as
you feign it to be, twill put you to your shifts, to find out what way dying
infants are saved in, unless you own another way then that which the Scripture
tenders it to men in, for the justification and salvation of infants, viz. the
presentment of the righteousness of Christ for them without belief in them, or
any other kind of obedience; And since in such sense as this only you own the
Gospel promise to be made by Peter Act. 2. to believers infants, viz. that they
shall by right be admitted to outward privileges, as baptism and membership,
when others shall not, I beseech you consider what a poor piece of promise is
made by him, and what a miserable comforter the Apostle is made by you, in
making as if this were all his meaning, and all that he intends by that
precious word of promise; I suppose his drift was to support the Jews, now
smitten down under sense of sin, and the guilt of Christ's blood which then lay
upon them, by propounding to them some ground of consolation, but here is cold
comfo^t in what he says, if that be all, which you say is, the sense he
speaks in, he had spoke little to their purpose, and as good he had said never
a whit, as never the better; for this promise (as you take it) has more matter
of mourning in it then otherwise to say you shall be brought nearer to the
Church, but never the nearer to salvation thereby, further then you do that
which others doing, that are further off the Church, shall be saved so doing as
well as you: Sirs you had as good cut off the entail of that piece of promise,
which you entitle believers infants to, as cut of the best part of the promise
from them, which yet you seem to entail as from their parents to them, for this
is not worth a rush without the other, for abstract this great privilege you
seem to invest them with, from that which you divest them of by this
distinction, and its worth little or nothing, if not plainly worse than
nothing, without the other: what better to be under a promise of being
privileged with, and what privilege at all to be admitted to this, and yet to
be no more, nor upon any other terms under the promise of the inheritance it
self, then others, such as were yet never at all signed to it: Is it not r^ther
a burden and a bondage? for outward ordinances verily are part of the
preceptory part of the Gospel, and the precept in point of ordinances, as well
as in point of manners, is part of the yoke and burden of Christ, and of the
hard sayings of his, which flesh and blood brooks not to hear off, for though
the way of Christ is light and easy, and not grievous where it is lessened by
thoughts of the recompense of reward, yet is it in it self a burden, and a
yoke, and such a one too as considering the sufferings of all such as submit to
own it, well nigh wearies them that walk under it, though under clearest title
to the Kingdom, for which they suffer, much more may it be a misery, and not a
mercy to such, who have a promise of being barely admitted to it, but no more
of life and salvation, or at least upon no other terms, then such as have not
the privilege to be admitted to it yet at all; if the promise to believers and
their children run only thus, viz: you shall stand under the title of the holy
people of God, under rightto outward ordinances, when others shall not, not
only you, but also your children shall be baptized and inchurched, but neither
you nor they ever the sooner saved, as born of you, further then together with
you they shall believe and obey me in all things, in which case of faith and
obedience all unbelievers in the world, and their children shall be saved, as
soon as either you or they, it is as much as to say, the promise of a liberty
and freedom to partake of the ordinance, is to you and your children above
others, but the promise to partake of the inheritance is as much to all others
and their children as to you, and yours; what most comfortless comfort is this,
to men cast down under sense of sin, and guilt? what a pittious pla^ster is
here applied to men wounded in conscience, and smarting under the direful
apprehensions of Gods wrath? besides what exquisite nonsense do you make the
Apostle speak, if his words be taken in your sense, for they must run thus,
viz. first, by way of precept, repent and be baptized you and your children, in
the name of Christ for remission of sins, and then by way of encouragement
thus, viz. so this great privilege of being baptized shall belong to you and
your seed, which impenitent unbaptized ones, and their seed shall not enjoy,
but the promise of salvation and remission of sins is made no more to you then
unto them: this is to restore them from their contrite and weather beaten
condition, and to invest them cum privilegio with a witness, yet this is all
the privilege, if the promise here made to these parents, and their children
be of no more then being outwardly incovenanted, i.e. inchurched by baptism (as
you say it is.) But undoubtedly it must be otherwise then thus for all your
saying and the promise, take it which of these two ways you will, viz. for the
mere tender or profer of the thing (as the word promise is sometimes used) or
for the thing it self proffered or promised (in which last sense its mostly
taken) it must needs be of some more excellent matter, then mere outward
membership in the Church on ^arth, ab^ract from all true and immediate title to
remission of sins and salvation: yea verily its most evident that the thing
here promised is no less then remission of sins and salvation itself, for as
no less is expressed in the very text wherein he names remission of sins and
the holy spirit, which elsewhere is called the earnest of the inheritance, so
unless you will divide the children from sharing alike with their parents in
that promise which in the self same sentence, terms and sense is propounded
alike to them both, so as to say the word promise is to be understood of
remission of sins, and salvation as in relation to the parents, but of an
inferior thing viz. a right to ordinances only as in relation to the infants
which were intolerable absurdity to u^ter, it must necessarily be meant of one
and the same kind of mercy to the children, as is exhibited therein to the
parents; yea and upon the same terms too, and no other then those upon which
i^s tendered to the parents viz. personal repentance and obedience, and so
consequently of remission of sins and salvation, and not of such a trivial
title to external participation only as you talk on, which if it be, then
unless you assert that God has promised salvation absolutely to all the
natural seed of believers, upon those very terms only as they are their seed,
which you are ashamed to stand to, the promise, mean which you will by that
word promise in this text, whether the bare proposal, or the salvation
propounded, or both, upon these terms belongs of right not only to believers
and their posterity, but also to all men and their posterity to, without
difference, when at years of capacity to neglect or perform them throughout all
ages and places of the world; for as the gospel or glad tidings of salvation
are commanded by Christ Mark 16. 15, 16. to be preached or proffered to every
creature at years to hear and understand, though not to infants on terms of
belief and baptism, so assuredly those terms being performed, the salvation so
promised shall be enjoyed accordingly, if he has any truth in him, who said ^e
that believes (i.e. lives and dies in the faith of Christ) and is baptized,
shall be saved; and Paul likewise Romans 3. 22. intimates no less, saying that
the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ is unto all, and
upon all them that believe, and there is no difference; so that if they that
are now unbelievers and unbelievers children also shall hereafter believe, with
such faith as shows it self by obedience, which kind of faith only the
Scripture means, the promise of salvation and remission of sins is as well
unto them, as unto those that do now both believe themselves, and were also
born of believing parents, yea and the promise of the holy spirit also Prove. 1.
22. 23. for indeed God so loved the world (not mundum electorum only ex mundo
electum) that he gave his only begotten Son, not to condemn one person more
then another, but as they should personally reject him, but that the world
through him might be saved, that whosoever in it i.e. in all the world, not in
the world of Elect (for that sounds as if some of the elect may believe, and
some not) does believe might not perish, but have everlasting life John 3. 16.
17. 18. 19. All which things well and wisely weighed, he is blind that sees any
more birth-priviledge or right by birth to salvation, or the promise of it in
believers seed, then in unbelievers; neither is there now any more privilege
at all in any one man's natural seed above another, save the mere hopefulness
of education and advantage of instruction in the way and means of salvation,
which may possibly befall believers children more then others, though in case it
happen (as it may possibly also do) that believers children have their breeding
among (...), and the children of very Indians among believers, in that case
these last have not only no less privilege, as to the promise of salvation
by bare birth, but a privilege also by that breeding beyond the other.

That therefore the promise of the Gospel Covenant in any sense in the world is
made to believers seed (as barely such) more then to the natural seed of
unbelievers. can never be proved by the word, while the world stands, yea the
very contrary is most evidently proved in this place Act. 2. 38. 39. if we
consult no other Scripture besides it. For

First, neither were these parents believers as yet when Peter said the promise
is to you and to your children, but only were pricked at the heart upon some
measure of conviction, that the person whom they had crucified was the Lord of
life, which thing the v^ry Devils believe and tremble at; for in order unto the
begetting of that saving faith, which yet they had not, he spoke these words of
encouragement, and exhortation to them, and this to the contradiction of Mr.
Vahan who d^ag'd in an Argument by the head and shoulders from this place at
the Ashford disputat^on, was ingenuously acknowledged by Mr. Prig. Nor

Secondly, does Peter make the promise any otherwise to them and their children
then he does to all others in the world i.e. on condition of their coming in
at Gods call, it is says he to you and to your children, and to them that are
far off, i.e. all manner of persons, even so many in all nations and
generations as the Lord our God shall call i.e. as are prevailed with to come
when God calls them, which to be the sense of this place is further illustrated
by that pararel place of Paul, Heb. 9. 15. where he says thus, viz. they that
are called received the promise of eternal inheritance. Nor

Thirdly, when the parents did believe and were baptized, were any of their
infants baptized with them (as they must have been had that promise been to
their infants as well as to themselves, on that single account of being their
seed) for recording how many were baptized at that time, he concludes them
under such a term, as excludes the infants from that days work, while he says
thus, as many, meaning no more then those (for else he deceives us utterly in
his Relation) as gladly received the word (this infants could not do) were then
baptized, which number, as they are recorded to be about 3000 might in
likelihood have amounted to three times 3000, if all the infants of all those
had been dipped also.

Fourthly, nor were there any more inchurched that day among the rest, but such
as gladly receiving the word, were then and thereupon baptized, for of these
only it is said, and not of infants, they continued together in the Apostles
doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread and prayers; but all their
infants must have bin inchurched also as well as they, if equally with their
parents, and by virtue of the same promise, the right of Church Membership had
belonged to them. Besides

Fifthly, It crosses the current of all other Scripture to put such
male-construction upon this, for that the promise of old, I mean the old
promise of the Law; which was of the earthly Canaan, and but a type of this did
appertain unto a fleshly holy seed I grant, but that the new covenant, or
Gospel promise is made to any man's fleshly seed (as such so that thereupon we
may baptize them in token of it, before they are called to profess faith in
Christ) is a thing, which I confess I found in the common high way, when I
looked not after it, but since I searched narrowly for it I could never see it;
Sure I am the Scripture holds forth no other seed of Abraham himself to be
heirs with him of the heavenly Canaan but his spiritual sead, i.e. believers,
that do his works, nor does it own any but these to the right of membership,
and fellowship in his family, i.e. the now visible Church, for the visible
Church is Abraham's family in all ages, as well under the Gospel as under the
Law, and Abraham's house i.e. the visible church as it is under the Gospel is much
altered from that it was under the law, yea so differently is it constituted,
and totally translated from its Mosaical form, that it is even turned up side
down, and in a manner nothing remains the same it then was, as the covenant is
not the same with that of that of the law, so neither is any thing else, that
appertains to it, but every thing at it were diverse from the other, and no way
answerable save as the Antitype is answerable to the Type; for neither is there
the the same Mediator, nor the same Priesthood, nor the same Law, (for the
Priesthood being changed, there must of necessity be also a change of the Law,
Heb. 7. 12.) That being the Law of a Carnal Commandment only, in the
observation of which perfection was not to the conscience, for it^ sanctified
only to purifying of the flesh, i.e. from those outward fleshly, not moral
uncleanness, and therefore with the ordinances thereof called carnal, Heb.
9. 9. this the power of an endless life, i.e. available, not to that temporal
typical cleansing, purifying, and pardon only, for the procuring of a Temporal
life, or well being in Canaan, but to the obtaining of an eternal life, by
procuring remission of moral pollution Heb. 9. 13, 24. nor is there now the
same Lawgiver under God that then was, that being Moses the Servant, who yet
was faithful to him that appointed him in all his house the fleshly Israel, for
a Testimony of those things which were to be spoken after, this Christ the son,
who was worthy of more glory than Moses, and is now over his own house, whose
house we are that believe to the end, Heb. 3. 2. 3. 5. 6. Nor yet the same
Promises, that being of of an earthly, this of an heavenly inheritance; nor yet
the same holy Nation, holy people, holy seed, to which the promises are made,
that being the typical promised seed Isaac and his posterity, this the true
promised seed, i.e. Christ, and his seed, i.e. all the Saints, that are born of
God by faith in him Gal. 3. 16. to Abraham and his seed were the promises made,
he says not unto Seeds as of many, but as of one, and unto thy seed, which is
Christ; nor the same ordinances, and administrations signing the inheritance,
those being circumcision, the Passover; these baptism in water, and the
Supper; nor lastly the same subjects for those ordinances, those being by
nature Jews or atleast by profession, and their Male seed only (as to the one)
Male and Female as to the other, and that whether believing yea or no, these
nor Jews nor Gentiles by nature only (but all persons whether Jews or
Gentiles, Males or Females, yet only as believing; for verily so far are the
natural posterity of believing Gentiles (as such, and as yet not professing to
believe themselves) from being heirs apparent with Abraham of Gospel promises,
and privileges, and from title to the Gospel ordinances, that sign them, and
from being holy ones by birth, as the Jew once was, and as Mr. Blake contends
for it that these are, and from the repute of Abraham's seed in the sense of the
Gospel, that even Abraham's own natural seed (as such only) are not at all his
seed in this sense at this day, nor at all holy with that kind of birth
holiness they once had (for that is ended and abolished in Christ crucified)
nor entailed as heirs of that Canaan, without faith and repentance in their own
persons, which and no other, are the terms inrighting thereunto, to any of these
Gospel ordinances at all, and all this will be seen most undoubtedly to be
true, by him that searches the Scripture, which testify no less, and because
this is the yery Root, and Knot in the state of this controversy, the
unfolding and laying open of which will discover the whole mystery of your
mistakes in this point, all which arise originally from your erring in it (for
Error minimus in principio fit major in medio, maximus in fine) pray have me
excused both in that I have been hitherto so long, and in case I be yet a
little longer on this matter.

First then let it be considered that Abraham's own seed, even that seed that
were heirs with him by promise of the Earthly Canaan, though born of his body
now by Isaac and Jacob as truly, though more remotely then of old, of his body
(I say) that was the greatest believer that ever was (Christ only excepted) and
therefore must much more then any other believer (if any believer at all could)
by his faith confer a right to Gospel privileges upon his seed, even these are
not his seed in the Gospel account, no^ his heirs according to this Gospel
promise, nor as barely born of his body to be baptized and enchurched, and this
I shall make plain unto you from many Scriptures the first whereof is Romans 9.
6. 7. 8. In which I beseech you to observe how the Apostle there denies
Abraham's own natural children the name of Abraham's seed in the sense of the
Gospel; first mark how he magnifies them exceedingly, and sets forth their
dignity and pre-eminence above all other people, under the name of Israelites,
as to whom pertained the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants; i. e. both
Testaments the type and the antitype, unto whom then pertained not only the
giving of the law, but also the promises (for verily the several excellencies
of both law and Gospel, upon the several terms upon which both were
established, did in more special sense belong unto that people at that time,
then to any people under the Sun, yea the first covenant, and the promise
thereof the Earthly Canaan and all the privileges and ordinances signing it
did pertain to them, as the proper heirs thereof, by bare fleshly descent from
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; yea all that was theirs ipso facto (as so born)
without more ado, whether they were believers or not believers, as to the
Gospel; and as for the Gospel covenant, which is now belonging to them in
common only with all other men, in one respect it did principally pertain to
them above all others, till they lost their pre-eminence, viz. not in respect
of any right to it they had by birth whether they received it, yea or no, but
in respect of the first tender thereof, which, when it came in fuller force to
be ratified to the world in the preaching of the Gospel, was by special order
and appointment from God, in the first place to be tendered unto them, nor was
it carried at all to the Gentiles, till these Jews had both slighted and
rejected it, when brought to them in the Ministry of Christ and John; in proof
of which see in Mat. 10. 5. 6. 7. where the Disciples sent forth to preach are
forbidden to go in any way of the Gentiles, or to any save the lost sheep of
the house of Israel; yea they were the Children whose bred this was at that
time; and which till they loathed it, was not to be given to the Dogs,
excepting a few Crummes of it, I mean to the Gentiles, who till the Partition
Wall was broken down between them, and the Jews by Christ crucified, were
accounted Dogs, Common, unclean, sinners by nature, in a certain ceremonial
sense in reference to the Jews, who then by birth were holy in a ceremonial
sense, now vanished, then answering as opposite to that birth uncleanness of the
Gentiles, Man. 15. 24. 25. 26. 27. see also Mat. 22. 3. where the Jews are said
to be first bidden to the wedding, so Luke 24. 46. 47. where Christ commands
that in their preaching the Gospel to all Nations, they should first begin at
Jerusalem; and so we see they did, after his ascension Act. 2. see also Act. 3.
25. 26. where the Jews are said to be (...) T H E Children of the Gospel
Covenant, in respect that unto them first God sent his son to bless them, in
which respect they are said Mat. 8. 12. to be T H E Children of the Kingdom,
i. e. the heavenly Kingdom which yet they were cast out into utter darkness
from any enjoyment of, for their non-acceptance of it; so Act. 13. 46. where
Paul says to the Jews that 'twas necessary that the word of the gospel should
be first spoken to them; so Acts 28. 28. it is said, the salvation of God, which
the Jew rejected, was from henceforth sent to the Gentiles: Notwithstanding all
which glory, and pre-eminence of this people Israel, whose were the fathers
also, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, Paul, after he had
showed their high prerogatives above others, comes with Alas, and great sorrow
of heart, and much bewailing for their infidelity to exclude them, even all of
them, save those few with whom the word of the Gospel took effect, so as to
gain them to believe, notwithstanding the ancient and legal title, from the
very name of Israelites, and from standing Abraham's children now any longer,
for says he (as who should say the more is the pity) They are not all
Israel, that are of Israel, i. e. all that are Israelites after the flesh, are
not the Gospel Israelites, or Israelites in the Gospels account, because few of
them did receive it; all that were Abraham's seed after the flesh, and stood in
his family, i. e. the visible Church of old, as being his seed cannot stand so
now, for belivers only, and such as are Christ's by faith are counted for the
seed: that this is the meaning of those words is most evident by them that
follows for (says he) neither because they are the seed of Abraham, i. e. his
fleshly seed, are they called children, i. e, his children thereupon, as to his
Gospel Covenant, but in Isaac i. e. Christ in the Antitype shall thy seed be
called, that is (says he) expounding himself, and alluding to what was done
Allegorically, as in a figure, as concerning Ishmael and Isaac in Abraham's
family of old, the children of the flesh these are not the children of God, but
the children of the promise are counted for the seed; the children of the
flesh, by which he means those that were born of Abraham's body by Isaac, who
now stands in reference to Christ, as Ishmael did in the house of old in
reference unto him, these are not the children of God, but the children of the
promise, (such was Isaac in the legal, typical, ceremonial and carnal account
in relation to Ishmael, for not Ishmael but he and his posterity were the
promised seed, which should inherit the old Canaan, and such is Christ in the
real, spiritual, Evangelical and everlasting account in relation unto Isaac
himself, for not Isaac and his seed as they were Abraham's seed by Sarah, though
they were the children of the promise of the earthly Canaan, and a promised
seed in respect of Ishmael, but Christ who is the true Isaac, and those that
believe in him, among whom si^h Isaac was one he will inherit here also, as
else he could not, these are the promised seed that must inherit heaven, Romans
4. 13, Gal. 3. 16. these children of the promise, i. e. these that are of
Christ by faith, and so his seed after the faith, are accounted Abraham's seed,
his sons and heirs of the world with him, and of the eternal inheritance.

A cleerer illustration of this to be the true sense and meaning of the spirit
in Romans 9. you have in Gal. 3. 7. 9. where the Apostle uses this term, viz.
[they which are of the faith] to express no other then the very same persons,
whom he here styles the children of the promise, know ye (says he there) that
they which are of the faith, i. e. which believe (for none else are of faith
that I know of) the same are the children of Abraham, and blessed with
faithful Abraham, he says not they which be of Abraham's flesh, for such
neither are accounted his children, as to the gospel promise, nor simply as
such are heirs thereof with him, muchless does he say or mean, that those which
are born of the bodies of them that be of faith, are Abraham's children; and
such as must be signed as his sons, and heirs by baptism, in such wise as his
own fleshly seed were signed by Circumcision as heirs with him of the old
Canaan: yet these are your common sayings, who raise such a sort of seed to
Abraham at second hand, or third remove, as will never be able to prove their
pedigree, or descent from him, either after the slesh, or after the faith
either, till they believe themselves, whilst they breath on earth, as if
because Abraham is the spiritual father of all that believe and walk in his
steps, and they his seed, and sons and heirs with him by promise of eternal
life, therefore he must patrizare to all their natural posterity too, and be
the spiritual father not of their persons only, but of their offspring also:
But Sirs, let me tell you he is not so much as a father to his own seed in the
Gospel sense, neither can they stand his children; or the children of God, and
heirs of the heavenly blessing and kindome, because they come out of his
loins, unless they do as he did, for though his fleshly seed as a type for the
time then being, stood denominated the children of God, and holy in an outward
sense, and heirs according to the earthly promise, yet that account is gone
now, and there is no other way whereby the Jews themselves, much less any
generations among the Gentiles, can be styled the children of God or Abraham,
so as to expect the gospel portion, but believing in Christ Jesus in their own
persons, Gal. 3. 26. 29. Ye are all the children of God by faith in Jesus
Christ: if ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the
promise.

Another place which cleers it that Abraham's own seed in the old Covenants
account are not his own in the account of the gospel, so as barely thereupon to
stand in any title to either the privileges or ordinances thereof, or to
fellowship now in his family, is John 8. where Christ being cavill'd at by the
Jews for promising them the privilege of the Gospel-freedom from sin,, to
which they were slaves, servants and bondmen (for all that legal freedom they
did so boast of) upon faith and continuance in his words, discovers so plainly
that a man may run and read it, the discarding of the Jews from all these three
things which I am now proving, that for want of faith, they are perished from
them since the gospel.

First, from the repute and denomination of Abraham's children any longer.

Secondly, from any share in the glorious, or spiritual blessing of the Gospel.

Thirdly, from any right of abiding longer in the Church, which they were the
children of before, which Church (as visible) now as well as then, and to the
end of the world, since Gods conferring the fatherhood of the faithful upon
him, is called the house or family of Abraham.

First, they say in a snuff two or three times ore, that they are Abraham's seed
v. 33. that Abraham is their father v. 39. that they are not born of
fornication (meaning as Ishm^el the Son of the bondwoman, or servant to their
mother Sarah was* but they had one father, even God v. 41. to which Christ
replies, not by denial of any of all this, for 'twas true every tittle in that
sense, in which they meant it, i. e. the typical sense and meaning of the old
Covenant, yea they were Abraham's children, and this Christ confesses in plain
terms verse 37. I know you are Abraham's seed; yea they were also the children
of God by an outward and typical adoption of them unto himself, as his
peculiar ones, and heirs of that typical inheritance, Ezekiel. 16. 8. etc. but by
telling them that Abraham's children are accounted of otherwise now then
formerly, viz. not as coming out of his loins, but as doing his works, as
being like him, and allied to him, not so much after the flesh as after the
faith: whereupon they not yet believing, he denies them to be, and goes about
to prove them not to be Abraham's children in the true and substantial sense, in
this Hypothesis verse 39. if ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works
of Abraham, to which do but add the minor, viz. but ye do not the works of
Abraham, and the conclusion follows thus, viz. therefore ye are not the
children of Abraham: you see Christ asserts them to be Abraham's children in the
old account, so as to stand members of the old house, but denies them to be
Abraham's children in the sense of the new.

Secondly, they say they are free men, and were never in bondage to any man, to
which Christ replies by granting it was so indeed, in the outward typical sense
that they were free men, and true heirs of that earthly glory, that was
promised to Abraham in that old Canaan, but denies them to be freemen as to the
gosspel, with that heavenly fredom of the Jerusalem, which is above the mother
of all true believers Gal. 4. 26. yea in those spiritual respects, in which the
Son makes free indeed those that know and receive the truth and gospel, they
were but servants verse 34. and in bondage to sin, which is the greatest
slavery of all, as also Paul says Gal. 3. 25. that Jerusalem was, which was of
old, and was in bondage with her children, so he says for all their Sonship,
yet in truth they are but servants and not sons, he grants their Sonship,
freedom, and title to the old inheritance, but denies their son and heirship as
to the new.

Thirdly, they boast and bless themselves in their standing in the house or
family of Abraham, i. e. the Church, as to the ordinances, rights and
privileges whereof who but themselves had the title? for this indeed was their
advantage of old, that to them were committed all the oracles of God, to which
Christ replies, true they did stand in the house for a time, yet but for a
time, and though sons and heirs in the laws typical sense, yet they were were
but servants in the Gospels, because they believe not in him, and being but
servants (as Moses and all his house or church the old Israel were, in
comparison of Christ the Son, and his house or Church, i. e, the Saints) they
must anon be packing out of the house, and abide in the Church i. e. Abraham's
family no longer, that the true Sons and heirs may come in, i. e. believers,
who are the blessed seed to whom only the Gospel-promises and privileges do
belong, ver. 35. And the servant (says he) abides not in the house for ever,
but the son abides ever, if therefore the son make you free, and that he does
not for all your former freedom, unless you believe in him, and continue in
his words, then shall ye be free indeed, even to the glory, oracles and
blessings of the spiritual house the Gospel Church, which else you must be cut
off from for ever: thus Christ tells them, and so indeed it came to pass
within a while, for not believing and repenting, which are the only terms ^at
give right and admittance to the ordinances and fellowship of the Gospel, these
Jews though natural branches of Abraham still as much as ever, if being the
fleshly seed of a believer could have steaded them at all, as to a standing
here, were yet clean broken off from the Root Abraham, as he stands a Root to
all the faithful, because only of unbelief, Romans 11. 20. when such as were
wild olives, and no kin at all to Abraham after the flesh, were in their own
persons, but not their natural seed with them (save as they believed with them)
owned as his children by believing, and as members of the true Church under the
Gospel. And this was also most directly declared by John the Baptist, and the
rest of the first ministers of the Gospel, who would not admit of the Jews as
Jews, though Abraham's own seed, and holy by birth, and members thereupon of
that Church under the law to baptism, and membership in the Gospel Church, when
they offered themselves upon the aforenamed terms, without faith, repentance,
and amendment; for howbeit the Pharisees and Saduces and the whole multitude of
people came forth to be baptized of John, Mat, 3. 7. etc. Luke 3. 7. etc.
pretending and pleading that if baptism were a Church-priviledge, it must needs
belong to them, as who were the children of Abraham, yet see how he rounds them
up as having no part nor portion in that matter: O generation of vipers (says
he) who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? as if he had said, what
have you to do with that remission of sins, righteousness and redemption from
wrath to come, which I preach and baptize in token of, being though invested
with circumcision, Church Membership and other legal rites and privileges, yet
corrupt and crooked in conversations? bring forth therefore, i. e. to the end
that you may be admitted, baptized, and inc hurched here, fruits answerable to
amendment of life, and begin not, (its like that plea was in their thoughts and
mouths too, whereupon he puts them off from it) think not to say that we have
Abraham to our father, we are the seed of such an eminent believer, for God is
able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham, i. e. God will, without
being beholding to you, raise a seed to Abraham, rather then want them, from
among these stones, which whether he means stones literally, or the Gentiles
which were yet as stocks and stones in their eyes, I leave you further to
examine, but thus much we may gather hence however, that even in that very time
wherein the birth-priviledge and holiness of a fleshly seed stood in full force
and power unrepealed (as then it did) so far as to give right to all ordinances
of the law, yet, even then I say before, how much more since the Abrogation
thereof by faith, Abraham's own seed could not, much less then may the seed of
believing Gentiles, now its repealed, (as such) be admitted to baptism without
repentance: the Jews as impenitent and unbelieving as they were, stood uncast
out of the Jewish Church, while that Jewish Church it self was yet standing,
but they could not pass per saltum out of that Church into the Gospel Church,
nor immediately from their right to circumcision, which mere fleshly birth gave
them, prove their right, without somewhat more, to baptism; yet thus they might
have done, if what gave right of old to one of these ordinances, does in like
manner inright persons to the other,

And this that Abraham's own natural seed do not now stand his seed, so as
thereupon only, or at all to stand in this house of Abraham, i. e. the visible
Church of the Gospel, and in title to the promises and privileges thereof, is
further and more lively figured out to our undestandings in that admirable
allusion of Paul to the things transacted of old, as a type hereof in the
family of Abraham, between the two mothers and their children, viz. Hagar and
Sarah, Ishmael and Isaac, Gal. 4. 21. to the end, where (to give you but a hint
of the thing, that you may follow it in your own thoughts at leisure) having
first related what is written of Abraham's having two sons, one by his
bond-maid Hagar, viz. Ishmael, that was born after the flesh, the other by the
free woman, or his true wife Sarah, viz. Isaac, who though born of Abraham's
flesh as well as the other, yet because he was promised to come of Abraham's
true spouse Sarah, long before he did, was said to be born by promise, he
asserts these things to be an Allegory, i. e. things which though really and
truly done, yet were done also in a figure, and as a shadow of some other
things to come viz. the two Covenants and two seeds of Abraham thereunto
belonging, or the two several Jerusalems or Churches of the law and the Gospel,
with their several children viz. the fleshly seed of Abraham and the spiritual,
each answering respectively, not only as anti-types to their several types,
that pointnd at them, whether the maid and her son, or the mistress and hers,
but also inter se invicem, as the two mothers and their children did, each of
them unto the other, for these (says he) i. e. these two mothers and children,
the bondwoman and her son, and the freewoman and her son, are the two Covenants
or testaments, meaning in signification, or in way of resemblance of them, the
one from mount Sinai, the other from mount Sion, both spoken of, and to the
life also pointed out one ore against the other in Heb. 12. 18. to the end,
that from mount Sinai, or that Testament, which was given in the hand of the
Mediaror Moses, that gendreth to bondage, or enthrawles her children, this is
Hagar, for this Hagar who brought out her son to bondage is (says he) mount
Sinai in Arabia, or that law of Moses given on mount Sinai in Arabia, and
answers to, i. e. as a type points out, and signifies the Jerusalem that now
is, i. e. the Church of the Jews before Christ, which notwithstanding her
childrens abode i^ the house of Abr^ham, and her Hagarlike flaunting, and
vaunting her self over the other for a time, as if she were the only mistress,
whose seed must inherit all, yet in comparison of the true mother, and her
seed, viz. the gospel Jerusalem, which was yet to come, was but in bondage with
her children, and must when that seed once should come in, be chashiered and
cast quite and clean out of doors as a seed to be no more accounted on, so far
as to abide with the other: for nevertheless; i, e. all her present liberty,
and immunity notwithstanding, what says the Scripture? (says he) cast out the
bond woman and her son, for the son of the bond woman shall not be heir with
the Son of the free woman, i. e. the seed of the old Covenant of the Earthly
Jerusalem, viz. the natural seed of Abraham, shall not share in privileges,
nor the inheritance promised in the Gosspel together with the spiritual seed,
viz. the believers or children of the Church under the Gospel.

Thus as Hagar, and her son Ishmael, that stood in Abraham's house a while, and
were proud and insolent, as if they should have dwelt there for ever, were at
last packt out before Isaac the true son and heir by promise of the old
inheritance, and ordinance, when he was born, and before Sarah, who would not
endure to have Ishmael have any portion in Canaan, or any room in the house
with her son Isaac, so also Sarah her self, and her son Isaac, I mean the
fleshly Jerusalem, and Jew that dwelt as Mistress, and heir for a time in the
house, inheriting only some outward excellencies, and enjoyments, were at last,
being found mocking thereat, cast out of the house, i. e. the Church, the
Sonship, the glory, and all before the true Mother and her children, viz, the
Gospel Church or true Sarah, and the true Isaac, Christ and his Saints, or seed
of Believers, who will not bear not brook it to have a mere fleshly seed,
though of Abraham himself, much less of any Gentile believers, to dwell with
them in the family: Isaac and the fleshly Israelites were by promise to inherit
the old Testament privileges, and the Ishmaelites were not suffered (as such)
to partake with them therein; Christ and believers are by promise to receive
the eternal inheritance, nor is any man's fleshly posterity, no not Abraham's own
by Isaac, I mean the Israelites themselves (as such) permitted or promised to
participate therein: Ishmael though as Abraham's seed after the flesh he had a
portion, yet had nothing to do with that of Isaac the child of promise in the
type; Isaac though Abraham's son, not only after the flesh, but by promise too
(as in reference to Ishmael) and so in true title to a better portion then
Ishmaels, viz. the Earthly Canaan, and that as a type for a time, yet being but
his fleshly seed in comparison to Christ, and believers, and by his bare
fleshly birth (save only that he was a spiritual child also by believing) as
inferior to them, as Ishmael was to himself, has naught at all to do (as the
fleshly seed of Abraham) with that heavenly portion that belongs to these.

Now then if it be so (and so it will appear to him that does not trifle, but
truly understand the Scriptures, and this last especially which with many more
viz, Heb. 8. Heb. 9. speak expressly of two distinct covenants or Testaments,
made with two sorts of seeds of Abraham concerning two Canaans, viz. an Earthly
and a Heavenly, whereof one all along was a type of the other, for a time only,
and now ended, contrary to all our blind Seers, that confound, and blindly
blend both of them into one) if so I say that Abraham's own sons by bodily birth
are not now his own in Gospel account, nor heirs (as so born only) of the
Gospel promise and inheritance, nor house dwellers in the Gospel Church, for
want of personal faith, though Abraham's children after the flesh still as much
as ever, then I cannot but stand amazed at the perverseness of you the
Priesthood in three things.

First in that merely because you and your people do believe (and I would to
God you did believe, for so but few, for all your flourish of either you or
your people do indeed) therefore you count your natural seed the seed of
Abraham, this you express in plain terms in your Review p. 14.

Secondly in that, even Eatenus, as your children only, you hold them heirs of
the promise of the Gospel covenant made with Abraham.

Thirdly in that you sign them as visibly such by Baptism (as you call it) and
thereby admit them into membership ^n the Gospel Church (as you call it) and
having yet no evidence of their belief, conclude them under a true title to all
outward ordinances, save such as upon your own heads only you keep from them,
if by the word they have such title to Church Fellowship, as you say they have,
viz. the Supper, of which you make them snap short, as much, and as
groundles^ly to the full (if baptism at all belong to them) as we in baptism.

Sirs, let me reason with you a little, and beg some cool consideration, and
ingenuous answer from you concerning these particulars.

First which way come your natural seed, you being but Gentiles in the flesh,
to be the seed of Abraham?

Secondly why do you, or how can you sign them as heirs of the Gospel promise
so simply upon that account only? there are but two seeds of Abraham that I
know of in all the world, viz.

1. His seed after the flesh, and such are all those that are born of his body,
viz. Ishmael, and his Children by Keturah, to whom he gave portions, and those
that came of him by Isaac and Jacob, which only (for Esau sold his birthright)
were heirs with him of the Land of Canaan.

2. His seed after the faith, and such are those only that walk in his steps
Romans 4. 12. that do his works John 8. Who are also by that same faith which
denominates them his children, said to be Christ's also, and the children of
God, and heirs with him of the world according to the Gospel Promise, Romans 4.
12, 13. Gal. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 3. 21. 22. 23.

Non datur tertium semen Abrahae: two seeds of Abraham the Scripture mentions,
but a third fort cannot be assigned, all and only those that descend from his
loins as the Midianites and others by Keturah, the Ishmailites by Hagar, the
Edomites and Israelites by Sarah, which last only were the holy seed, and
children of promise in reference to the Hagarens in a type and sole heirs of
the typical Canaan, all these I say were the first sort, all believers, of what
nation soever, are the second sort, but the natural seed of believers are
neither of the one nor of the other.

As for the children of the Proselites, i. e. Jews not by birth, but
profession, which by way of exception against this may possibly pop into some
of your minds, I utterly deny them (as so born) to be any seed of Abraham at
all, or heirs of either inheritance, unless they believed also, though their
parents (believing) might be his spiritual seed, and heirs of the heavenly
inheri^ance; and if you ask why then was every male among the infants of
Proselites circumcised? I answer not upon any such account as their being
Abraham's seed, or heirs with him of either this or that, but merely as they
were Males in the house of one that was a Jew, at least by devotion, though a
stranger as to fleshly relation, that being the express command of God, for the
time then being, and during the standing of that Covenant of circumcision (the
like to which if you had for infant baptism, the controversy were at an end
between us) that every man child in every family throughout all generations,
whether born in the house or bought with money of any stranger, that was not of
Abraham's flesh should be circumcised, Genesis 17. 12 for there was but one Law and
ordinance for the stranger, or Proselite Jew, and him that was a Jew by birth
concerning circumcision and the Passover, Numb. 9. 14. upon this same and no
other account very many, viz. foreign man-servants, in every family of any
Jew, were by appointment to be circumcised, mee^ly as being males of the
family, though neither born of Abraham, nor believing with him, nor any way at
all his ^eed, nor yet heirs with him of either Canaan, which injunction and
order of God concerning that old covenant ordinance of circumcision, or the
Passover either, to which the Supper answers, more lively than baptism to the
other, if we might at all regard what was done then, as a Rule for us now, who
so shall produce as the Pattern or infer any thing from as the instution of
God, according to which we are to act in the New Testament ordinances of
Baptism, and the Supper; and yet not act according to them neither, but
abominably besides them both (as the Priesthood does, baptizing (as not at all
but rantizing so) not at all after the manner of circumcision, viz. not males
only, not on the eighth day only, but any other, when they may as well upon
that, not servants also upon the Masters, faith as well as the Children upon
the parents, and as for the Supper denying it utterly to infants that might*
then eat the Passover) I avouch them to be not a little besides their natural,
but much more besides their spiritual intellectualls.

Let this then satisfy as to any conceit, that any may have, as that the
Prosolites seed were the children of Abraham, and heirs with him because
circumcised, viz. that though all Abraham's seed that were heirs with him were
circumcised, yet all that were circumcised were not thereby proved to be
Abraham's seed, nor heirs with him of either promise, and though his fleshly
seed, Israel the heir especially, and his spiritual seed also, i. e. believing
Jews, and Proselites were both thereupon to come under that dispensation, and
that as heirs too severally of the two several promises, viz. the typifying,
and typified Canaan, yet many past under circumcision upon that forenamed
account only, of being males in the house, that were neither Abraham's seed
after the slesh nor after the faith, as Servants, and the seed of Proselite
Masters, Fathers, not appearing yet to believe with them; for even such were to
be circumcised under the law, though (by your leave) not such to be by the like
reason baptized under the Gospel, for as there is no command for such a
matter, so if there had, the Servants of the Eunuch (himself only turning
Christian) must have been (as it is known they were not) baptized together with
him: besides if baptism must be like to circumcision in its subject, then not
only he that is not yet apparently an heir, but he also that is apparently not
an heir by faith must be baptized, as well as Abraham's son Ishmael, and his
servant Eleazer, and all the other males of his house were circumcised, who
were all well enough known to Abraham, to be none of the heirs of that land of
Canaan, whereof circumcision was given to him, and his seed in Isaac, in token
of their inheriting of it, at that very time when he circumcised them.

I demand therefore yet once again, what seed of Abraham your infants are, in
that thereupon you undertake (as so) to baptize them? you tell us in your
Review, page 14. They are Semen fidei, the children of his faith, his spiritual
seed; I am ashamed to hear you say so, which way do they come to be, in that
minority, his spiritual seed, since believers only are so? you seem to tell us
they are so by believing themselves, for so Zachaeus, say you, by believing was
made the Son of Abraham, as who should say Zachaeus became, as infants do, the
spiritual seed of Abraham by believing, which word believing is as much as not
having only, but acting faith, which to act not others only but your selves,
who sillyly assert them to have faith, do somewhat more sensibly p. 8. confess
them to be incapable.

Others tell us, and even your selves too sometimes, and in effect in that very
same page, that they are semen fidei, or the seed of Abraham's faith, upon
another account, viz. as their parents are believers, for the promise is (say
you, though that is no Scripture phrase at all in that place whence you quote
it, viz. Act 2. 39.) to believers and their seed, and if the adversaries say
that the Iewe^ were Semen carnis, and had right by the promise so these say you
concerning the seed of believers, are semen fidei, and the promise is to them;
which words* The Promise, The Promise, The Promise, you will scrible down
twenty times in one Treatise before you will sit down once and search out
seriously what it is, or once show distinctly what it is you mean by it.

So then howbeit with John baptist, Man. 3. with Christ, John 8. Luke 19. 8, 9.
with Paul Romans 4. 13. 9, 6, 8. Gal. 3. 7. 9. there is but one way of becoming
Abraham's spiritual seed, or the children of his faith, so as thereupon to be
signed by baptism as heirs with him of the Gospel-promise, and this is not by
being the fleshly posterity of a believer, though it should be of believing
Abraham himself, for even his own fleshly were not his spiritual seed, but
only as they believed with him, but by bringing forth fruits of repentance,
doing his works, treading in the steps of his faith, you belike have found more
ways to the wood then one, whereof when ones fails you in the fight, you
commonly take your flight by the other, and with you there is two ways whereby
persons, nay, which is a greater mystery, whereby the same persons, even
believers infants in their very infancy, may and do become Abraham's spiritual
sons and heirs, viz. first by their own walking in the steps of Abraham's faith,
i. e. believing themselves, which though it be the true way of becoming
Abraham's spiritual seed, yet infants are not capable to walk in it. Secondly,
by being the natural progeny of believing parents; which though infants are
capable of it, yet is none of the way whereby to be canonized, according to the
sense of Scripture, the Spiritual seed of Abraham.

But it seems the terms upon which persons become heirs with Abraham of
Gospel-promises, and stand in true title to Gospel Ordinances, are not uniform,
but mul^form in your imagination, for those on which persons in the capacity of
parents are privil^dged with the title of Abraham's spiritual seed, and title to
Gospel Ordinances and enjoyments, are their own believings not another; but
those on which others, i. e. all that are in the capacity of children to those
parents are thus highly privileged, are the believing of their parents,
whether they have any faith of their own yea or no, and yet some count that the
child's own faith which the parent professes for him.

But Genus, et pro avos, et quae non ^cimus ipsi vix ea nostra voco.

Sirs, what pretty intricate blind bo-beep Divinity is this of yours? do the
same privileges and promises belong to the believing parents and their
children, and yet though exhibited to them both alike in one and the self same
phrase and form of speech (for says Peter the promise is to you and your
children, and to them that are far off yea even as many (meaning of you and
your children and of them that are far off) as the Lord shall call) do they
belong upon such various and different grounds, viz. to the parents upon their
own faith, to the children upon the parents faith? my father then it seems,
what ere his fathers were, must prove his pedigree from Abraham by his doing as
Abraham did, or else he can be no gospel-son, nor share at all in any
gospel-priviledges and immunities, but if he were a believer, I his son may
prove mine at easier rates by far, viz. by going no further then the faith and
faederation of my father.

But Sirs, will this hold a trial think you by the word? is there any such
manglements as these to be found there? is it to be found there that now under
the Gospel Covenant since that outing of the old Covenant, and that fleshly
seed* that were heirs of it, and all the tipical pertinencies thereof the faith
and faederation of fathers inrights and enrouls all their fleshly seed as Heirs
with them of salvation, without any evidence of their believing themselves?
then tell me why the fleshly seed of those great believers, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob stand excommun^cated from all Gospel-priviledges, participations of
ordinances, promises, etc. even from the beginnings of the Gospel Church and
first administering of baptism to this very day? will you plead your own right
above theirs to stand his children in the Gospel Church by saying, we had holy
men and believers to our fathers, but their fathers believed not the Gospel,
therefore worthily are they cut off with them? I reply thus, were not Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob their fleshly fathers? and though remote ones, yet were they
not their true fathers after the flesh still as much as ever? did John Mat. 3.
and Christ John 8. and Peter Acts 2. deny them a standing in the Gospel house
and admission unto baptism and membership without repentance and belief in
their own persons, and doing the works of Abraham? did they I say put such off
from all Gospel-expectations and privileges who offered themselves thereto
with this plea, viz. we have Abraham to our father? and dare you admit such
without faith or repentance, for whom you can make no higher pretense then
this, viz. they are the children of believers? me thinks if mere
birth-priviledges and fleshly descent, must carry it still without faith in the
seed themselves, are not the Jews infants to this day higher born then any
Gentiles infants in the world, whose parents are believers? for they verily can
say no less then this, we are the natural issue of the father of all the
faithful, yet may they not be owned barely upon that account to
gospel ordinances, and if the natural seed, and that by Isaac and Jacob of
Abraham himself the grand believer, which seed could of old claim a room by
right of birth from Abraham in the house of Moses, cannot possibly carry it so
high under Christ, as by the same descent, only without faith in themselves,
to gain a standing in his house, or so much as right to be styled their own
natural fathers children (as to the Gospel) I am amazed to see you Gentile
believers to confer upon your mere natural seed the name of Abraham's
spiritual seed, and denominate your semen carnis his semen fidei.

Baptist.
The Jews, though the natural seed of Abraham, yet cannot have the account of
the spiritual seed, nor any right to Gospel privileges because they believe
not themselves, which if they did they should have right to the Gospel as well
as we who believe, but since they abide in unbelief they are cut off from all
share in these things.

Baptist.
Then learn once I beseech you this lessen from your selves, which you will not
learn from John, Christ and Paul, viz. that the ground of standing Abraham's
spiritual seed, sons and heirs; and Church Members under the Gospel is not the
the faith and faederation of the parents, by virtue of which you plead your
childrens right to baptism, saying they have believers, as the Jews once to
John pleaded theirs, saying, we have Abraham to our father, but faith it self
in the particular persons so standing, for so many Jews, heathens, infidels
children as are of the faith of Abraham, i. e. not born of faithful parents,
but faithful themseves (as he was) are incorporated; incovenanted, inchurched
as Abraham's seed, and Evangelically blessed with faithful Abraham; but till
even believers children, yea Abraham's own believe themselves, the parents faith
cannot now possibly ingraft them, the time of faith or standing by faith alone
in the house, or visible Church of God being now come in, the standing by any
fleshly generation what soever is done away, yea Abraham's own children, the
natural branches that grow out of his loins are cut off from standing (as
till Chirist they did) now any longer upon their own Root Abraham, because of
unbelief.

I say then that no infant in infancy, of what believing parent soever, is
either Abraham's spiritual seed, or dying in infancy is saved upon any such
account as a believers seed, or Abraham's seed, nor whilst living an infant
only, may be signed by baptism as an heir apparent of salvation: for if
Abraham stand not a spiritual father to his own mere fleshly seed, he stands
not so sure to the mere fleshly seed of any believing Gentile, for that were to
privilege every ordinary believer* and his natural seed above either himself
or his own.

Nor does this hinder, or deny the salvation of the dying infants of believers,
or dispose them ere the sooner (muchless necessarily) to damnation, to say they
are not Abraham's spiritual seed (qua believers infants) nor heirs to salvation
upon any such account as that, for though neither upon that, nor any other
account at all they may warrantably be baptized, yet its more then possible, or
probable either (because infallible) that there is other Scripture account
enough, upon which when we see them die in infancy we may assert them
undoubtedly not to be damned; for as it is most sure and true, that all that
are apparently (if really) Abraham's spiritual seed by faith must so living, so
dying be saved, in token and farther evidence of which to themselves more then
others they are by the good will of Christ to be baptized, yet is it neither
true, nor necessary that all that are saved must be Abraham's spiritual seed by
faith, but most certain that some shall be saved, that never were Abraham's seed
in any sense at all, witness not only the faithful forefathers of Abraham,
for he was their seed, and not they his, but also all dying infants of what
parents soever both before Abraham's time, and since, of whom to salvation
notwithstanding those are the only terms on which it belongs to adult ones,
to whom its preached, Mark 16. 15, 16. these being truly capable of neither,
it is not required that they should either repent, believe or be baptized. I
know this Justification of dying infants without faith is uncouth, and little
less, for all it holds forth so much salvation, then damnable doctrine among
you Divines, that plead the contrary, but I shall by the help of God make it
good to the faces of you all, when I come to consider the baldness of your
consequence in this point, as you give me good occasion to do in some places,
where me thinks you meddle with it somewhat clumsily, as it were in mittins, as
if because there is no other way revealed for the salvation of such by Christ,
to whom the gospel is preached, who are capable to hear, and do what is
required, for such only the word universally speaks of, when it speaks of
salvation in that way, but the way of belief and actual obedience only,
therefore there is no other way for the salvation of dying infants by Christ,
who can possibly neither believe in him, nor obey him, which as it is such
shameful stuff, that I cannot bear it with out inward blushing at your
blindness, so whether you have not as much cause to be ashamed on it within your
selves is well worth your inmost inquiry.

I say therefore again, so far is this from excluding dying infants of
believers from entrance into the kingdom of heaven, to say they are neither
Abraham's spiritual seed by faith, nor heirs thereof upon that ground only of
being so, that it rather concludes and supposes there is some other ground that
is common with them to the innocent infants of even infidels, and all the
world, upon which these, whom, though they are hundreds to one, yet your selves
in your fierce wrath, and merciless cruelty devote universally to damnation,
may dying in infancy universally be saved also; which ground if you will yet
know it, is the righteousness of Christ, the free imputation of which
universally from the father saves not only all that believe from both that,
and their actual transgressions too, but even the whole world, whether they
believe it or no from the the imputation of Adams transgression; so that none
at all ever perish upon that account, in which respect he is said to be the
Savior of all men, but especially of them that believe: much more does it, and
that without faith, save all dying infants, who as they believe not, so have
not as yet by any actual sin bard themselves, or deserved exemption, or become
liable at all to the second death, i. e. the damnation of hell, which befalls
not any but upon personal neglect of the light and grace of life, brought in by
the second Adam, as the first death only overtakes mankind for only that sin
of the first Adam.

Babist.
If all dying infants are saved then not few but many, if not the mayor part
must be saved, contrary to that of Christ, Mat. 7. 13. 14. Luke 13. 23. 24.
where he says few there are that are saved.

Baptist.
There are indeed but few inter adultos among persons that come to years, of
whom alone, and not of Infants at all Christ there speaks, and even every where
else, where he speaks to us of the way of life, and this is plain by the reason
he there gives why so few are saved, which is the straitness of the gate, and
narrowness of the way that leads to life, viz. of self-denial, and suffering
for Christ, which men mostly being very loath to walk in, it comes to pass that
few of them come to life by it; but infants being altogether incapable to walk
in it, are are altogether dis-ingaged from walking in it till they come to
capacity so to do, and yet are not damned for not walking in it: when we come
to years of understanding, and to apprehend the good will of God to us, in
providing a Saviou^ for us, his good will concerning us in order to salvation
by him is, that we believe in him and obey him, and apply his righteousness
unto our selves, Gal. 3. 27. but whilst we are yet in such minority, as neither
to know what God has done for us, nor to be capable of putting on the Lord
Jesus our selves, he himself is pleased to impute his righteousness to
salvation to us so dying, even as we our selves, whilst our infants are new
born, do not only provide, but also put on what clothes we have provided in
our pity toward them, for the covering of their nakedness, but when they come
to years of such discretion as to discern, and be sensible of their own shame,
and capable to dress themselves with their own hands, we expect when in our
love we have once provided raiment for them, they should put it on themselves,
or go without it: thus candid are we toward the dying infants of all sorts:
nevertheless, though we tell you of our charity toward them, and of your own
cruelty in sending all heathen infants to hell, and this no less then twenty
times over, yet we must expect to hear it from ore the pulpit cloth twenty
times ore again, before the devil be dead, how blessed and charitable your
doctrine is, and what most bloody and cruel opinionists the Anabaptists are
concerning infants.

Infants then I say of what parents soever (...) either such as die in the
personal innocence of their own infancy, and so are universally saved, and yet
in token, or as (...) sign thereof to themselves there is neither need, nor
sense, nor reason to baptize them; or else such as live to understanding, and
then they appear, either not to do Abraham's works, and then we own them not yet
as Abraham's seed, though born of believing parents, yea though of believing
Abraham himself, nor as heirs according to the Gospel-promise, or else to
believe in Christ, and walk in the steps of Abraham, and then of what parents
soever, though of infidels, we are to own them as Abraham's spiritual seed, and
such as (so abiding) are heirs apparent by promise of the heavenly Canaan: this
we can never discern by them in their infancy, not knowing yet whether they
shall die infants, or live to years, nor whether when they come to years they
will reject Christ or receive him. To conclude this then, that any man's fleshly
seed in the world is upon the mere account of their natural descent of such or
such parents, or further then as dying in infancy they have no actual sin to
condemn them, or living to act sin they believe in Christ (in both which cases
the seed of unbelievers are as capable of salvation as the seed of believers
themselves) are by promise heirs of salvation, and in toke^ thereof are to be
baptized, and in baptism visibly signed (more then other children) as children
of God, members of Christ, and inheritors of the Kingdom of heaven, it is a
lesson which I learned once by roat, and had by root of heart, when in the
minority of my standing in the false ministry with you, I was verst in the
Priests Primmer of Common Prayer, and (as to Gospel-administrations) was skild
but little further then the Psalter, but when I once turned over a new leaf,
and began to advance a little further, even into the Scripture, which in some
volumes was in those days annexed as some certain appendix at the end of it, I
could never read that lesson perfectly since, neither can I learn now that any
man's fleshly seed, that lives and yet believes not, can make any clearer claim
of kindred to Abraham as their father, or to the Gospel inheritance by a mere
bodily birth of believers only, then I can make of my kindred to the Great
Turk, and of my tight to succeed him (as his heir) in his dominion, by pleading
that between them both his Grandmother and mine had four elbowes.

Now therefore Sirs, let it be seriously considered by you, that that outward
mere denominative birth holiness, which was once in the seed of the Jews, and
is now supposed, and asserted by you to be in the seed of believing Gentiles,
as it was then peculiar to that people only; that were Jews by either nature or
Religion, so it is now universally and utterly ended in Christ crucified, and
no more to have a being among them, or any other people under heaven. It was
not by Christ coming communicated, or (as Mr. Blake cloudily contends,
throughout his Mistaken Treatise ^f birth-priviledge, and covenant holiness)
conveyed from the Jews to believing Gen^iles, and their seed, but clearly
cashiered, and confiscated, so that there is now no such thing to be found at all.
It Is not devolved downwards but rather resolved into that Gospel truth, and
substance which it shadowed ou^, yea and totally dissolved, ecclipsed,
annihilated, swallowed up (as the light of the Moon before the Sun) being
clothed upon with a far greater, and more glorious holiness than it self; for
as the type was in time to give way, and be gone when the thing typified
thereby should once come into existence, so all that old covenant holiness even
the holiness of that seed Isaac, and his posterity as well as other things that
were predicated by it, was, as but a type of a more perfect hol^nes, and holy
seed to come, to flee away, as Ishmael before himself, when once Christ should
come, and that holy seed to stand in the house to whom the promises of the
Gospel do belong.

Babist.
This seed you speak of, viz. believers was come before Christ, and in being
under the law as well as now, therefore they sure cannot be the holy seed
shadowed out by that holy seed that came of Isaac.

Baptist.
True the Gospel holy seed was under the law, but not the Laws holy seed under
the Gospel, the substance being ever when and where the shadow is, but the
shadow not always when and where the substance: Novum Testamentum semper and
ubique fuit in vetere velatum, vetu^ non in novo, nisi revelatum: the law, and
its holy things are not in being, but only revealed what they were, under the
Gospel, but the Gospel, and its holy things were in being (though veiled over)
under the law, and yet for all that the Gospel is said truly to come then,
because it came not into its full force till Christ came, so faith is said to
come in with Christ, Gal. 3. 23. 25. not as if there were no faith in the world
before, but because both the fullness of the things before believed came in
then, and things before believed came then into full force and act, and also
because the way of standing in the Church, which before was chiefly by a
fleshly birth, comes now to be no otherwise then by a spiritual birth from
above, by faith in Christ Jesus, Romans 11. thou sta^dest by faith (says ^aul,
speaking of the manner of the Gospel standing in the visible Church) so that
the holy seed, and heirs of the Gospel covenant i.e. believers, which are the
seed of Christ, Esaias, 53. He shall see his seed, are said to come then, though
there was such a seed in the world from the beginning thereof, because they
then came to dwell alone as it were in the house, where Ishmael the son of
the Bondwoman (to speak after the Allegory) I mean the fleshly Israelites, a
mere fleshly seed dwelt together with them (as Ishmael did with Isaac, till he
was cast out) in former time; for even as Ishmael the servant dwelt as it were
the Son and heir in the house till Isaac was born, and then after a while was
cast out, that Isaac the true heir might dwell alone, and such as should
successively come from him, so Israel after the flesh, though a servant in
reference to the Gospel Israel, dwelt, and domineered, as the only child of the
Church till Christ the true Isaac was born, and then afer a while was cast out
of the Church, that his seed might dwell there alone for ever after.

Babist.
If it be so that believers* only are that holy seed which is now to stand in
the visible Church; how is it that you baptize, and ^church such among you
sometime's as are no true believers?

Baptist.
We receive all that we receive by baptism into the Church under the notion of
true believers only; and such they are so far as we are capable to conceive by
that outward profession of faith, upon which only we admit them; but if our
charity be so mistaken (as that of the Apostles themselves was in the like
case) that persons after either appear to be Hypocrites, or prove Apostates, we
have warrant from the word, according to which we also act, to cast them out
again, as those that have no right at all to stand there, whilst by their
works they seem to be unbelievers, till by some future and clearer fruits
thereof we can guess them groundedly to be converted truly to the faith.

All then that we can say of the holiness, and holy things that were under the
first covenant, which had then ordinances of divine service, but carnal ones,
and a worldly sanctuary, an humane, infirm, and imperfect High-priest-hood, an
earthly inheritance, a fleshly seed, which yet were all holy for the time then
being, all (I say) that can be now said of them* is this, they were Typical,
Ceremonial, and abiding only till the the of Gospel reformation, Heb. 9. 9.
and are now all abrogated, and out of date, so that we may say (as he fuit
Ilium) so fuit Canaan, fuit urbs, fuit lex, fuit Templum, fuit sanctum
Sanctorum, fuit sacerdotium, fuit sacrosanctum semen: there was indeed a holy
and, a holy City, a holy Law, a holy Temple, a holy Priesthood, a holy seed,
but all these belonging to a first Covenant, which was faulty, and so gave
place in time to a second; all ornaments, furniture, and accomplishments of a
covenant, that decayed, waxed old, was ready to vanish, and is now long since
vanished before a better, there were privileges, there was a freedom, there
was a rest, there was a holiness; there was a glory, there was a Mosaical
ministration, but as it was less glorious by far then the Gospel ministration
of Christ, so, as the shine of a Star when the Sun rises, it past away, and
perished from before it, when the other came in, so that they were at a loss
that then did, as those are that still do dote, though but in part, upon it,
not looking steadfastly to the end of that which is now abolished, and not
considering that all that glory is done away and has something remaining in
its stead that is more glorious than it, nor that all that which was made
glorious and holy, as a type, for a while, viz. the holy* City, the glorious
holy mountain, the holy Priesthood, holy Temple, holy root, holy branches, and
what ever else was so denominated, has now no glory, nor holiness at all upon
it by reason of a glory that excels, 2 Cor. 3. 9. 10, 11. 13.

Babist.
Abraham is still an holy root, and his children holy branches, even now under
the Gospel, as well as of old under the law, and so are believing parents to
their seed, as the Jews of old were to their children, for says Paul Romans 11.
16. if the first fruit be holy, so is the lump; and if the root be holy, so are
the branches, as Mr. Blake also well observes in his Birth-priviledge p. 7.

Baptist.
That the Root here is Abraham for my part I freely grant you, since it is
supposed you have so much advantage by it, although it is sub judice among some,
whether by the root in that place be not meant Christ, because the standing
upon it is said to be by ^aith only, which is that only that ingrafts persons
into Christ, and (as some say) ingrafts them into Christ only, and not any
other: and that by the olive tree is meant the house or family of Abraham i. e.
the visible Church, and that the branches, and lump that are here said to be
hly, are Abraham's children al^o, but I beseech you let it be considered that
Abraham was a root two ways, or a double holy root, standing respectively so
to a twofold lump, or two sorts of holy branches, viz* natural and spiritual,
his children after the slesh, and after the faith, ^is typically and
ceremonially holy seed, and his morally and really holy seed, his sons by
generation and heirs by promise of the the earthly (...), i. e. the carnal
Israelites, and his sons by regeneration i. e. the Saints and believers, who
are (...) by promise of the heavenly Canaan, and the^ue Israelites in whom is
no guile* under the first Covenant, or old Testament Abraham stood a holy root
to his natural branches born of his body by Isaac and Jacob, which also in a
figure and pro tempore, to shadow out the holy seed to come, that should
inherit heaven, were (by bare de^omination more then inward qualification) a
holy seed, inheriting a figurative holy land; but under the Gospel, the
substance being come in place, that shadow is fled, and how ^eit Abraham is a
holy root now unto the end of the world, as well as before* yet not now any
longer to his own fleshly seed by Isaac, much less the mere carnal seed of
believing Gentiles, but to the other sort of seed, viz. the children of his
faith, that walk in his steps, and do his works, for the natural branches of
his own body are now broken off, and can stand no more a holy seed, and
branches in reference to that holy root Abraham for the want of faith, but the
other i. e. all, and only such as believe, of what nation or parents soever,
Jews or Gentiles, are now counted for his seed, and stand holy branches to that
holy root Abraham, and the holy lump to him, who was (as it were) a certain
first fruits unto God of the whole body of believers, and chose^ of God to be a
father of the faithful, and a holy root for ever to all persons that in after
ages should believe, to which honor he was also sealed by circumcision.

The true visible Church then, or olive tree, in which there is fatness and
fullness (as David says I shall be filled with the fatness of thy house) is
coun^ed his family to the end, in which there is now no right of admittance, or
continuance (^s of old) for his own fleshly seed, the very Jews, that were an
holy seed before the time of faith came, muchless for any other man's natural
seed without faith, but for those only even those individual persons that do
believe. There Is no room by right for any else in the house of Abraham the
Gospel Church, whose members are born unto it not offlesh, but of faith, not by
being of Abraham himself, but as Abraham himself was, not by being of believers
after the flesh, but by being believers with them. In the Allegory, while Isaac
the typical promised seed was only in the word of promise, and not in actual
being Ishmael dwelt in the house, but soon afterhe came into the world Ishmael
must abide in the house no longer, so while Christthe true Isaac, typified by
the other, to whom the Gospel promises were made, was but barely in the
promise, the fleshly Israel vaunted it in the Church, but when the fullness of
time was come for him to be ^ncarnate, and in esse reali, that fleshly holy
seed, much more the fleshly seed of believing Gentiles could have no right of
residence in the family of Abraham, nor are any (saving believers) allowed
members thereof to this very day.

Babist.
But it seems to be the Jews themselves, even the natural seed of Abraham, to
which in that Romans 11. 19. Abraham is said by Paul to stand a holy root, if it
be considered with reference to the verse before, where he speaks plainly of
them, as in contradistinction to believieng Gentiles, therefore Abraham's own
fleshly seed, are holy branches still of that holy root.

Baptist.
In no wise as they are his natural seed only, but as they may hereafter be
hoped to become his seed by faith also, and be grafted again upon their root
Abraham, and their own olive tree, i. e. the visible Church, their fathers
family, by believing and embracing the Gospel, from which they were broken off
through unbelief; in which if they abide not still they shall (says he verse
23.) be grafted in again; but never simply as they are his natural seed only.

Abraham may be said to stand a holy root to his own bodily issue two ways,
first only as they were born of his body by Isaac and Jacob, with whom, and
whose seed that typically holy Covenant was established, which being now
vanished away, he is no longer such a holy root to those natural branches of his
body as that they have any birth holiness now therefrom.

Secondly, as the same persons that were his natural seed might also be his
spiriseed by faith in Christ, and so he is here said to be a holy root, and the
Jews in reference to him holy branches, viz. in respect not to their fleshly
birth of him (for as they are his natural branches only, and no more they are
broken off) but in respect to their future calling to the faith, and receiving
in again in time to come, upon account of their owning of the Gospel: the
spititual branches only are now grafted into the olive tree, and growing up
upon the root, the natural branches are broken off, and the root as a holy root
to them withered, that holiness of it faded, it is alive as a holy root now to
none but the believer, not its own natural branches, muchlesse to the natural
branches of believing Gentiles.

Babist.
When the Jews were broken off their natural children were broken off with
them, therefore when the believing Gentiles were grafted in their stead their
natural children must in like manner be grafted in with them.

Babist.
No such matter Sirs, there is either no good Antecedent or else no good
Consequence in this: for first, if you mean as to the Gospel, Church and
Covenant, the children of the unbelieving Jews are not so broken off, and
excluded with their parents, in such a sense as you imagine, i. e. upon the
Account of their parents unbelief only, but for want of faith in their own
persons, and as succeeding their fathers in unbelief, for if any children of
the unbelieving Jews, when they come to years (and children when at years are
the natural seed of their parents, I hope as well as in infancy it self, if
being the children of such or such parents alone would either ingraft or
exclude) if I say unbelieving Jews children do believe, the promise is so made
to them, that their parents unbelief cannot exclude them, but if the children
at years do not believe, the promise is so little made to believers, and their
seed as that the parents belief availes no further then to the engrafting of
himself, and hecannot at all entitle all his natural seed by his single faith,
nor as heirs of the same heavenly inheritance with him, inright them to the
ordinance in token of it: but if you mean as to the old Church and Covenant then

Secondly, it follows no more then if you should go about to make a way for the
needle by the thread, that because the Jews and their seed under the law were
taken in, and thrown out of Covenant altogether, so the Gentiles under the
Gospel and their seed must be owned, and disowned thus collectively, for as to
that old Covenant of the law, made with the fleshly Israel concerning the
earthly Canaan, the very promise of that was made to the whole body of that
nation and people, that came of Abraham Isaac and Jacobs loins, in such a
manner as that their infants were by very natural descent according to the
promise, as t^y and fully heirs of it as themselves, from which consequetnly,
when once God took his advantage, by the breach first made on their part, to
break it on his part also, he must necessarily turn them all out together, and
so he did, discovenanting the whole nation at once, and as it is said in Zach.
11. 10. breaking the Covenant, which he had made with all the people,
discarding and disinheriting them from all that glory in the lump; but the
Gospel. Covenant, and promise concerning the heavenly inheritance is not at all
on this wise, but of a different nature, taking in no whole nation in the
world, nor any one or more men's mere natural seed, no not Abraham's, Isaacs, and
Jacobs (as the other did) to all generations of its continuance, but rather
Sigillatim) such several persons out of every nation, tongue, kindred and
people that fear God, and work righteousness Rev. 5. 9. Act. 10. 34, 35. even
all, and only such as obey him: Singulos generum credentes, not genera
singulorum credentium, vel non.

If therefore you speak of the Jews standing upon the Root Abraham, and in the
Church before Christ, upon the old Covenant account, then I confess that the
whole body of them were broken off altogether, and that as they, and their
fleshly seed were all incovenanted, so they were all discovenanted at once,
when that covenant of circumcision, which God gave to Abraham, and his fleshly
seed Genesis 17. concerning the land of Canaan was it self abolished in Christ
crucified; but then the consequence will not hold from that covenant to this of
the Gospel; these being two distinct and different covenants, the terms of
standing in which are in no wise the same. But if you speak of the covenant of
the Gospel, then your Antecedent is false, for I deny utterly that the Jews and
their seed were altogether alienated from that, further then every individual
of them did cut themselves off from a right of standing therein by want of
faith in their own persons, for as this covenant was never made with any men,
and their mere fleshly seed, no not with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and their
natural posterity, so that a bare birth of their bodies does ipso facto make
them heirs of the heavenly inheritance promised therein; nor give them a right
(as such only) to be signed as true heirs thereof, but only with Abraham and
his spiritual seed, i. e. Christ and all believers in him; so no men and all
their natural posterity are outed from it together, but as both they, and
their posterity do stand together in unbelief upon which account faith being
the only way of standing heirs under the Gospel, and the Jews Children proving
unbelievers in all ages as well as their parents, I confess they are broken off
together, and not otherwise, for if the Children of the Jews did appear to have
faith (as in infancy they cannot, and when they are grown up unversally they do
not) their parents infidelity could in no wise prohibit their standing; and
since neither in infancy, nor at age they appear to be in the faith, their
parents in case they were never so faithful can in no wise entitle them to a
standing, for then the natural seed of those thousands of Jews which did
believe in the Primitive times, have a birth-priviledge, and holiness to this
day, whereupon they may claim admittannce unto baptism, as well as any,
specially if those words Romans 11. 16. if the Root be holy so are the branches,
were to be taken in such a sense as you put upon them, but we know that though
they are branches growing naturally upon that holy Root as you call it, of
believing parents, yet they are counted unholy by your selves, because they
believe not in their own persons, yea if we should ask how the children of
those Jews, that at first believed, did come to be such strangers to the Gospel
Church, your selves would answer us because they believed not, as their parents
did, by which you do no less than grant what we contend for, viz. that the
faith of Ancestors gives no right to their posterity to stand at all in the
Gospel Church, and Covenant, but faith in the particular persons only so
standing.

Well then they were broken off: but why? not because they had not believing
parents, for Abraham was the fleshly Father of all of them, and the primitive
believing Jews were the fleshly fathers of many of them, and are to this day as
much as ever, if bare birth privilege could ingraft them as it did of old in
the family of the Jewish Church: Nor was it because they wanted title upon
which they might have stood still in the Jewish Church, if that Church it self
had stood to this day, for they were Abraham's seed, and that gave them capacity
enough to dwell in the house before, their own unbelief notwithstanding; but
because they do not believe themselves, because the terms of standing in the
Church which before Christ were these, viz. We have Abraham to our Father, we
are the Children of such, and such parents, are now quite changed, so that it
boots not to say such a thing as Abraham is our father, Mat. 3. unless we can
also say we repent, and believe the Gospel.

The Jews were broken off by unbelief, and thou and thine (o believing Gentile)
must stand by faith, yet not thine by thy faith, but thou thy self by thine,
and they by their own; faith is that in which thou standing, and not thy seed,
thou have right to stand in the Church, and not they, in which they standing,
and not thy self, they have right to stand in the Church, and thou have none.
Perpetuity in personal faith gives perpetual personal right to baptism, and to
Church Membership, but not a perpetuity of the same right to any man's whole
posterity; there is now no difference made at all as to Gospel interest, by
being either this or that by nature, but in all the world any person Jew or
Gentile, male or Female seed of believer or of unbeliever, Barbarian, Scythian,
bond or free, is capable both to be saved, and signed as an heir of salvation
by baptism upon personal faith, but in no wise the progeny upon the faith of
the parentage.

And yet to put it more out of doubt, that the Covenant holiness, and
church-right of men's fleshly seed, which was of old, is not continuing under
the Gospel, but Ceremonial and so ended in Christ, in whom your selves say
Iudicialia sunt Mortua, Ceremonialia Mortifera, I will leave two or three
consequences upon the file, which either answer and that not invita Minerva,
nor stretching your Genius beyond sense and reason, rather than want somewhat
whereby to prove your Iudaizing to be judicious, or else by silence say you
cannot: I leave you to consult with them as you see occasion.

That holiness which sanctified the Jews Land, City, Temple, Altar, all 1.
Argum.
its untensils, Priesthood, and the whole body of that people, and all the
pertinences of the first tabernacle, and old Covenant was Ceremonial only, and
is now abolished, and not abiding among believing Gentiles.

But that holiness, that sanctified the Jewish seed, was the same, and no other
then that, which sanctified their Land, City, Temple, Altar, and its Utensils,
Priesthood, and whole people and all the appertenances of that first
Tabernacle, and old Covenant.

Ergo, That holiness, which sanctified the Jewish seed, is now abolished, and
not abiding at all among believing Gentiles.

As for the Major I would wish you not to subject your selves so much to
suspicion of superstition (as you will do in these days of light by putting me
to prove it) as to require proof on it, since no intelligent man, or religious
Christian (save the Pope and Dr. Featley, and the rest of their several fryes,
and fraternities) will deny it Featleys dip. dipped p. 178.
or did ever in the days of the Gospel attribute the same holiness to outward,
and inanimate things viz. places, Lands, profits, Emolluments, first fruits,
Tithes, Oblations, and other obventions, Temples, Altars, Tables, Lavers,
Chalices, Vestiments, nor yet to Priests, and people that all these were
denominated holy by under the Law, for to me by the same reason that first
fruits, tithes, and such like are now to be called holy, the first born of
every creature both of man and beast is still to be called holy also, for even
these were sanctified and holy Denominative, and Dedicative, as much as any of
the rest Ezod. 13. 2. yea as Paul did in another case viz. appeal to the
Pharisees to judge between him and the Sadduces, so may I to you of the
Presbyterian Priesthood to decide this matter between me and the Seducers of
the Popish and Prelatick strain, whose holy sandalls, copes, surplices, and
other superfluities, viz. railes, high Altars, holy Tapers, and Candlesticks,
holy Fonts, holy Windows you your selves pulld down, and profaned before that
part of the wheel where the Baptists dwell, did at all appear so plainly (as
now it does) in the Horizon, of this English Nation, for which sort of
sacrilege D^ Featley (much mistaking you, and being half afraid that you had
been Anabaptists, when (God wot) you are so far from Rebaptization, that you
neither do baptize, nor ever were so much as once truly baptized your selves)
cries out against you, who were in truth the men, that first began to digrade,
and divest all those holy trinkets of that denomination of holiness, wherewith
they had invested them, and that with a most hideous outcry, saying pa. 181.
of his book thus, What evil their disciples, mingled with the Brownists, have
done in the Sanctuaries of God in England, and Ireland, though I should hold my
peace, the timber out of the beams, and the Chalices out of the vestry, and the
Marble, and brass out of the Monuments of the dead, would proclaim it to the
Everlasting infamy of this profane sect.

You then being together by the ears so much among your selves about this
question, viz. whether Temples, Vestments, Altars, Fonts, and Monuments, and
other Steeple house stuff, and Temple trumpery, which was in the Bishops times,
be holy yea or no with that Relative holiness (as D^ Featley calls it) wherewith
the holy places, and Temple furniture of the Jews was holy, I might safely
slink away here, and leave you Presbyters to tugg it out with your Fathers the
Bishops, who have indeed already drawn that controversy so near to an end, as
to determine all the holy things, and well nigh all the holiness they had out
of doors. Yet that you may know I own and honor you so far, as freely to side
with you, so far as you are willing to reform indeed, and renounce Rome, and
her Religion (but Alas Sirs that is not fully yet, for notwithstanding the
covenants whereby you have sworn both me, and your selves to extirpate to your
power all popery, superstition, Idolatry, and mere men's inventions, yet Oh what
Remnants of Romish rubbish, viz. national Churches, popish parochial postures,
popish payments, and profits, old tricks of trotting after tithes, more then
truth, and seeking to benefice your selves well, rather then to benefit the
people, do yet abide unabolished among you) yet so far (I say) as you do
reform, I am willing to go along with you, and therefore will lend you my hand
so far as to sling one stone after all that Canaanitish holiness, wherewith
the Pope and his Clergy has consecrated and christened not only all the babes
born in Christendom, but also the very bells, and other bawbles belonging to
the several sanctuaries, with the name of HOLINESS to the Lord, as far as it is
possible to keep it out from creeping into England any more, and that shall be
an Argument from the mere typicallness of all that Dedicative holiness, that
was once resident in the Jewish Church, and every thing almost that pertained
thereunto, the like to which D^ Featley feigns to be now in the Christian
nations; and thus I frame it.

All that holiness, which was but typical, was but temporal or ceremonial and
so to be abolished under the Gospel. 2. Argum.


But all that holiness whereby the Jews land, City, Temple, Altar,
Priesthood, people, first fruits, profits, and all the appertenances of that
first Tabernacle, were denominated holy, was but merely typical, and
figurative of a future holiness, that was to come in more fully under the new
Covenant, second tabernacle or Church under the Gospel.

Ergo, all that holiness, wherewith the Jews land, City, Temple, andi. was
holy, was but temporal, or ceremonial, and so to be abolished under the Gospel.

The first Proposition needs no proof, for your selves deny not but that all
things under the law that were but types of things to come, were terminated and
taken clean away, when the truth, or things typified thereby did come in under
Christ.

The Minor is no less clear then the other, for the Law had but the shadow of
things to come, not the very Image of the things Heb, 10. 1. it had but the
patterns of holy things in the heavens, not the holy or heavenly things
themselves, those holy places made with hands, and all the holy furniture
thereunto pertaining, were but figures of the true holy place, i. e. heaven it
self, into which our high priest is gone, there to appear in the presence God
for us, Heb. 9. 23. 24. yea read through the 8th. 9th. 10th. chapters to the
Hebrews and you shall find that all things under the law did but serve unto the
example and shadow of heavenly things, and were but as it it were a figure for
the time then being, imposed on the Jews until the time of Reformation i. e.
till Christ came.

Now as to the Minor in the Prosyllogism, which is this viz. that the holiness
which sanctified the Jews seed, was the same, and no other then that which
sanctified all the other appertenances of that Covenant, it is but a folly for me
to offer to prove it, since Mr. Blake himself (the man that most earnestly
pleads the present being of that same holiness in believers seed as in the
Jews seed of old) does little less then clearly confess it, in the 3 and 4 page
of his birth privilege, where he writes thus, viz. common things dedicated for
holy service, and use are holy, a people by nature sinners, dedicated to the
Lord, are for holy use and service of the Lord, when others are for the service
of Idols, therefore Jerusalem a City, none of the holiest for any transcendent
holiness of the Inhabitants thereof, is yet called by the Evangelist the holy
City, by reason of the Temple, and worship there that were holy and from thence
(says he) this observation follows, A people that enjoy Gods ordinances convey
to their issue a privilege to be reputed of a society that is holy, to be
numbered amongst, not unclean, but holy persons, in proof of which observation
among other things he says thus, viz. The land of their habitation where they
dwelt and enjoyed this peculiar privilege is ordinarily styled the Holy Land,
being the land of Emanuel, and the language there spoke the holy language,
being a mark to discern the people of God, the distinguishing and
discrimminating Epithet given to them was still holy, even all of this root
who were branches of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, all of this lump whereof Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob were the first fruits, they peculiarly had this honor to receive,
etc. and that in infancy, etc. distinction from all others.

All which words of his (collectively considered) must needs bear such a sense
as this, viz. That as the things that were else wise common, were holy things,
and in such sort as the City Jerusalem was a holy City, their Temple a holy
place, their service, which we know stood mainly in offering of gifts and
sacrifices, meats drinks, diverse washings and carnal ordinances for that time
only, a holy service, their land of Canaan, it self a holy land, their
language a holy language, and in a mannet every thing of theirs was
discriminated by the term holy, from what ever was then counted common and
unclean among the Gentiles, in such sort that people were a holy people, and
their issue reputed, not an unclean but a holy seed.

If this be his sense, then me thinks its a very senseless thing for him to
affirm that same holiness to be removed from all other things, that were the
subjects then denominated by it, and to remain only in people and their seed;
but if he deny this to be his sense in those recited words of his, I think he
must either crack his conscience to evade the disadvantage that accrues to his
cause by owning it, or else grant that he was not sensible of what he wrote,
for I see not how he can shuffle those sentences into any other sense: And as
he, so Mr. Baxter that backs him in his opinion of birth-priviledge says the
same, and confesses p. 81. of his book that the common nature of holiness is
one and the same in all these, viz. Priests and Levites, Temple, Altar,
Sacrifices under the law, and in the children of believers and their
unbelieving yoke-fellows spoken of 1 Cor 7. 14. i. e. a separation to God, for
so says he there, i. e. in such sense as the Priests, Levites, Temple, Altar,
Sacrifice, etc. were sanctified, both children of believers, and also
unbelieving yoke-fellows are here said to be holy and sanctified.

It being then in both Mr. Blakes and Mr. Baxters own account one and the same
holiness, whereby as well the seed as the land, people, Priests, sanctuary and
service were all denominated and distinguished as holy, which surely was no
other then a mere ceremonial holiness, its but folly for me to say more in
proof of this, that it was the same: nevertheless forasmuch as here is the very
foundation of all your falsity and confusion, in that you either do not, or
else will not discern a difference between the time of the law, and the Gospel
(for distingue tempora, et reconciliabis scripturas) and for that also I am
jealous over you with a godly jealously, that I may espouse you, who are yet a
treacherous and adulterous, as a chaste ministry unto Christ, would to God you
could bear with me in my folly, and indeed bear with me if I yet insist a
little further to show the sameness of that holiness, that was then in the
Jews land; sanctuary, service, etc. and in their fleshly seed, which that it
may yet more plainly appear, I beseech you let it be considered, that (as your
selves grant that the holiness whereby the seed was then said to be holy was,
not real and inherent, but merely dedicative, relative, denominative, i. e.
titular, See Mr. Baxter p. 109 297. 298.
and discriminative, See Mr. Blake p. 4.
so indeed it was but typical, and consequently but temporal as all the rest
was, for in such wise as their Temple was but tipical of the Gospel Churches (I
mean not steeple houses, but congregated and truly constituted Assembliesof
people, 1 Cor. 3. 17. Ephesians. 2. 21, 22. 1. Pet. 2. 5.) And as that nation and
people in their holiness, and all other particulars was tipicall of the Saints,
where ever locally scattered, yet mistically imbodied, and not of Christian
nations collectively taken, and as their holy land and kingdom flowing with
milk and honey was typical of the heavenly Canaan, and kingdom flowing with
rivers of pleasures, and their holy City of that holy City new Jerusalem that
is to come down from God, Rev. 21. and their holy high priesthood of our holy,
harmless, undefiled high priest Christ Jesus, and their holy priesthood of all
the elect of God, sanctified and anointed, not with material holy oil, but the
holy spirit it self, or holy unction to be a holy priesthood, to offer
spiritual sacrifice, 1. Pet. 2. 5. and as their holy Altar and Sacrifices was a
type pointing out our Altar Christ, that immacculatelamb offered without spot
to God, whereof Paul says they have no right to eat that serve the tabernacle,
Heb. 13. 10, (by which saying of Paul in that place you may by the wayif you be
not stocks and stones take notice thus far of your selves, that the same holy
persons that by that holiness had a real right to be, not only in the nearest
service, but highest office also in that Church of the Jews cannot possibly
upon the mere account of that holiness, plead a right to participate of
Gospel-priviledges, and if the holiness of the priests, which was superior in
degree, though the same in kind with that of the people, and seed, by which
they were privileged with so high a standing in that Church, could not inright
them of it self, unless they were obedient to the faith also, to membership and
communion with gospel-fellowships, in gospel enjoyments, shall we suppose the
bare birth-holiness that was in the Jews seed (if it were now as truly in the
fleshly seed of believing Gentiles, as it is certain there is no such matter) can
entitle, and give right to enter and partake of Gospel-priviledges, without
more ado? be ashamed Sirs to assert it) and lastly as all that holiness of the
old Testament and tabernacle, and things thereunto belonging was no more then a
type for the time then being, of the New Testament and Tabernacle and holy
things thereof, so even that fleshly seed of Abraham, and that birth-priviledge
and Covenant-holinesse, which they then had, yea that law of infants
Church Membership and Circumcision, which Mr. Baxter p. 59. of his book will at
no hand yield to be but typical and ceremonial, or to have any antitype that
succeeds it, was as merely typical and ceremonial as all the holiness, that
was in the other subjects, viz. the holy persons and things above named; and
since he there challenges us to show what it was a type of, and prove it to be
so if we can, as simple as he seems to make himself in this matter, I dare be
bold to tell him that there was not any one thing under the Law, or in that
whole Church of the Jews, which (though this will not down with him) was all
but a Cer^mony, but it was a more lively type in reference to its Antitype,
than this Infant-birth-priviledge, birth-holiness, and that Law of
Infant-Church-membership and circumcision were; for verily as that fleshly seed
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were reputatively holy, and were by Covenant and
special promise from God, heirs by that bare fleshly birth with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob of that Earthly Canaan, together with all the glory, privileges,
immunities, rest, riches and bodily blessings of that earthly inheritance, and
in token of their true title thereunto (as so born) were circumcised in the
flesh; so Anti-typically all the faithful seed of Abraham, i. e. true believers
in Christ, and these only, ate that truly holy seed, which by the
Gospel Covenant and promise, are and shall be heirs with Abraham of the
heavenly Kingdom or Canaan, together with all the privileges, liberties,
dignities, and blessings of that eternal, glorious and incorruptible
inheritance reserved for him and them, and to be revealed and brought to them
at the next coming of Jesus Christ, in token whereof they are not only
outwardly baptized in water, immediately after they are thus born, and become
the Children of Abraham by faith, but also circumcised in the heart with the
circumcision made without hands; i. e. inwardly sanctified by the spirit of
God, mortyfying, crucifying, cutting off, and casting out the fleshly
supersluities thereof, Col. 2. 11. All which as its proved abundantly in each
particular thereof in several other Scriptures (as Romans 4. 13. 14. Heb. 8. 6.
Romans 9. 7. 8. Gal. 3. 7. 9. 26. 27. 28. 29.) so is it very plainly and
summarily showed in Heb. 9. 23. 10. 1. where the Law of the old Covenant is
said to be, with all the holy things thereof but only patterns of things in
the heavens, figures of the true, and to have only a shadow of the good things
to come, and not the very substance of the things themselves, the
Covenant-holiness therefore and birth-priviledge which was then in the Jews
fleshly seed, with whom that Covenant was made, was (as all other things then
were) but typical, and consequently but ceremonial and temporal, I mean
abiding only till the time of the Gospel: And since your selves acknowledge
that what was but typical of old is now vanished, I marvel that you should so
much forget your selves, as to renounce the same holiness that was then in all
other things, and retain it still as standing in the seed, and you hold it to
be removed from Abraham's own fleshly seed too, and subjected only in the
fleshly seed of believing Gentiles, you fight against the owning of any of that
kind of holiness that of old was (I mean you Priests of the Presbyterian
party, for the Bishops and Dr. Featley fight against it in the Pope, and yet
hold it themselves to be where you own it not in Temples, Copes, Surplices,
Altars, Fonts, Chalices, and such holy Church-geer, as Christ's Church in
London, in Oxford, in Cambridge, in Canterbury did once superabound with, but
neither Christ's Church in Rome till corrupted, nor Christ's Church in Corinth,
nor Ephesus, nor Philippi, nor any of the rest of the Churches in the primitive
times ever did, nor any of Christ's true Churches in these latter times ever
will place holiness in any more; I say you are against all that relative
Jewish, ceremonial holiness, and abide not to hear of its abiding in any thing
else, and yet abide not to hear any otherwise but that it abides still in that
only subject, i. e. the fleshly seed of enchurched parents.

But Sirs, although in most things I must needs prefer the worst of you two P
Priest-hoods of the Prelatick and Presbyterian posture, yet (to give the Devil
his due) in this one thing I cannot but commend the Pope and his Priesthood
beyond you both, in that since you will all needs Judaize more or less, and
regulate your Gospel service by that of the Law, they Judaize more judiciously
and more ingenuously than either of you, two P P that pluck him to pieces for
it, for thou English Scottish
Angel art neither hot nor cold, neither gospel, nor law, neither wholly Romish,
nor rightly reformed, but retaining a little of one, and a little of the other,
and lying in a Lukewarm temper, between them both, for which God will spue you
out of his mouth as well as them: but as for the other they are not lukewarm,
but I bear them record they have (as the Jews also had since the Gospel came
in) a zeal of the Law, but not according to knowledge, yea they are zealous of
the holiness of that Covenant more, and more completely, then either of you:
for they plead not only for the holiness of their fleshly seed, as P. nor only
a holiness in Temples, Altars, Fonts, Vestments, Vessels, etc. as P. but for a
holiness well-nigh in all those things, and more too, than ever were
denominated holy under the Law, in which supererrogating, I must needs
uncommend them again as far worse then you, yea they say downrightly to the
people, that except it be after the manner of Moses in all things almost,
Judicial and Ceremonial (only Moralls they are a little more moderate in
observing, and can better bear an absolute abrogation of) viz. one Holy
High Priest to procure atonement, alias, fell indulgencies and pardons, whose
supremacy must be owned, and he answerably adorned with holy Mitre and Crown,
Purple, Scarlet, fine Linen, Chains of Gold; also if there be ^ot holy
Altars, Tapers, Lavers, holy Water, Offerings, first fruits, fine flower, Wine
and Oil, Salt, Cream, Spittle, etc. holy Fasts, as Lent, Wednesdaies,
Fridaies, holy Feast-daies, in memorial of such Saints as the Pope canonizeth
(which are more by far then there are days in the year) holy Pictures and
Images, holy Wars, holy Pilgrimages, holy Clouts, holy Rags, holy Relics,
holy Bells, holy Chanteries, holy Churchyards, of which they say Pueri sacer
est Locus extra Mejete, holy persons devoted to service, viz. holy Votaries,
holy Monks, holy Friars, holy Nunns and sic de ceteris, from the Universal
Vicar to the holy singing men and pipers, and the rest of that rabble, which
are the very vermin of Christendom; yea if they observe not all the holy
Statutes, and ordinances which his Holiness their Lord God the Pope commands
them, especially if they separate from the holy Catholic Church of his
constituting they cannot be saved; Thus they clean outstrip you, if pleading
for relative, dedicative holiness, and consecration of persons, places, and
times, be as proper under the Gospel as under the Law, and are so zealous of
that kind of holiness, that in zeal thereof they will have all to be Holiness
to the Lord, till they come to be as wicked, and profane as the very devil
himself can well desire they should be.

Si aliquando quare non nunc? (says the Pope) when you question him for his
Dedicative holiness, if so once why not now? If under the Law, why not under
the Gospel? the same phrase you commonly be speak us in when we demand a reason
why you fancy such a birth-holiness in your fleshly seed; in return to which
against such time as you shall satisfy us so slenderly in this case, so as to
say Si aliquando quare non nunc? arguing from the manner of things under Moses,
that thus or thus they ought to be under Christ, and deriving a holiness from
that of the Jews fleshly seed, to the fleshly seed of believing Gentiles under
the Gospel, I leave this double question upon record.

First, Si aliquid quare non quicquid? If you will have any thing holy with
that Ceremonial holiness now, why not every thing that then was so?

Secondly, Si aliqualiter, quare non aequaliter? if you will needs Iudaize at
all, why not in all as well as the Pope? though where he does all, and more too
he shall at last have no thanks for his labor.

The next and last argument whereby I shall prove that typical holiness of
Abraham's fleshly seed, as well as of all the other subjects denominated, and
distinguished by it under the Law to be but Ceremonial, and now nullified under
the Gospel, is this.

That holiness whose contrarily opposite commonness, sin, and uncleanness was
but merely ceremonial, and is now utterly ended, and abolished, must
necessarily 3. Argum.
be but ceremonial, and now abolished also.

But that holiness, which successively through all generations (for the time
then being) did denominate, and distinguish the Jews, and their progeny from
all people, and their seed as holy, is a holiness whose contrarily opposite,
commonnesse, sin, and uncleanness was but Ceremonial, and is now abolished.

Ergo, That holiness which did distinguish the Jews and their natural progeny
(as holy) from all other people and their seed was but ceremonial and is now
utterly abolished also.

The Major cannot possibly he denied, for contrariorum eadem est ratio,
contrariorum uno sublato tollitur alterum: of contraries take away one, and the
other cannot remain in its opposition to it, any longer: as for example, the
commonness, sinfulness, prophanness, uncleanness of some meats, flesh, birds,
beasts, places, persons, and their natural seed above others being ended, the
cleanness of some meats, flesh, birds, places, persons, and their natural seed
above others must without controversy be at an end also: under the law,
whilst there was more uncleanness, commonness, and prophanness in such and
such meats, places, people, then in others, there must necessarily be by the
Rule of contraries more holiness in these meats, places, people, then in those:
but under the Gosspel there being no more uncleanness, commonness, or
prophanness in these things, places, or persons above those, there must be
consequently no more holiness in those than these: and so if there be no such
birth holiness as was under the Law, there can be no such birth uncleanness as
was under the Law: and if no one man in all the world is more sinful, common
and unclean then another by nature, no man can be more holy then another by
nature, with the holi^ess directly opposite to that uncleanness, but all men
must now be all alike by nature or fleshly birth.

And now as to the Minor, viz. that the commonness, sinfulness, prophanness, or
uncleanness of some men's fleshly seed above others, oppositely answering to the
holiness with which the Jews seed was then holy above others, is totally
destroyed, as well as all that uncleanness, and the holiness contrary
thereunto, that was then in some meats, and flesh of birds and beasts above
others is evidently proved to be a truth to any which will impartially consult
and compare these three scriptures each with other (viz. Act. 10. v. 11. 12.
13. 14. 15. 28. Act. 11. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. also Gal. 2. 11. 12. 13. 14.
15. 16. 17 18. in all which if you be not either so blind that you cannot, or
so obstinate that you will not see, you cannot avoid the sight of this very
thing, viz. that not only the Commonness, and uncleanness that was once in some
meats, and flesh of birds and beasts forbidden as abominable to be eaten, under
the Law, but also the commonness and uncleanness that was in some people, and
their seed more then in others, even that sin and uncleanness of the Gentiles
by nature in respect of the Jews, who were then forbidden to eat with them, as
a thing for them unlawful and abominable, is not at all in being now under the
Gospel, but quite abolished and consequently the birth holiness directly
opposite to it abolisht also; which holiness yet, that was as then in the Jews
by birth, and nature M^ Blake is not ashamed to scrue his wits to prove a
translation of from the Jews seed now, to the seed of believing Gentiles under
the Gospel, and that from the last of these Scriptures, viz. Gall. 2. verse 15.
then which, I testify, no Scripture does more clearly confute him.

As to those Scriptures cited out of Act. 10. and Act. 11. these things are
well worthy your observation in them first that Peter (though under the Gospel)
stood yet opinioned (God having not till now discovered the contrary to him)
according to the Law that such meats as were then forbidden to be eaten, and
such people as were not Jews by nature, but by nature sinners of the Gentiles,
were unholy, unlawful, unclean and abominable for him that was a Jew, so much
as to eat, or eat with still.

Secondly, that God did not show unto Peter in that vision any such thing as
Mr. Blake dreams and seems to himself to have the vision of viz. that he had
now translated that old commonness and uncleanness that was once in the
Gentiles by nature, and stated it now upon such as are Jews by nature, and such
as are by nature descended from unbelieving parents, and contrary wise
translated and stated the birth-holiness that was once among the Jews by
nature, because they now believe not, upon such Gentiles by nature, as are born
of believing parents; for no more then Gentiles by nature can I call them
still, for all their parents faith, not Christians or Saints by nature (as Mr,
Blake frivolously fancies them to be) that are descended from Christian parents
after the flesh only; for howbeit the fleshly seed of the Jews are Jews still,
both natura, nomine et natione, yet the mere fleshly seed of Christians and
Saints, are not Christians and Saints at the same rates in Gods account (how
ever they are in the Popes and his) any more then the mere fleshly seed of
believers are by birth, nature, name and nation believers as much as their
parents, which that they are Mr. Blake himself, will not surely be so shameless
as to assert: and though he tells us a trifling tale, that the name of
Christian would not, long hold in any family, or among any people if it be not
so, that as Jews are Jews by birth, so Christians are Christians, p. 6. yet I
tell him again it is no great matter whether it do or no, yea it is not only
worth nothing, but worse then nothing to have the mere name and title of
Christian, communicated and derived from parents to children, from generation
to generation without the nature, for that's the main mischief that has
overspread all Christendom, and filled it with a thousand Antichristians to one
true Christian indeed. Secondly, as simply as he says God provideth for a
continuance in succession of that name from age to age, yet I know no such
provision that God has made in his word for any such thing, as the continuance
of the mere name of Christian in one family or nation, by any such
birth-priviledge or propagation thereof from Christians to their mere natural
posterity, but all the provision that has been made in this behalf has been
made by the Pope and his priesthood. Yea if God himself had took order for any
such matter, then me thinks the name Christian should have been continued to
this day among the posterity of that Gospel Church of the Hebrews, i. e. those
many thousands of Jews, which in the primitive times turned Christians, yea
then so many thousands of the Jews, which then believed, and became Christians
Act. 21. 20 might have multiplied as easily by this time into one Christian
nation at least, by the pastoral power, improvement, and sanctity of Saint
Simon Peter, as the Church of Rome, i. e. those few Gentiles, which at first
believed there, did at last by the pollitick power, improvement and subtilty of
Sir Simon the Pope, his supposed successor increase and multiply into so many.

And as God did not show unto Peter in the forenamed place, that he had now
removed that birth privilege, and old Covenant holiness from the Jews by
nature, to the natural seed of believing Gentiles, so

Thirdly, he showed him point blank that he had now quite abolished, and put an
end to that old outward carnal, legal, ceremonial account of things, and
persons as holy and unclean, so that now as no meats, nor flesh of birds and
beasts should be counted common or unclean, in relation to other, as aforetime,
so no men now or flesh of men however born, should by mere fleshly birth of
such parents, though unbelieving Gentiles, be counted common or unclean in
relation to others, whether Jews by nature, or believing Christians natural
seed, as more holy by birth then they, for being cavill'd with by them of the
circumcision i. e. the birth privileged Jews, for eating things common and
unclean, and for associating himself with men uncircumcised, common or unclean
(for so both the Gentiles or uncircumcision in the flesh, and many meats eaten
by them, and prohibited to be eaten by the Jews are called and accounted under
the law) he tells them chap. 11. that he was at first as scrupulous of the
thing as themselves, till a voice from God declared to him that he must not now
call any thing common or unclean, that was so before, in respect to other, as
more holy then it in the sense of the law, because whatever was then common or
unclean in such a sense, God had now cleansed i. e. destroyed that denomination
and distinction that was between it, and what answerably to it was wont to be
called holy: And that these discriminating terms of holiness and uncleanness
are as much abolished in all people and their fleshly seed as in all other
flesh of birds and beasts appears undeniably chapter 10. 28. where he tells
Cornelius the very same as concerning men, who aforetime were by birth common
or unclean, that he tells them of the circumcision as concerning other
creatures which aforetime were called common or unclean. Ye know (says he)
that it is an unlawful thing (meaning according to the will of God under the law)
for a man that is a Jew to keep company, or come nnto one of another nation
(for then indeed Jews by nature might not eat with such as were by nature
sinners of the Gentiles) but now God has showed me that I should not, (meaning
in these days of the Gospel) call any man common or unclean: observe the words
I beseech you, and consider them with reference to the vision it self, and that
further exposition of it, which Peter himself makes in the 11. chapter, and the
result thereof is no less then this, viz. That as there is now nothing, i. e.
no meats, or flesh of birds or beasts, or other creatures more unclean, unholy,
unlawful or abominable to be eaten then other, as some was under the law, so
there is not now any man by birth, nature or nation unclean, in such sense as
the Gentiles were of old in reference to the Jews, but that all men are alike
now by birth, and none by nature more holy or unclean then other, in such wise
as before, none by mere nature nearer to God or further off, more or less the
people of God or accepted with him, further then by holiness or unholinesse of
life they are distinguished. In further consideration of which v. 34. 35. Peter
opened his mouth again and said thus, of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons, i. e. now he accepts not men of one nation above another,
no not Jews by nature, more then those which heretofore, in relation to that
birth-holiness the Jew had, were counted sinners of the Gentiles, nor any one
man above another, as merely descended of such a parent, but in every Nation he
that fears him, and works righteousness is accepted with him.

Though therefore time was, when the natural seed of Jewish parents (as merely
so born, though proving never so morally wicked, profane and unbelieving in
their own persons) were still accepted of God (I mean in that outward
ceremonial sense only) as his people, his peculiar chosen generation, his holy
nation, above all nations of the earth, though (as Mr. Blake says truly) none
of the holiest for any transcendent manners of the inhabitants: yet when Christ
came the hour came, and now is, wherein no fleshly birth or being of this or
that nation or parentage or natural descent and condition does invest one
person or people with this birth-priviledge of acceptance before God as his
people, or denomination of a holy people or seed more then others, the hour now
is, wherein in mere infancy there is no more distinction at all between persons
as holy and unclean, wherein faith and not typical but true holiness, or
holiness of truth only, Ephesians. 4 17, 18. 24. makes the distinction between the
Church of the Genliles, and other Gentiles; wherein there is no difference
between Jews and Gentiles, and the children of both save according as they are
called, and have hearts purified by faith, Act. 2. 39. 15. 9. wherein the
righteousness and grace of God is unto all, and upon all alike without
difference in time of infancy, and upon all alike that believe a alike when
they come to years, for there is no difference, Romans 3. 22. wherein there is
neither Jew nor Greek, circumcision or uncircumcision, more unclean or holy by
nature either then the other (as of old) but all alike accounted sinners or
holy according as they live sinfully or holily, and not other wise. If then we
may not call any man, of what blood, nation or parentage soever under the
Gospel common or unclean, (as God showed Peter that he should not) no not those
who (saving the abolishing of that unclaanness) are as abominable by birth as
the Gentiles were in the time of the law, then may we not call any man,
howevernaturally descended, holy upon the same account of that his natural
birth, in comparison of others.

Whereupon though Christ called the Canaanites by nature, dogs in reference to
the Jews, and their seed the children, while that birth-uncleanness or
holiness stood yet unabolished, Mat. 15. 12. 26. after which example Mr. Blake
takes such blind boldness to himself, as to imagine the new born infants of
believers and unbelievers may respectively be so denominated still, yet he
takes upon him much more then God ever gave Peter leave to do, or any man else
in those days of the Gospel, if he now call any person by mere natural birth
more holy, common or unclean then other.

It Is not now fleshly birth, nor circumcision, nor uncircumcision in the flesh
that discriminates men as Saints or sinners, children or dogs, holy or unclean,
in Covenant with God or out, fit or unfit (further then nonage unfits all
alike for such a thing) now to be of the visible Church, which is not now
national neither as heretofore it was, for under the law this only made men
communicable or incommunicable one with another, this was the cause why those
of the circumcision cayilled with Peter till he satisfied them to the contrary,
because he being a Jew by nature, and circumcised in the flesh went in to men
uncircumcised, and did eat with them, Act. 11. from eating with whom he
dissemblingly withdrew himself at another time, fearing them of the
circumcision, Gal. 2. which way of discrimination of persons each from other as
holy and unclean, fit or unfit for Church Communion each with other by mere
fleshly birth and circumcision in the flesh, was but a type, the Antitype
whereof is not this, viz that believers fleshly seed are holy, Saints, Gods
people, Church Members by birth, and contrariwise unbelievers fleshly seed by
nature dogs, swine, sinners, unclean in such sort as the seed of Jews and
Gentiles were under the law; but this rather and indeed viz. that believers
themselves spiritually born by faith in Jesus Christ, circumcised in heart,
doing Abraham's works, are now the children of Abraham, a peculiar people, a
holy nation, near and deer unto him, that must dwell in his house, and be fed
and refresht with that bread, of which there is abundance, and unbelievers
themselves, unholy ones in heart and life, never new born, nor become children
to God and Abraham by faith in Christ, but remaining uncircumcised within,
under the unclean lusts of the flesh, are those unclean ones, and sinners with
whom communion is not to be held by the other in Church bodies, those dogs and
swine to whom the childrens bread is not to be divided, nor holy things given
even the holy ordinances of the Gospel, nor pearls cast i. e. the precious
particularities of professed believers, viz. baptism and the supper thrown away
upon them.

Moreover as God showed Peter by that vision Act. 10. that not any man now, no
not a Gentile by nature may be called common or unclean any more then one that
is a Jew by nature, so he shows him the same ore again, in a round reproof by
the mouth of Paul Gal. 2. 11. to 19. where it is recorded how shamefully he
separated from eating with the Gentiles for fear of offending the Jews, of
whose cavils with him in this kind he had had some experience before, Act. 11.
as if he had been opinion'd still according to the law, that such meats as were
then unclean, and such people as were then sinners by nature, in reference to
the then holy seed of the Jews had been no less then abomination still for
him, or any Jew by nature to eat of, or eat with, and likewise how roundly he
was dealt with by Paul, who minded him of that, which he knew well enough but
was too willingly ignorant of at this time, viz. That these who were but a
while since by nature holy, were now no holier by nature then Gentiles, that
were then also called sinners of the Gentiles, but that as to that old account
of ceremonial uncleanness and holiness, whereby they were distinguished from
the very womb before, they were now all alike by nature, viz. Jews no more holy
then other men, and other men even Gentiles no more sinners by birth then they,
all that partition wall of birth holiness and uncleanness, propinquity and
alienation that did once difference some men from other ab incunabilis being
broken down, and themselves such as must look upon themselves as dead to that
law, whereby they stood the children of God and Saints, and all other men
sinners by fleshly birth, and under another law now even that of the Gospel, by
which there is no other way of being holy and becoming so much as relatively
only, much less really the children of God, then that of faith in the Lord
Jesus for the Jews themselves more then for any other: and therefore in case
they now go about to build again the things that they had destroyed (meaning
that fleshly birth holiness which they had before disownd) they should make
themselves transg^essors in so doing: this verily is the very sum, sense, and
scope of that Scripture viz. to cry down all the old ceremonial distinctions of
men by nature and Nation, to beat down all that old birth privilege and
pre-eminence of one person however descended above another, as to Gospel
participation and communion: out of which yet Mr. Blake blindly takes his text,
where upon to build again a certain birth holiness in one man's fleshly seed
above another, the very thing that Paul there declares rather to be abolished,
most perversely propagating to the mere carnal seed of Christians that ancient
tipical and now ended holiness of Jews by nature, who though the seed of
believing Abraham himself, yet have none of it at all now themselves, nor yet
whilst they had it could be admitted by John to baptism, and gospel privileges
upon that only account, and yet if it still remain as the thing intitling to
ordinances both must have it, and a right also to baptism by it, specially if
Mr. Blakes own tenet be true, that the ground of a child's admission to baptism
is not the faith of his immediate parent only, as he says it is not p. 24. of
his birth privilege, but the promise made to believing Ancestors at a great
distance; for as he s^th there that if Iosia have no right from his father
Ammon, yet he is not to b^ shut out having right from his father Abraham, so
say I Abraham being not only the remote parent of Iosia, but of all the Jews
that are born at this day also, if the Jews have no right now from their own
immediate parents that in the primitive times, or more lately believed not the
Gospel, yet may they have right, if right at all be to be had to Gospel
privileges from the parents faith at a distance, from their remote fathers
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, whose believing of the Gospel, is as well worthy to
entitle all their seed to this day to the Gospel promises, as the faith of any
believing Gentiles only.

I cannot therefore but stand amazed in my mind to consider how miserably Mr.
Blake mistakes himself in taking that text, from which to prove a present birth
holiness in the infants of believing Gentiles, which if there were no other to
compare it with, does sufficiently clear it of it self alone; how much more if
compared with those forecited out of Act. 10. Act. 11 that there is now no such
holiness and uncleanness as was once between Jews by nature, and such as were
then called sinners of the Gentiles: yea if that distinction of Jews by nature,
and sinners of the Gentiles spoken of Gal. 2. 15. were now in being, and
remaining unabolished, it would be so far from establishing that indeed it
would utterly overthrow what Mr. Blake pleads for from it, and instead of
advancing the natural seed of believing Gentiles so high in holiness as he
would have them to be by birth, debase them rather into a worse condition then
I dare say any unbelieving Gentiles seed is in by birth (as to such a kind of
uncleanness as they once were denominated by) in all the world; specially if it
be so as he himself says p. 10. of his birth privilege, viz. That the seed of
believing Gentiles are now under one of those two heads in the text: For if
that distinction be not now destroyed, and all men by birth come under one of
those two denominations now; under which of them I trow will Mr. Blake rank the
infants of believing Gentiles? he will not render himself so ridiculous sure as
to say they are Jews by nature, and therefore (unless the distinction be
totally taken away) he must say they are by nature sinners of the Gentiles,
which in the sense of the Law, is as if he should say Dogs, unholy, common,
and unclean, and more then we our selves dare say of any now newborn infants
under heaven, as in contra-distinction to other.

If he say they are neither sinners of the Gentiles, nor Jews by nature
neither, then either he must say they are some third thing, which if he do Mr.
Blake himself will contradict Mr. Blake in that, for he asserts page 10. of his
Birth privilege that the seed of believing parents under the Gospel must be
looked upon under one member of this division in this text, and that the
Apostles distinction and distribution is so full and complete that a third
cannot be assigned, or else he must grant that this distinction is now wholly
ceased under the Gospel, which because it is the giving up of his whole cause he
will be very loath to do, and therefore rather than do so (then which yet, if
he well understood what is best for him he could not do a better thing) of the
two he chooses, to the utter contradiction of himself, to rank them under a
third head, to assert them to be some third thing, namely a sort of carnal holy
seed of his own, and the Clergies coining, a Relative holy seed of their own
consecrating, a faederall holy seed of their own feigning, a holy seed hatched
in their own heads, which are neither fish, nor flesh, nor good red herring,
nor sinners of the Gentiles, nor Jews by nature, nor Jews besides nature
neither, i. e. by personal faith as all true Christians are, but quartum
quoddam, a certain fourth thing, called Christians from their mothers womb, or
ever they are so much as christened into the name, or discipled into the
nature, and yet for all this a seed set forth in such a transcendent manner, as
if all other were in comparison of them by very descent, p. 13. unclean,
sinners, unholy, dogs, and filthy swine.

'Twere enough to make a wise man wonder to see how superlatively Mr. Blake
magnifies this seed of believing Gentiles, above the seed of all other men in
the world, even above the fleshly seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob themselves,
who only, at least mainly; had the promise of this privilege of transmitting a
Covenant holiness to their issue, and this but typically, and for a time
neither, even till that seed should come, i. e. Christ and believers in him, to
whom all, and only the Gospel promises were made.

He calls them Children of God, and Saints by very nature, Little ones of Sion
in reference to infants of Infidells, which with him are little ones of
Babylon: and yet (to go round again) this Babylon (in his own opinion) is not
the Infidells but Rome, a Church of Christians (in name at least, as well as
the Protestant nations) and consequently (to go round again) in his own opinion
such (see page 26.) as transmit a covenant-holiness into their seed, so far as
(in his own sense) to make them little ones of Sion as well as the other: and
yet for all this too (to go round again) though it be execration with him to
hurt the little ones of Sion, i. e. in his sense the infants of such as are not
infidels, but Christians in name, yet (to go round again) it is an happy thing
to dash the little ones of Babylon i. e. in his sense infants of Papists who
yet are Christians nomine tenus and not infidels, and consequently (secundum
se) the Lords heritage and such as have Christ's name upon them, and such as for
a Turk to persecute were to be guilty with Saul of persecuting the Lord Jesus
p. 30.) against the walls p. 29. which little ones of both Syon and Babylon he
is yet much mistaken in when all is done, in taking either of them for fleshly
babes of what parents soever, Syons little ones in the true spiritual or gospel
sense, being the Saints themselves only, and not their fleshly babes as such,
even the little ones Christ, Paul, Peter and John speak of Mat. 10. 42. Gal. 4.
19. 1 Pet. 2. 2. 1 John 2. 1. 12, 13. And Babylons babes being no other then
the C C Clergies adult disciples, or A A Antichristian C C Christian creatures.

And (to take notice a little more yet of Mr. Blakes high expressions of the
birth holiness, birth happiness, birth mercy, birth dignity of mere nominal
Christians fleshly seed, as they lie scattered up and down in p. 28. 30. 31.
32. 33. and other pages of his book) he calls them a seed in relation to God as
well as their parents, [and so indeed they may soon be, if he mean of such mere
outside Christians as he doth] the inheritance of God, the Saints and Servants
of God, a holy seed, having a royal transcendency above all others, as only
worthy the name of a people, enjoying the light, nigh unto God, a people of
hope and expectation, children that have bliss, [as if they were actually and
inalterably already stated in it, and possessed of it, and all other infants and
people as inalterably designd and devoted universally to cursing and damnation,
as having no Gospel at all belonging to them, no not that Gospel which is to be
preached to every creature] a seed by birth privilege to be baptized, p. 27.
[which yet is more birth-priviledged then Abraham's own seed could have Mat. 3.
even before their birth privilege did perish from them] such as have a large
and full right to all the ordinances of God, and privileges of the Church,
appertaining to members, as they shall be capable of their use, by personal
faith and good demeanor when at years, and grown up, [and I wonder who has not
the like upon those terms? even infants of infidels surely as well as they when
at age, and whilst infants, they are no more capable of the use of any
ordinance then the other.]

He tells us, these by birth are of the household of God, of the Citizens of the
Saints [tis much he said not fellow Citizens in Paul's phrase, Ephesians. 2. sure it was
because he bethought himself of their uncapableness of fellowship, for all
their membership] He tells us that these are orderly admitted, i. e. by baptism
then which Scripture knows no other admission, for no sooner do we read of a
convert (says he) but we presently hear of his baptism [whereas of all the
converts in Christendom that sit under the ministry of the Pope, Prelate and
Presbyter, I never knew one in all my days baptized after their conversion of
him by preaching, till being converted from them to the Truth as it is in Jesus
they convert and come to us, and then we immediately baptize them indeed; but
as for them, it is impossible for them so much as to preach the Gospel in all
Christendom, in the way and words in which Peter, Ananias, Philip, Paul, and
all the first and purest preachers did, while they suppose all they preach to
to have been baptized in infancy (for what Priest in Christendom can say to his
parish repent and be baptized for remission of sins, arise and be baptized
and wash away thy sins; he that believes and is baptized shall be saved (as
they of old said, Mark 16. 16. Act. 22. without gross absurdity having
christn'd them all long before he ever preached to them?) neither do they
baptize any at all after conversion, and the best baptism they dispense in
token of remission of sins (so long before either sins commission, or the
sinners conversion) is at best but mere rantism neither.]

He tells us that those have right to all the immunities of this house, to all
the privileges of this City of God (meaning the Church here below) and have
title to all Christ's visible ordinances, that they belong to Christ, and
therefore must partake of that which is of Christ, and being of the household
they must therefore have of the food of the household, yea the stewards of the
mysteries of God must be accountable in case they deny it them.

[And yet till they are at years not any one of them may participate (as
themselves say) of any one of those visible ordinances, viz. neither praying,
preaching, hearing, nor the supper, nor any thing else which is the food of the
household after baptism, by which they are barely entered in infancy, and only
thrown ore the threshold into the house, and then ly starving for many years
together, without bit or crumb of any other food at all, being utterly denied
to be communicants at the supper, the use of which their folly will once be
manifest, who say they are less capable of in infancy then of the use of
baptism, for (as shall appear more hereafter) howbeit they are truly capable of
neither they are as truly capable of both as of either, yet are they denied a
share in that service of the supper by these shewards of the mysteries of God,
the ministry themselves, and that for no less then 16 years together at least,
according to the rule of the old stewards the episcopacy, that have almost
given up all their earthly account, and I know not for how long by the will of
the new stewards i. e. the Presbytery, for if their rule be to practice it no
oftener, then they practice it indeed, some of them have had no supper at all in
their parishes, neither for young nor old for about seven or eight years
together last past, and when they will no body knows, and how they can with a
good conscience I cannot tell, nor never could while I stood among them, they
standing all, and their people all universally unbaptized to this day, for
which neglect of theirs to give persons their meat in due season, order and
manner, feeding them with a breakfast in baptism, before they are fit to be
fed, so much as with that milk, and then denying them any supper at all when
they come to years, though they then both pay for it, and are at least as fit
to feed thereon, as they were in infancy to feed on baptism, the Lord of that
supper, and of all the other holy ordinances of his which they have dispenst
more after their own minds and men's tradition, will, and Testament, then his
own, will call them ere long to give account of their stewardship too, and let
them be no longer stewards.]

And yet a little more to trace Mr. Blake to and fro as he daunceth the hay up
and down in that trifling treatise, he tells us that these are a holy seed, of
the noblest birth, yea though they be the children of loose living parents, of
misbelieving parents, p. 4. 5. 25. 26. of apostatized parents of excommunicate
parents of fornicating parents [and consequently a very bastard brood, which
under the law that Mr. Blake himself professes to be tried by were unclean, and
not admitted into the congregation unto the tenth generation] of papistical
parents [for even these are but misbelievers and Christians in name still, and
as himself says no insidels, though (to go round again) holding such damnable
errors in the faith p. 30. as sh^t them out from the happiness, and therefore I
think from the holiness too, of Christians] yet all this notwithstanning (to go
round again) if the children but of believing parents that are of the Church,
and (to go round again) not true believers neither as believer is opposed to
unbeliever, misbeliever or Christian in name only, with all which he confesses
the Church may abound, but as believer is opposed only to infidel p. 25.
[between which terms unbeliever, and infidel which are not synonimaes it seems
with him, yet the Scripture makes no more difference then is between (...) and
(...) the same greek word that expresses both, and is translated into latin by
infidelis, and Englisht by either unbeliever or infidel, notwithstanding all
this I say if born in England, or any where else in any nations, or of any
parents that are but Christian in name only, or of but one such Christian
parent, the other being an Indian, that is with him an infidel indeed, they are
with him a holy seed still, that God ownes and challenges for his, yea frrom
the womb Gods heritage, a seed so nobly born as noble Nehemiah himself was not,
yea p. 28. the least of whom is greater then Nehemiahs better. These high and
Heroic Eulogies Mr. Blake bestows upon not true believers and real Saints
only to whom yet they peculiarly belong; but on mere carnal Gospellers, the
natural luke warm formalists of the Antichristian more then Christian nations,
upon pretensive verbal professors, and that not of truth neither as it is in the
word, but as in the word of an erroneous Priesthood, who preach truth for
tith, and yet not the tith of that truth they should preach neither, but mostly
the traditions of men, upon real professors of prophanness, for so many to one
of them that are Christians in name only, and yet not on these only but on the
mere fleshly seed o^ these does he bestow such expressions as these, even no
less then can be said of the chiefest Saints, he says of the fleshly holy seed
of all the sinners in Christendom, viz. a chosen generatien, a royal
priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people, page 8, people of God that suck
in much of God whilst they suck the breast page 32.

And yet for all this their so timely acquaintance with, and knowledge of God,
as it were from the womb his heritage, having the knowledge of the Scriptures,
if not with John Baptist full of the holy Ghost from the womb, never in that
condition of enstrangement from God as the Ephesians were said to be in Ephesians.
2. 11. for thus extraordinarily also does he extol that fleshly seed that is
born within the precincts of the Christian nations p. 32, for all this (I say)
to go round again, and to use his own phrases and expressions of them in the
quite contrary way page 28. breeding and education not answering birth and
descent, by which they are Gods by Covenant; A people ignorant to perdition,
and destruction, such as though dedicated to God so soon as born, yet have
nothing appears in their lives, but that they might have been given as well to
Molo^, such who (as holy seed and people as they are) are no better but
somewhat worse than the Mongrel seed, that spoke half in the Language of
Canaan, and half of Ashdod, out of whose mouth scarce a word can be heard, for
to argue that they are Christians, lisping out oaths as soon as words, put to
learn trades, and little regard had that they may learn to know Christ Jesus;
for even thus and no less does Mr Blake disparage this honorable holy seed that
is born in Christendom, soon after he had lifted them up as it were to heaven,
and set them above the seed of all other people in the world, in respect of
this birth-holinesse and happiness: insomuch that if you read how this royal
race, and fleshly birth holy seed of all that are Christians but in name, do
sometimes ride and float upon the high waves of his windy applause, and by and
by are debased and denominated in no higher and better, but somewhat worse and
inferior terms then the mongrel seed, which God was so far from owning as his,
that he enjoined their own fathers not to own them N^h, 13. Ezekiel. 13. Iam jam
tacturos sidera summa putes.
Iam jam tacturos tartara nigra putes.


Me thinks it is very much, and not a little to be mused on, that a seed of such
holiness, mercies, glory, honor, royalty, bliss, promises, privileges, carried
up so high into the air which words, born up above all men's seed with pompous
titles of, high born heirs, intimately interessed in God, in Christ, in
Abraham, allied to them all as their own, upon no other then that bare account
of being the mere fleshly seed of Christians, and that in name only, should yet
when all is done have neither any earthly kindome, inheritance or Canaan (as
the Jews had while they enjoyed this birth-priviledge) whereby to prove them
real heirs of something more then bare ordinance (which is but bondage without
the inheritance) not a dram more of any outward earthly felicity, power, glory,
peace, plenty, etc. then what may befall the seed of Turks and Tartars as well
as they; nor yet the least measure of real right, or true and immediate title
to the heavenly Canaan, kindome, and inheritance by any promise thereof made to
them as such, i, e. upon the mere account of being such men's seed, unless at
years they become believers, and obedient to the Gospel themselves, upon which
terms of belief and obedience when they come to age, the seed of the vilest
wretch under heaven may be an heir of it as well as they: for in infancy the seed
of believers have not hard themselves from heaven, or deserveed exemption, by
any actual transgression, from the general state of little infants declared
in Scripture, any more then the Infants of believers, so but that dying in
infancy they may be saved equally with the other, and when they grow to years
the seed of the best believers in the world have no promise without faith to be
saved ere the sooner because they are such men's seed, but in the way of faith
or believing themselves, the seed of the worst enemies to Christ that ever
breathed have as much promise and assurance from God that they shall be saved
as the other. Sirs where is the blessedness you speak of? where the great
pre-eminence of believers seed under the Gospel does now ly, in respect of
which they are styled by Mr. Blake, and others such great and high born heirs,
nor yet what inheritance it is, which by that bare fleshly birth only they are
heirs to, I could never yet find of my self, nor learn from any of you. As for
the Jews by nature though they were not heirs of heaven it self, upon the mere
fleshly birth of Abraham without faith Romans 4. 13. yet they were not called
heirs merely as born after the flesh in vain, for there was an earthly Canaan
which they were heirs of, and God gave to them by promise as they were merely
the fleshly seed of Abraham, which also they actually enjoyed according to the
promise, whether they had any faith or moral holiness yea or no, during that
time of the law, but as for the fleshly seed of believing Gentiles, to which
Mr. Blake translates the same birth privilege of being holy and high born
heirs by nature, they stand heirs (by that natural birth only) of neither the
earthly nor yet the heavenly Canaan: Mr. Blake feeds us with an empty title of
holiness by birth, heirs by birth, but cannot possibly say we are heirs of
heaven by birth of believers, unless we believe our selves, and believing
themselves those that by fleshly birth are of unbelieving parents are by
promise heirs to it as much as any: nor can he say that the seed of believing
Gentiles are heirs by birth (as the Jews were) of the land of Canaan, and yet
if the same birth privilege, birth holiness, birth happiness they had, be now
(as he says it is) made over to such in the same way as it was once standing
among the Jews, me thinks as they were disinherited from their land through
unbelief, when once the time of standing by faith only came, as well as from
their title to the names of Church, people of God, a holy seed, heirs by birth
and such like, so those that succeed them in their whole birth privilege,
should have their inheritance as well as the name of heirs by birth, or else
how is there such an equalizing of the body of Christians with the Nation of
the Jews, as Mr. Blake pleads there is p. 8. how can we be said to be as
largely and in as full and ample manner invested with, and installed into the
glorious fleshly birthrights, which the Jews of old were dignified withal if
we have not a plenary conveyance of the outward benefits and blessings of the
land of Cana^n, and the possession of that inheritance, which God then gave to
those Jews by nature, to us and our fleshly seed, as well as of the outward
oracles and ordinances? besides what a poor pitteous piece of birth privilege
is it, to be adopted instead of the Jews into the mere name of holy sons and
heirs, and yet to have nor a foot of that land which was the Jews inheritance,
in respect to their fruition of which by right of a promise to Abraham and
them, they were then honored with that name of heirs? but if it be said that
we are now by a birth of believing parents heirs (as they were then) of the
heavenly inheritance, and the true eternal Canaan and kingdom whereof that was
but a type, though we have not to do with that typical land it self as they
once had; I still strongly deny it that either any Jews by nature then were, or
any of the fleshly seed of believing Gentiles now are, by the faith of their
fathers only heirs by any promise at all of the kingdom of heaven, or any
further at all then as dying in infancy they never deserved exemption by
actual trangression, or living to age they believe themselves, and so viz.
dying in infancy before they have bard themselves by actu^l sin, or believing
themselves when grown to age, I say still the fleshly seed, even of such
fathers as never had any faith, are by that faith of their own heirs of the
kingdom, which God has prepared for all persons that love him of what parents
soever, and shall (so dying) assuredly inherit it once, and that by promise as
well as they.

And so I leave Mr. Blake unless he like rather to return to the truth, to
loose himself least I also loose my self with him from the work in hand, in
that m^drous laborinth of self contradictions, Romish confusions, Jewish
conceits and ceremonies, pithles privileges, absurd asseverations, of a
present continuance of that old legal typical, and (by God himself) long since
in Christ crucified, prosaned and cashiered holiness, which his Baby-book
entitled The birth privilege abounds with, which if they have so much truth in
them as he confidence in averring then his eyes are not so dim as I now deem
they are, but my own rather, with which I seriously and sincerely seek after
truth, are, Christ's promise in that case to the contrary notwithstanding Prove.
2. 3. 4. John 7. 17. totally and terribly darkened.

Much more might easily be said in discovery of the foppicalnesse of that book,
but I spare to spend any more time or paper upon it then its worth; besides
having by the last argument above urged slockt him up by the stumps, and by the
following considerations and returns to sund^y of his self confuting sentences
blasted some of his broadest shows, and chopped off not a few of his most
flourishing branches, I shall not weary my self further in fighting with any
more of his sigleaves, for they consequently will die of themselves, and so
till the Lord have ^cy upon him which is the best good I can, and the worst
hurt I do desire should befall him, and take him up into nearer acquaintance
with the truth of his Gospel, he must lie where he is for me, only because
there seems to be one scruple more behind, which though it be but a gnat, I see
many strain at I shall only blow it out of the way, and so hasten from further
handling of this head of infant holiness, to the rest of those mediums,
whereby you the Ashford Disputants undertake to prove believers infants to have
the holy spirit.

Babist.
The holiness of that fleshly seed which was circumcised under the law was not
ceremonial and typical only; nor only appertaining to Moses Tabernacle,
Testament and law as the holiness of the Priests, Altar, sacrifices, and other
legal services was: for that indeed as it began with Moses, so ended in Christ
crucified, but this holiness in the seed and the matter of infant
Church Membership and circumcision upon this birth privilege, and Covenant
holiness was before the law of Moses, for that people were a holy seed and
children of the promise made to Abraham Genesis 17. and thereupon circumcised 400
years before Moses, and the law, end therefore as it began not with it, so
neither is it to be abrogated together with Moses law.

Baptist.
Though the Covenant of circumcision, i. e the promise of the land of Canaan to
Abraham's fleshly seed, who by birth were a holy seed that were to inherit that
holy land, and circumcision it self also the token of it were long before
Moses, yet did they belong to Moses law, that is now abolisht, and thereto are
they by Christ himself accounted to appertain and plainly called the law of
Moses, Ioh. 7. ^2, 23. And as circumcision and the birth privilege of Abraham's
fleshly seed so many mo things were many years before Moses was born; as
offerings and sacrifices, and distinctions of cleanness and uncleanness of
beasts, and yet all were but pieces of the ceremonial law of Moses, and were
to cease utterly under Christ, neither is it any good consequence at all to
argue thus concerning any thing, viz. It was before Moses was born, and before
Moses gave the law, and therefore no part of the ceremonial law, for many parts
of that law of Moses were in being before Moses himself had any being, and yet
are reputed to no other then Moses Testament, as well as many things that were
done no less then 1000 years before Christ came in person, are reputed as
apperatining to his Testament, and to tell you the truth both the Gospel and
the Law, both the old Testament and the new, though neither of them perfectly,
yet in part and secundum quid (as you use to say) i. e. in some respects, and
remote beginnings were both in being as high as Adam and Abell; even thousands
of years before either Moses or Christ were born, after whose names the two
Testaments are called: for as what was of the Gospel was called after Christ,
though a thousand years before Christ came, or the Gospel began in its last and
most clear and perfect promulgation, for in Heb. 11. 24. Moses is said to
esteem the reproach of Christ as great riches etc. So that we see the cross of
Christ was before Christ was born, even so what was a part of the typical law,
or old Covenant was styled Mosaical though some parcels of it were given out,
and in use before Moses was born; yea circumcision it self which was four
hundred year elder then Moses, is said to be given by Moses, and called the
Law of Moses: Moses gave you circumcision etc. and ye on the Sabbath circumcise
a man, that the Law of Moses may not be broken Ioh. 7 22. 23. And not only
circumcision and sacrifices but even the whole Law is said to come by Moses,
though circumcision and sacrifices, which were parts of it, came long before
him, and grace and truth to come by Christ, i. e. the very things themselves of
which Moses Testament was but typical, and a shadow, Though grace and truth
were both in the world in part long before Christ came personally into it, John
1. 17. yea something of both Law and Gospel came into the world before either
Moses or Christ, yet they are denominated after them Moses Law, Christ's Gospel,
and said respectively to begin in them, to come with them, to be given by them,
as if they had been altogether unheard of before these times; because when they
came they gave the things a new that were before, and also the fullness of the
things respectively perteining to each Testament, which in part were, but not
in their ample perfection till their times; and thus the Law was said to begin
at Moses, Gal. 3. 17. and the Gospel to begin at Christ birth, Mark 1. 1 the
one 400 years the other at least two thousand years after both Covenants, viz.
the Law and the Gospel too began in the word of Promise to Abraham, and his two
seeds, Isaac and Christ, to whom respectively the two promises were made of two
several Canaans; the Earthly and the Heavenly, whereof the one, together with
the promise it self that was made of it, and the Promised seed to which it was
made, viz. the fleshly seed of Abraham by Isaac, was a clear type of the other,
i. e. of the promise and promised seed that by that prom^se were to be heirs
thereof, viz. a spiritual seed of Abraham by faith in Jesus Christ Genesis 17.

For there the Inheritances of both Covenants were both given in the word of
promise, the one, viz. the Heavenly Canaan more darkly, through the other
typing it out, the other i. e. the Earthly Canaan more clearly, plainly and in
terminis ver. 7. 8. I will give to thee and thy seed after thee (meaning Isaac
the only seed, and heir of that promise, for Ishmael and his had not that
typical covenant established on them p. 20. 21. but Isaac and his fleshly seed,
as also Antitypically Isaac and his fleshly seed, who were sons of the
bondwoman, and a mere fleshly seed in reference to Christ, though children of
the freewoman and a promised seed (in a type) in reference to Ishmael, had not
the true, or Gospel Covenant established on them, merely as born of Abraham's
body, but as believing, and so it is established on all men, but Christ and
Believers) I will give thee and thy seed (says he) the Land of Canaan: even
then and there God gave out both the Covenants in the promise, viz. the Gospel
more implicitly, and in a shadow, the other (...). e. the legal Covenant
concerning Canaan in express terms together with a present grant of one of the
grand Ordinances of it, as a sign and token, viz. Circumcision, typing out the
spiritual Jews or seed of Abraham's circumcision in heart, that must be heirs
only under the Gospel, Romans 2. Phil. 3. to which Ordinative, or beginning, or
cardinal ordinance circumcision, many more Statutes, Laws, Judgments, and
ordinances were to be added in after ages, when the time of their entering their
Possession should draw nigh, to the observation of all which (as in time God
should give them out more clearly by his Servant Moses (the Deliverer, Minister
and Mediator of that Covenant) circumcision was an obligation, and in these
Respects that Covenant is called the Covenant of Circumcision Act. 7. 8. and
Circumcision it self called an Engagement to keep the whole law, i. e. binding
to the performance of all things required to be done on man's part, i. e. the
Jews in order to their enjoyment of Canaan under that old Testament or
Covenant, Gal. 5. 3. For though Circumcision, as well as that promised Land,
whereof it was a token, and that fleshly seed that were signed heirs by it, and
all other the Ordinances of Divine Service, which the first Covenant then had,
and in a manner every thing else under the Law related thus far to the Gospel
Covenant, as that they were types and shadows of something answerable under
the Gospel, i. e. Circumcision of the heart, and that other seed, i. e. Jews
inwardly, both answering to that Circumcision and those Jews which were outward
only and in the flesh, Romans 2. 27. 28, 29. Phillip. 3. 2, 3. and of the
Heavenly Inheritance, which these inward Jews, i. e. believers or circumcised
ones in heart are heirs to by promise; yet both that sign Circumcision, and the
promise signified by it, were all alike relating immediately to that Old
Testament of Moses, as parts thereof, and were not parts, but paterns only of
the new; nor was Circumcision any other then an ordinance of the Law of Moses,
and not a direct rule for us to square or steer by in our dispensing any
ordinance of the Gospel, for that were to disparage the Lawgiver, we are under
even that other great Prophet Christ, whom Moses pointed at, saying Deuteronomy. 18. A
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, him shall ^e hear in all
things, etc. as if he were not as faithful and punctual to the full in fitting
laws for his house, the Gospel Church, as Moses was for that old Israel or
Church under the Law, which was his, Heb. 3. 1. 2. 5. 6. 7.

Though therefore both Covenants were in being, i. e. the Law and the Gospel,
before either Moses or Christ, the one concerning the Earthly Canaan to a
fleshly seed in a Type; the other a Heavenly Canaan to a spiritual seed as the
Antitype; yet are they said to begin the one in Moses, the other in Christ,
because these two were respectively the two Mediators of these two Covenants,
and as it were the two several Masters and Law givers to the two seeds, or the
two several families of Abraham, viz. the two Churches under the Law; and the
Gospel, the fleshly Israel, and the spiritual, the personal coming of which
two Mediators and abiding for a time in their several houses, did perfect what
was lacking in them before in point of outward Ordinances, and institutions,
and from thenceforth, i. e. from the several periods of their presence with
them, establish them in a more complete posture then before, and each Church
severally in its own proper order. Moses then was the Mediator of the Old
Testament, established upon Earthly promises: and so gave precepts accordingly;
but Christ the Mediator of the new, which is called a better Testament
established upon better promises, Heb. 8. 6. and so gives his precepts not by
the mouth of Moses but as he pleases.

Besides all this, though the Covenant of Circumcision made with that fleshly
holy seed, began before Moses, yet whether that denomination of a holy seed, a
holy Nation, and people did begin so high as Abraham, or before such time as
Moses and Aaron had according to Gods command to them, ceremonially sanctified
by the blood of sprinkling and dedicated both the Book of the Covenant and all
the people, and all the vessels of the Ministry, and all other things
pertaining to that Tabernacle (for both that holy people and all their
ceremonially holy things whereby you need not be ignorant unless you will that
the holiness of that seed and their sanctuary was the same, and began and were
to end both together, were first consecrated, didicated, purified, sanctified
all at one time under Moses Heb. 9. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. etc.) whether I say the
holiness of the seed began so high as Abraham is a thing so out af doubt to me,
that I dare say that as the holy land was not relatively holy till they came
into it, so the holy seed, as well as the other holy things of that Covenant,
were not ceremonially consecrated, nor form ally sanctified, nor vouchsafed
that title of a holy seed, though vertually they were a choice seed before,
till a little before they were to enter it, and howbeit I challenge no man, yet
I entreat any man in the world to show me if he can where they were denominated
and distinguished from all other people as unclean by that term of a holy
people till God entitled them so by Moses, Exodus 22. 31. ye shall be holy men
unto me neither shall ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts, ye shall cast it
to dogs: which place compared with Levit. 22. 8. 9. Deuteronomy. 7. 6. chap. 14. 2.
chap. 26. 19. does so plainly show these two things.

First, That the holiness there spoken of began but thenceforth.

Secondly, that it was but a certain ceremonial distinction, and a holinese
opposite to that kind of defilement, which might be contracted by eating of
unclean beasts, and so fully ceased in Christ, that I even blush to read Mr.
Blake, and have been ashamed in my mind to hear some Independents also bring
those Scriptures, wherein God called Israel a holy people to himself, to prove,
that an inchurched believers mere fleshly seed is now by nature holy in the
same sense.

Now then let us hear the conclusion of this whole matter: of the things that
have been spoken this is the sum, viz. that there are three kinds of
holiness, of which when you say children of believing parents have holiness,
and consequenrly

the spirit, you undoubtedly mean one, viz. Matrimonial, Ceremonial, Moral.

The Middlemost of which, because your fellow laborers against the Gospel
intend that chiefly in their books, I have treated on last, and most largely,
and I now say three things of it in special.

First, That it is a Holiness which once was, but now is not in being.

Secondly, That it is a Holiness which of it self, when it was in being, as it
was at the beginning of the Gospel before Christ crucified, could not without
faith and moral holiness interest the persons in whom it was seated in any of
these three things, viz. Gospel Promises, Gospel Privileges, or Gospel
Ordinances.

1. Not the premises, for they were made to Abraham in Christ and his spiritual
seed; not his own fleshly seed upon such terms, as bare birth of his body, or
such holiness and righteousness as was under the Law intituling to Canaan Romans
4. 13. 14. Gal. 3. 16. 29.

2. Not the privileges, viz. Gospel immunities, and Church Membership, for
those that could plead they were under the typical freedoms of the old house,
or Church under the Law, as Abraham's seed only were, are denied by Christ to be
that holy seed that should stand in the Gospel house, that was now to be built,
or share in that spiritual freedom which the son gives, which is the only
freedom indeed, unless they did Abraham's works, John 8. 32. to the 40ta.

3. Nor yet the Ordinances, no not so much as Baptism the initiating ordinance
it self, for when that old holy seed remaining yet under their relative and
denominative holiness unabolished, did plead it as to baptism, they were put
back by John, and not permitted, barely upon that account upon which they stood
in the old house, without faith, unless they now believed and amended their
lives whose repulse of them when they came to his baptism was this viz. begin
not to say we have Abraham to our Father etc. Mat. 3. 7, 8, 9. Luke 3. 7. 8.

Thirdly, suppose baptism were entailed so to that holiness and a mere fleshly
seed of believers, or of believing Abraham himself as truly as it is true it is
not, yet how grossly were you overseen Gentlemen in undertaking to prove the
holy spirit by it to be in infants, for that's the probandum, the very thing
which by the holiness of infants you went about to make good, for the minor of
your first fylogism which was this, but little children have the holy spirit,
being denied was proved (say you) first by their faith, secondly by their
holiness, thirdly by those Eulogies given them in Scripture: if then by
holiness you mean this kind of holiness, I mean ceremonial, which once was in
the Jews by nature, you have a wet ^le by the tail then indeed, for ask but Mr.
Blake and he will tell you, that that holiness was in thousands who yet had not
the holy spirit, yea in truth all the Jews had that holiness, of whom not a
Tenth, even then when they had it, were either in infancy, or at years morally
sanctified, or endued with the holy spirit: and as I have said these three
things in special, concerning that one kind of holiness, so I have three
things in general to say in short concerning al these three sorts of holiness
viz.

First, one of them was in infants of old, and now is not but is vanished, and
when it was it proved not the spirit viz. ceremonial.

Secondly, another is, but nothing to your purpose, I mean the proof of the
spirit, though it be in most infants viz. matrimonial.

Thirdly, the other is not yet come for ought yet appears to infants viz.
moral, which if it did appear to be in them positive, qualitative, as an
inherent quality, not negative only so as to be without sin, or absolutely
innocent (for absolute innocence has no need of baptism) then I should say
something more to you, but you see it does not, therefore though you said
nothing then (as I wish since I had suffered you to do) from infants holiness,
to the proof of their having the spirit and right to baptism, yet I have
searched, but cannot possibly find what holiness you could possibly have proved
it by.

I have been the larger here, though you gave me but a bare hint, by the
nomination only of infants holiness: first, because here lies indeed the very
principal knot and basis of this controversy, which you erring in are
consequently erroneous in all your ways, for Error minimus in principio fit
major in medio, Maximus in fine. And as for all other arguments pro and con
they are but as Auxilliarie hereunto.

Secondly, because I am willing also since you call so much for it, to give out
my own grounds for the truth, by the way as I go along in disproving of your
false ones, that you may either yield to them if found, or answer and disprove
them, if unsound and rotten: in the residue I shall be so much the briefer.

The next argument whereby you undertake to prove infants of believing parents
to have the holy spirit, is drawn from those Eulogies given them in Scripture,
not inferior to those of the best Saints, from whence you thus argue.

Disputation.
Those who are invited to come to Christ Mark 10. 14. Mat. 19. 14. Luke 18 16.
(...) verse 15. babes such as are new come from the womb, blessed by Christ,
declared to have right to the kingdom of heaven, set forth for examples of
innocence, not to be offended guarded from heaven by Angels etc. have the holy
Ghost.

But such are little children,

Disproof.
You say they have Eulogies i. e. good language and commendations given to
them, not inferior to those of the best Saints. Nay Sirs, they are superior
in some sense to the best of Saints, for the best here have sin, but these have
yet none, Christ taking away Adams sin, and they adding none of their own, and
yet it will not follow that they are to be baptized, for they have yet no need
of it, muchlesse that they have the holy spirit, which is the thing you would
prove by it.

As for these particular Eulogies, which you instance in, if the most special
among them do clearly prove the subject thereby denominated, to have that holy
spirit that entitles to baptism, then I Will agree that mine are, but if it do
not, then I hope you will agree to it that your wits are little better then
sodden; In order to the fuller finding out of the full weight of each Eulogy to
such a purpose, I Will consider some of them asunder, that being the best way, and
not as you (Babilonicae brevitatis gratia) have wrapped and swadled them all up
together into one Syllogism, and if you think it too tedious so to do, I would
have you to know my pains in writing will be Tantamount to your patience in
reading.

The first Eulogy, which you say Scripture gives to little children, is their
invitation to come to Christ, from whence your Argument in form must run thus.

Babist.
Those who are invited to come to Christ have the holy spirit, and are
thereupon to be baptized.

But little infants of believing parents are invited to come to Christ, Ergo
they have the holy spirit and are to be baptized.

Baptist.
To which I retort, stating only another Minor in room of yours, as the
subject to answer to your middle term, and then judge your selves how false
your foundation i. e. your Major is, and consequently your building or
conclusion. Thus

Those that are invited to come to Christ have the holy spirit, and are
thereupon to be baptized.

But all men and women in the world are invited to come to Christ, Mark. 16.
15. Mat. 22. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 19. 20. 21. Isa. 55. 1. Mar. 11. 28. Rev. 22. 17

Ergo all men and women in the world have the the holy spirit, and are
thereupon to be baptized.

I need say no more to wise men.

The 2 Eulogy given from Scripture to little children is this viz. they are
blessed by Christ whence your argument must run thus.

Babist.
Those that are blessed by Christ have the holy spirit, and so present right to
baptism.

But little children of believing parents are blessed by Christ,

Ergo they have the holy spirit, and present right to baptism.

Baptist.
I answer first by denying your Major, which is not universally true, for
persons may be blessed by Christ, and yet not have the holy spirit, for better
understanding of which let it be considered that persons may be blessed various
ways, from which yet to their having the holy spirit there is no consequence
viz. outwardly and inwardly, temporally and spiritually, with blessings of the
body and of the soul, of this life and that to come: first with outward
temporal bodily blessings (abstract from the other) they may be and often are
blessed, when yet at present at least (for so they must have as to your present
purpose) they have not the holy spirit, who possibly also never have it in all
their lives, I mean in that sense from which Peter argues thus to their baptism
Act. 10. for that some of you say when you can make advantage on it another way,
was the spirit in the extraordinary gifts of it only, as tongues, prophecy,
utterance etc. by which sense how ever your infancy is clear cut off from all
capacity of having it, and so you are confuted by your own party in the very
corner stone of this your babish building; but I Will give you the advantage of
your own personal Tenet let it be what it will (save only that forenamed common
sense of the spirit, wherein I have told you, it is in all men, who yet are not
therefore to be baptized) I say again, both men and women, and children may be
blessed by Christ outwardly only, as with health, peace, plenty, fruitful
seasons, Mat. 5. 45. God is good to all, and sends sun and rain i. e. all
temporal blessings on the good and evil, just and unjust. The blessings of
bodily protections, as to be guarded with Angels from heaven from dangers, and
mischiefs; which is another of the Eulogies you here instance in, which to save
your selves and me some labor, I Will take in hear, it being but a temporal
blessing, from which it follows not that such as are blessed with it must
consequently have the holy spirit; also bodily salvation from and sanation of
diseases, distempers, by Christ, who is a Savior of the body; these blessings
of the body, the barn, the basket, and the store, health, and external
happiness persons may be, and often are blessed with from God, who fills their
bellies with hid treasure, so that they prosper and are not plagued, when yet
they are wicked in their lives, and far from the holy spirit.

Secondly; If you take Christ's blessing (as in this place you must, for its so
expounded and plainly expressed in one of the three Evangelists you quote,
which write all the same thing in some difference of prase) for his praying for
the persons whom he blessed, I say that even spiritually persons may be blessed
by Christ in prayer for them, yea blessed with the blessing of the spirit it
self, as de futuro, and and yet not, pro presenti, have the spirit: for Christ
blessed his disciples, Luke 24. 50. i. e. prayed for them that they might be
endued with the spirit, and yet that he then prayed for, or by lifting up his
hands, to the father then blessed them with, did not come on them till some
while after: in this sense Isaac blessed Jacob Genesis 27. 28. 29. Jacob Joseph,
Genesis 40. 15. 16. the High Priest all the People, Number. 6. 23. Moses all Israel
before his departure also, Deuteronomy. 33. 1. etc. and yet they were not actually
possessed of the blessings just then, when they blessed them, but along time
after. There is a blessing by promise, as God blessed Abraham with a Son, and
the Land of Canaan; a blessing by Prophesy as Jacob blessed all his Sons
fortelling, as I may say, their several fortunes Genesis 41. a blessing by Prayer,
as in the forenamed places, and in this of Mat. 19. 13. Mark 10. 16. And
there is a blessing by putting into actual possession, and fruition of a mercy,
so God blessed Israel with the real enjoyment of the Land of Canaan, and all
temporal blessings in that earthly place, and so Antitypically will once bless
all the spiritual seed of Abraham with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places by Christ Jesus Ephesians. 1. 4. Now the three first ways of blessing persons
are all concerning things to come, and sometimes a long while after; yea in
prayer Christ blessed all that ever should believe on him through the word to the
worlds end, Ioh. 17. so long before the thing befell them, that it was even
before most of them were born.

As to your Minor then, wherein you say, little children were blessed by
Christ, I grant it to be true, but not in any such sense as truly argues at
all that in their infancy they had the holy spirit. For

First, it of the two most plainly appears that his blessing was no other then
bodily infirmities, which are as incident to infants as men, and the end for
which they brought them shows the utmost he did to them, which was not that he
should baptize them (as I shall more clearly show by and by) but that he should
touch them, and put his hands on them, and pray: no question it was in order to
healing, for it was at a time when he healed many others, if you compare this
passage as it is in Mat. 19. with the first and second verses of the Chapter: yea
v. 15. it is plainly expressed what he did, i. e. he laid his hands upon them,
and departed thence; besides Luke says they brought little children unto him
also that he should touch them: which [ALSO] shows that others were brought
too, as sick folks commonly were, because virtue went out of him, so that as
many as touched him were made perfectly whole.

Secondly, if he did bless them spiritually in his prayers, it was doubtless
(yet all whom he healed were not so blessed neither, witness the nine Leapers)
concerning things to come, and if he prayed for their particular salvation, yet
they might not immediately have the spirit. But

Thirdly, What ever it was he did to those particular infants (which whether they
were believers infants or no too no man can tell) for many sought him for
loaves, and outward mercles, and many for healing of themselves, and children,
merely that they might be rid of their burdens, on whom yet he had compassion
for all that) yet first what is this to other infants, or to ours that cannot
now be brought to his person? besides what more to believers than unbelievers
infants? what more to any then to all? away therefore for shame with such dry
Divinity as this: he touched those children and blessed them, that were then
presented to him, that he might touch them, therefore all believers infants
have the holy spirit, and must be baptized: away with such dribling dispute
also, it is not fit for Christ's School, nor man's neither.

The next Eulogie you mention is this, viz. Their being declared to have right
to the Kindome of heaven, whence your Argument must run thus.

Babist.
Those who are declared to have right to the Kingdom of heaven have the holy
spirit.

But little children of believing parents are declared to have right to the
kingdom of heaven.

Ergo they have the holy spirit.

Baptist.
In answer to which I must distinguish upon your middle term.

There Is a two fold right to the Kingdom of heaven, viz. a remote right, and an
immediate right, conditional or absolute, a right in potentia, and a right in
Actu.

The remote, Conditional, potential, right, ad regnum, to the Kingdom, upon
future Contingencies, and Events; this all persons that ever were born into the
world have. i. e. conditionally, or in case they dying in infancy, do no evil,
or living to years shall believe, and obey the Gospel: but what is this right
to your purpose? for verily

First, It proves not the holy spirit, which you speak of to be in those that
have it.

Secondly, if it did it proves it to be in unbelievers as well as believers
seed, as unto whom, when they come to years, Christ is a common salvation, and
the Gospel of the kingdom is to be tendered, and that not in mo^kge but truly,
and really as theirs, till they reject, or put it from them, and as the ^ews to
all generations since Christ have done; that they may believe, and believing
have life through his name, i. e. immediate right to it here, and possession
hereafter: or if they happen to die in the innocence of their infancy before
they have (to speak in your own phrase p. 5.) by any actual sin barred
themselves or deserved to be exempted from that general state of littl
children declared in Scripture viz. secundum te O Accountant, right to the
Kingdom of Heaven, then have they all such apitudinem regnandi, as will cost
the Priesthood of England for all his Christian charity in declaring the right
of belivers seed to the Kingdom, more reason than they ever did, or yet have
to bestow that way, to clear themselves from the just censure of Antichristian
cruelty, for their excluding, and damning all the dying infants of others,
which are rari quippe boni, numero vix sunt totidem quot etc. counting the
little corner believers will stand in, at least no less then twenty to one.

And as for that other more immediate, actual, absolute right to the Kingdom,
when it shall come, this Mediante Morte in infantia, all dying infants have as
well as some, and not in infantia) all dying infants of believers then of
unbelievers, for even of such (I mean all dying infants, for infants living to
years are no more infants; though it be questionable too whether Christ speaks
of the same in the place in hand, or of such as are like them in innocence etc.
of the two most likely to be the truth) of such I say I grant the kingdom of
heaven to be (for ought I know) but of no persons living to years, whether
believers seed or unbelievers, Nisi mediante fide, et obedientia, and then they
have actual and present right to it, all which notwithstanding (mark what I
say, for it cuts in two the sinews of your consequence) twill not universally
follow neither that those that have right have (pro presenti) the holy spirit,
for though nothing can come between such as finally believe, and the kingdom,
and that fullness of the spirit that comes in with it, of which the spirit here
is an earnest, and the spirit itself as the earnest, so as to cut them off
from the future possession of both (God who cannot ly having promised the
kingdom, as conditionally to all people at years, if they believe, so
absolutely to all that finally do believe) yet many of those that believing the
things spoken pertaining to the kingdom, and so having more immediate right
then before (unless they loose it again) may (pro presenti) be without not
only the kingdom and fullness of the promise, which they stand actually heirs
to by faith, till the purchased possession come to be actually possessed by all
the Saints at once, but for a time too without the spirit (as but an earnest)
for this, in the common way of Gods dispensation of old, was neither promised
nor bestowed on any by promise (unless at any time God was better then his
word as he was Act. 10. nor on good ground to be expected till after faith,
repentance, obedience in baptism and prayer, witness the forecited places,
John 7. 38 39. Act. 2. 38. 5. 32. 8. 12. 15. 16. 19. 1. 2. Luke 11. 13. Prove.
1. 23.

The next Eulogy given to little infants, whereby you argue the holy spirit to
be in them, is their being set forth for examples of innocence, whence your
argument must be thus.

Babist:
Those that are set forth for examples of innocence have the holy spirit.

But little children of believing parents are set forth for examples of
innocence.

Ergo they have the holy spirit.

Baptist.
Bare simple innocence, harmlessnesse and freedom from hurt proves neither
holiness, nor holy spirit to be where it is, it being capable to be not only
in infants, who in respect of age and stature, though not of kind and nature,
are in an ordinary way at least an incapable subject of the other, but also in
creatures by kind incapable at any time of the spirit, viz. doves, sheep,
lambs, every of which (as well as infants) are set forth also as examples of
meekness, patience, innocence, silence, under suffering, as the Ant is also
for diligence and forecast, the vine for fruitfulness, the Serpent for wisdom
to the Saints, and yet have not thereupon the holy spirit, yea Eulogies for
some one particular natural excellency, qualification and indowment, and those
not inferior to those of the best Saints may be given, and that as an example
for the Saints, not only to other creatures and innocent infants, but also to
such as are elsewise injurious, and no way exemplary to others at all, e. g.
the unjust steward Luke 16. who though a mere child of the world, yet is
commended by Christ as having done wisely, yea more wisely (in suo genere) then
the children of light, and given as a pattern of prudence and forecast to them,
and yet I should be in doubt whether that man were well in his wits or no, that
should argue from those Eulogies to those holy spirit.

Secondly from which innocence yet, if it would follow that the spirit is in
infants, it must be in all as well as some: for is one Infant more free from
actual sin, and in point of innocence propounded as our pattern by Christ more
then another? is not innocence in the whole state of infants, even in
unbelievers infants as much to the full as in the other?

The next Eulogy is this, that they are not to be offended; from whence your
argument must run thus.

Babist.
Those that are not to be offended have the holy spirit.

But little children of believing parents are not to be offended.

Ergo they have the holy spirit.

Baptist.
To which by way of answer I Will only compose another Syllogism, and so leave
you to see (as you may do without a candle) and to search out the silliness of
your own.

Those who are not to be offended have the holy spirit.

But little children of unbelieving parents, and also the very Jews and
Gentiles, as well as the Church of God, are not to be offended.

Ergo little children of unbelieving parents, yea even the Jews and the
Gentiles, as well as the Church of God, have the holy spirit.

And so Sirs having weighed all your Eulogies one after another in the balance
of right reason, and found them too light, I Will only add one argument of mine
own from the very places you quote, from which if either men did not dote on
them, because they are found in the old Liturgy, and the new Directory, or were
not resolved to take tag, rag and long tail, to scrape together even all the
impertinencies that ere they can meet with, in proof of infant baptism, rather
then to forgo it now they are engaged in it, there is no clearer consequence in
the world then that infants are not to be baptized, and then I Will pass on to
your other proofs.

If those very numericall infants spoken of in those very places Mat. 18. Mar.
10. Luke 18. from whence, and from the carriage and practice of Christ there
toward; them, the priesthood pleads the baptism of other infants, of whom
Christ did never so individually declare (as he did of these, that they should
be brought to him, and that of such is the kingdom of heaven) were not
baptized by Christ, nor his disciples in the primitive times of the Gospel,
which are our pattern, then it follows not from the example of these infants
that other infants are, but rather that they are not to be baptized.

But those very infants spoken of in those very places from whence etc. were
not baptized either by Christ or by his disciples etc.

Ergo it follows not from the example of those infants that other infants are,
but rather that they are not to be baptized.

The Major is most undeniably clear, for by what warrant may we take upon us to
baptize other infants, when those infants were not baptized that were brought
to Christ's own person, and whose particular personal right to the kingdom (as
you your selves say) Christ there declares? for it is contended by youthat the
word [(...) i. e. of such] must be meant [of these] not [so such] as are like
to these [whereby you utterly overthrow your selves too] for if that speech [of
such] be in sense and signification [(...)] i. e. not [talium] but [horum] then
it can reach no more to other infants of the same kind, then to the other kind
of infants i. e. the Saints, these being both viz. the one in specie, the other
in qualificatione at most but such, and not the same, for the term (...)
expresses all that are alike to these, whether in kind or qualification only,
or both, but (...) is Individuum Indigitativum (as it were that points out
these Individuals that were then present and no more: so that, to allow you
your own fained sense (I say) if those were not baptized whom Christ so
Individually demonstrates, and indigitates as heirs of the kingdom of heaven,
much less may any other infants of whom (if you render (...) by (...) and give
the sense to be [horum] not talium] Christ cannot be understood as speaking
there at all.

For the clearing therefore of the Minor, which only will need proof in this
Syllogism (unless you will say let Christ and his disciples do what they will,
weel do what we list) consider this; that it is well nigh universally confessed
by your selves that these infants were not baptized.

Mr. Cottons words upon this very place p. 9. of his grounds and ends of
baptizing children.
are these viz. neither do I allege this place for to prove that Christ
baptized these infants, for it does not appear that their fathers who brought
them were baptized themselves, and therefore neither might their children be
baptized according to rule; and as he speaks thus of this place Mark 10. so
much after the same sort he speaks concerning another place viz, Act. 2. 38.
39. 41. from whence you also ground the baptism of believers infants, from
whence also as we do from this, we thus argue the contrary viz. If the infants
of those parents Act. 2. that were obedient to the faith and baptized, were not
baptized with the rest, then its evident that infants even of baptized
believers were not wont to be baptized then.

But those infants then were not etc. Ergo etc.

The Minor of this Syllogism also Mr. Mr. Cotton proves to my hands, who says
thus, p. 35. 36. of his grounds and ends etc.
But to deal ingenuously and faithfully with you the text viz. Acts 2. 41.
might hold forth a just color of an objection, if you had so applied it
against the Argument gathered out of v. 38. 39. for the baptizing of infants,
for if they who were baptized were such as gladly received his word verse 41.
then it does not appear out of this place that infants were at that time
baptized with the rest, because they could not receive the word, much less
gladly, least of all express their gladness by any visible profession. This
objection I confess would have prevailed with me to have for borne any proof
of the baptism of Infants out of this this place, were i^ not partly for the
reasons which have been alleged above from v. 39. partly also for that I find
the Lord Jesus is wont to accep^ the acts of parents in the duties of the
second commandment as done for themselves and their children; these are Mr.
Cottons own confessions about these two places, in the last of which he seems
to say (if I aim right) that those children Act. 2. were not baptized in their
own persons, but accounted as baptized by God, accepting their parents baptism
on their behalf as well as though they had been baptized in their own persons,
which if it be so, is of it self a clear argument against infant baptism; as
for the other place Mark 10. I never could meet with the man yet that was so
shameless as to assert that the infants there spoken of were baptized,
excepting Dr. Holmes, and he indeed helps this ^ame business ore the style,
and lends a left handed lift toward the proof of it, that these infants that
were brought to Christ were baptized, and that thus. p. 58. of his animad. on
Mr. Tombs Exercit.


If Christ speaks of and does such after higher things to such little children,
whilst little children, how much more may that which in nature antecedes, and
goes before these (namely baptism) be administered to them, whilst little
children?

But there is Mark. 10. mention of, and doing of an higher thing then Baptism,
namely confirmation of them by prayer and imposition of hands,

Ergo how much more may they be baptized?

The same he both argues and asserts p 63. of (...) the same book.
in these words viz, they were brought to him for an outward ordinance,
imposition of hands, that ordinance given to them did suppose a former, namely
baptism (as we have showed (says he)) above) and therefore if a little child be
brought for the first ordinance, that he (as such) is capable of, as children
were of circumision, it must be to baptism, and (...) little below he adds
this viz. Christ did not only cherish their faith that brought ^em, but also
cherished that baptism the children had received. In which expressions he is so
unexpresse, or at least so whifling to and fro, that he must have more brains
then I, that can pick out of them what he means distinctly by them: for in some
of them one would think he meant as if those infants were baptized before they
came to Christ, and were brought only now for imposition of hands, in some
again as if they had bin then baptized, and brought then to both that and to
the other, but which of the two he means it matters not, so long as I shall
prove by and by, that it was neither this nor that.

But by the way I desire all men to take notice of Dr. Holmes his proofs,
whereby he strives to clear it that the infants brought to Christ-had then the
ordinance of imposition of hands, and so had been baptized before, and how they
are not only nothing cogent, but so clearly cogent and consequential to the
very contrary, that he that reads them with reason must needs conclude the
Doctors right eye of reason was not a little bleared (not to say absolutely
blinded) by one thing or other when he wrote them: yea all he says for the
clearing of that, does clearly contradict and overthrow it.

In proof of what he says in this particular viz. that the ordinance of laying
on of hands was dispensed to these infants that were brought to Christ, he
alleges the practice of the Ancient times, at it is mentioned by Pareus,
Calvin, Hophman, Marlorat, Bullinger, and Cotton too, which all according as
Dr. Holmes himself has recorded their words, first severally in chap. seventh
of his animadversions p. 58. 59. 60 and summarily ore again as it were to set
his folly on high that all might see it, in the 10th chapter p. 85. 86. do
testify uno ore with one consent that in ancient time infants were not
admitted to imposition of hands, nor confirmed in the fruition of Church estate
thereby, that being indeed as himself asserts, from them too, one prime intent
of that ordinance which is one of the foundation doctrines to Church
fellowship, till to use the very same phrase he quotes out of them, being past
their childhood, past innocence grown up to years, youths at least, that made
profession of faith, they were received not to that only, but to the supper,
and all other Churh liberties also.

By which term Ancient times it is not easy to discem neither from him so
indistinctly does he utter himself in this, as also in most of his other
matter, whether he mean the true and pure primitive times of the most ancient
fathers the Apostles, which is our rule, or the new and post-primitive times of
the fathers since them, which though declining daily into corruption, the
priesthood has ever for ought I find, in more account then the other, yet by
one clause he seems more to allude to the Apostles days, viz. in p. 85. the
last line, where after he had cited the forenamed Authors, and their joint
opinion concerning the dispensing imposition of hands in foretimes to grown
persons only, he adds this viz. so that the original of imposition of hands
came down from the Apostles; thus far these learued men (says he) but which
ere he means it makes much what one for him, there being no times, primitive,
or posteren wherein the ordinance of laying on of hands was given to infants,
unless in that midnight of popery wherein they gave the supper to them also:
for is it not equally absurd, and (if worse can be) worse then senseless, for a
man to gather so undoubtedly (as he does) that Christ at that time dispensed
the ordinance of laying on of hands to those infants in Mark 10. in their
infancy, because the Apostles and Churches in after times, whose pattern he
was, did dispense it to persons ever, when they were past childhood, and grown
to years? does not this rather most evidently evince one of these two things
viz. either that the imposition of hands Christ gave to these infants was not
that ordinance the Apostles in ancient Churches practiced to men at years only
(and that it was not I shall show by and by) or else that the Apostles did
dispense the Gospel ordinances to other subjects then Christ himself did, whom
they were to follow, viz. he to infants, and they only to persons past
infancy? Moreover if the Apostles did say on hands at years, though Christ in
infancy, what if Christ had baptized those infants in infancy also? are we more
tied to follow his example in that, then in the dispensation of laying on of
hands? you see therefore how the Doctor though he borrows his friend Mr.
Cottins reading, and reasons ou^t of antiquity (as himself sai^p. 86. of his
animadversions) to make good a shameful assertion, and argumentation of his own
viz. that those infants which were then brought to Christ had both baptism and
imposition of hands, and even therefore baptism before, because imposition of
hands then, yet makes so bold with it for all that, as flatly to contradict not
himself only, but Mr. Cotton also, whose judgment is far founder then his in
this case, by inferring two things from Mr. Cottons words, clean contrary both
to Mr. Cottons own opinion (for he professedly denies that these infants had so
much as baptism) and to the true consequence of his words also (for Mr. Cottons
words directly argue that both re vera, and in his judgment of old there was
no dispensing the ordinance of imposition of hands at all on infants, till they
were grown up to years. How little therefore the Doctor deserves to be credited
in his consequences a fool may see. Nevertheless least any should more credit
and cleave to Doctor Holmes his odd conceits, weo says these infants had both
baptism and imposition of hands, then to Mr. Cottons candid concessions, and
plain confessions that they had neither; I Will add a little to evince it, that
they had neither baptism nor imposition of hands in any such sense as the
Doctor dreams on from Christ at that time at all.

First, that they were not baptized I argue thus.

If they were baptized. then it was either before they were brought to Christ, or
else by Christ or his disciples then when brought to him.

But neither before nor then.

E^go as yet not at all.

If you say they had baptism before they were brought to Christ, I wonder how
they came by it, or where they had it, or who administered it, since this surely
was their first appearance before Christ and his disciples, and how any else
but they could do it ask your selves, who make more ado then needs about the
bare administrators of baptism, as if they must needs be none but Ministers in
orders* if you say John Baptist might do it, my no is better then your yea if I
say he might not, for as you have nothing but thought to ground your thoughts
on that he did baptize any infants, so I have John's one deed declaring that he
did not, by whom nor you nor I never find that any were baptized but in doing
of that, which infant^ cannot do viz. confessing their sins. Yet of the two
this seems rather to be Dr. Holmes's fancy, that they had been baptized before
they were brought thither, for p. 61, they are supposed here says he, to have
been before baptized, because they were brought to this higher addition, of
imposition of hands, and blessing.

If you say they were then baptized when brought, it must be either by Christ
or his disc^ples, but neither by him nor them,

Ergo not at all at that time.

First not by Christ, for he baptized not all with his own hands, only he is
said to baptize because his disciples did it by order and commission from him
John 3. 22. 23. with John 4. 12.

Secondly, nor were they brought to him for any such end as that he should
baptize them, but that he should touch them and pray, which so soon as he had
done, he went his way.

Secondly not by his discipl^s, for they were not brought to them, but to him,
and if you say it seems they came to them first, because they blamed those that
brought them, I say that argues plainly that they were not brought to be
baptized, for if they had, and had bin also the true, lawful, wonted, and known
subjects of baptism to the disciples (as they must have been ere this time, if
either John or themselves had used to baptize infants among the rest) they
could not have been so ignorant and forgetful of, or carnally contradictory to
their own and John's orders, and wonted fashion, as so frowardly to find fault
with, and forbid their coming to be baptized now, but would have rejoiced in,
rather then reproved their forwardness in it, for it is most certain that they
had been not only spectators of John's Baptism, but dispensers of baptism
themselves also long enough before this time, to have been instructed in the
true subject of it, for the bringing of those infants was after John was
beheaded, but Christ by his disciples had baptized in Judea before John was in
prison, and whilst John was yet himself baptizing in E^on; yea and had made,
and baptized more disciples than John.

Besides the ground of their rebuke of those that came with little children was
no doubt their care, and loathness to have Christ too much pressed, in which case
they sometimes rebuked others, when they throngd upon him so fast for healing,
that they had no leisure so much as to eat bread.

Secondly, that they came not now under Imposition of hands in that sense the
Dr treats on, is most evident.

First, by the Dr own quotations of Mr Calvin's, and Mr Cottons readings
concerning the practice of the first times; for so far are they from clearing
such a thing, as he alleges them for, that they clear the clean contrary, the
subjects of that imposition of hands, they speak of, being only professors of
the faith, and not infants; yea how does D Holmes belabor himself to prove it,
that those to whom the primitive Churches dispensed Imposition of hands were
persons grown to years, more then does his cause good, and more then any wise
man puts him to by the denial of it, but those that were brought to Christ for
it here spoken of none other then very infants in their nonage.

Secondly in that this ordinance of laying on of hands was not likely yet in
use and being in this prae-primitive-period, wherein Christ laid his hands on
these infants; the ends in order whereunto it was enjoined, and practiced when
it was, being such as in this juncture, not only infants, but also the very
disciples themselves were incapable of viz. (as the Doctors own quotations
truly show) perfect and full fruition of, confirmation in Church state, Gospel
Church liberties, Church-fellowships in all Church ordinances, viz. the Supper,
and suppications, and also the receiving of the holy spirit, none of all which
were yet given to any, in such wise as afterward they were, no not to the
Disciples till either just before (as the Supper) or else after Christ was
crucified: for howbeit matter for the Gospel Church, and fellowship was
fitting, preparing and gathering in by preaching and baptizing even from John,
who began the Gospel two or three years before that, and the Gospel Church was
as it were in a certain Chaos, or Congories of matter not yet digested into its
perfect form, somewhile before the Jews Church was ended in Christ death, yet
it came not to have its own formal constitution, in point of visible order,
posture, fellowship, government, officers, discipline, endowments with the
spirit, whereby they might be built up an habitation of God, and ordinance of
laying on of hands in prayer, specially relating thereunto, till after Christ
crucified, and ascended, the holy spirit being not yet come, because Jesus not
yet glorified.

Thirdly they came not for this but for another kind of Imposition of hands,
which is otherwise called touching, which who ever had from him were (in case
of diseases) made whole. They came surely for that laying on of hands which Dr
Holmes himself speaks of p. 57. out of Hophman, viz. a laying on in order to
healing, for which healing, by a touch of him, many men, women and children
came, or else were brought to Christ, while others that were well came to hear
him Mark 5. 27. 28. 29. 30. Luke 6. 17. 18. 19. Mat. 14. 13. 14. 34. 35. 36.

This Imposition of hands therefore that these infants had was not that which
persons, when past infancy only, had in the Churches after, and for Dr Holmes
to say the Apostles and ancient Churches confirmed persons by prayer, and
laying on of hands, when they were past infancy, and not in it, therefore
surely Christ to the same intent and purpose laid hands on these in infancy, is
equally absurd as to argue thus, viz. the Apostles and primitive times
practiced baptism to men and women only confessing sin, and professing faith,
therefore it is most fitting, and likely now to be the will of Christ, that
persons should be sprinkled in their nonage: so brittle are all the bottoms
you yet build on, but to proceed.

Disputation.
Know ye not that the spirit of God is in you except ye be reprobates, and they
dare not say that little children are all reprobates.

Also Review page 16. They are not Reprobates, Therefore Christ is in them.

Disproof.
Nor do we say that little children are all reprobates, nor durst you say that
any of them are reprobates, if mere blindness did not embolden you thereunto:
for the truth is consider them yet living in the capacity of infants, and so
though in foro Dei, and in esse intentionali, and conditionali, i. e. with God,
who calls things that yet are not as though they were, and foresees both what
they will do, and what he accordingly will do with them hereafter, they are
already known to be either of one sort or the other, yet in foro hominum, and
in esse actuali, i. e. actually, and in the sight of men they are (finally)
neither reprobated nor elected till they finally receive Christ, or reject him.
yea I wish you were all but as sure to be saved, as it is sure that none are
(quoad nos) rejected, or devoted in the word, which is the copy of Gods
decree, to eternal damnation, but upon account of their own actual
transgression, and as it is sure that none at all of them that die in infancy, and
no more of those that live to years also are damned, but such as finally put
salvation away from them, and so judge themselves most worthy of the other; for
though of Jacob and Esau they being yet unborn, neither having done any good or
evil, it was foretold by God, who foresaw what good and evil they would do in
time; and what he thereupon would do unto them, that the Elder should serve the
younger, yet this was foretold of, and fulfilled in their posterity, and not
their persons, for though Edom served Israel, yet Esau in person served not
Jacob, but Jacob rather bowed before him, and as for that viz. Jacob have I
loved, Esau have I hated, which you wot was spoken of them as from the womb,
you shall find if you look again, that it was not spoken of their persons, but
their posterity; nor yet secondly of those without respect to Edoms wickedness
above the other; much less thirdly before Jacob and Esau was born, and had
acted good or evil, but so long after Jacob and Esau were born, and had done
good and evil, that they were also ere that time, when this was spoken, Mal. 1.
many years since dead and rotten, but this would lead me into another
controversy, of as large extent and consequence as this in hand, and therefore
I will wave it here, yet not so as to decline the discourse of it with you,
upon occasion, any more then of the other; well then that they are not all
Reprobates it is asserted by you and us too, but what is this at all to your
purpose? For

First, is there no Medium between being a reprobate, and a present having the
holy spirit? there were twelve Disciples at Ephesus, which had not so much as
heard of the holy spirit, so far were they from having it yet, yet dare you say
they were all reprobates? there were many men and women that believed the
things spoken by Philip pertaining to the Kingdom, upon which the holy spirit
had not yet fallen, were they all reprobates, because they had not yet received
it? or those thousands Peter promised the holy spirit to, were they all
reprobates, because they yet had it not, when he spoke to them? yea millions of
men ly yet in wickedness, and so far from having, that at present they rather
scoff at the holy spirit yet dare you not say they are all reprobates; for
some of them may turn at Christ's reproof (for ought you know) therefore what
consequence is there from not being reprobates, to a present possession of the
holy spirit?

Secondly, do you know so precisely which infants are Elect, and which
Reprobate, as to take upon you to distinguish them by baptism? or are all
infants of unbelievers reprobate, so that you may accordingly denominate them
for such by whole sale as you do? Do not the infants of unbelievers very often
prove believers, and so elect, and precious? and as ordinarily believers
infants (when they come to years I mean) prove reprobates? were not Asa the son
of wicked Abia, and Josias of^ wicked Ammon elected both, when Ishmael and Esau
the sons of Abraham and Isaac themselves were in Scripture (secundum t^ o
Accountant p. 13.) both branded for reprobates?

Lastly, to the plain perverture of the words of the the text, you quote to
your own ends, instead of Jesus Christ, between whose and the spirits being in
men there is no small difference (for Christ may be in us by faith (I mean we
may be in the faith) when yet he is not in us by his spirit, I mean before the
spirit is yet given, witness all the disciples that believed, and were baptized
with water, some while before Christ gave them the holy spirit, Act. 8. Act.
19.) instead of Christ I say you insert the spirit of God: you also wholly
pervert the sense of the Apostle in that place 2 Cor. 13. 5. who speaks it not
to infants, nor of them neither, but of persons that could both know and prove,
and examine their own selves, of all which infants, were incapable by your own
confession; he wrote it of them to whom he wrote it, and so indeed, though you
are slow of heart to consider it, the whole Gospel was written, viz. de adult
is, and adultorum officiis, of grown persons, whether parents or children, and
their duties, but not for the use of infants in infancy at all.

In the next place upon occasion of my denial that it can be made appear that
infants have the holy spirit to the making of them subjects of baptism you
argue it on thus.

Disputation.
The report of Scripture concerning them, and the necessary consequences of the
former Arguments, do make it more plainly appear to any one that will not deny
Scripture and reason, then the Profession of any particular person, who perhaps
may be an hypocrite (as Simon Magus) can make it appear of himself Gods
testimony being to be preferred before man's.

'Disproof.
Here is one of the most prodigious pieces of absurdity, and contradiction of
your selves, as you speak in other places, that was ever discerned to pass from
men that cried out so loud (as you do) for liberty to reason logically since
the art of Logic was found out.

In that you here call the consequences of all your former Argu^ents necessary
consequences, which is as much as to say such as conclude the thing in hand, i.
e. that infants have the holy spirit necessarily, universally, and infallibly,
for that, and no other (were, you so well skilled in Logic as you would seem
to be) is a necessary consequence, which proves the matter concluded certainly
so to be yea certo it a esse, nec aliter s^abere posse: a necessary consequence
is when there is tam necessarius nexus, and indissolubilis dependenti^ etc.
such infallible dependence between the subject, and the praedicate, that the
conclusion must be universally and perpetually true, whereas your conclusion,
which is this, viz. That little Children have the holy spirit, as it follows
not so much as probably nor possibly from all that you have here premised
toward the proof on it, witness all the Disproof made of your Disputation
hitherto, so much less does it follow from them necessarily to be true, for
then it must b^ at least truly denominated de omni, i. e. universally true
concerning all little children, that they have the bospirit, de omni being the
very lowest degree of necessity: but this for shame you cannot say, that all
little children of every sort have holy spirit, no nor yet so much as all of
that sort of whom you so peculiarly assert it, viz. the little children of
believers, among whom, when they are at years, there are as many destitute of
the holy spirit as are endued with it

And in further evidence hereof that it follows not necessarily from any thing
you have said that those little infants you sprinkle have the holy spirit, I
appeal from your selves to your very selves, for howbeit you here affirm (as
also p. 16.) ^ch necessity in the consequences whence you conclude that infants
of believers have fai^ and the holy spirit, yet to the utter confutation of
your selves herein, you elsewhere confess that at the best your proof can be
no more then probable viz. p. 18. where you write concerning the infants of
Christian parents having faith and the spirit, as if notwithstanding all that
was said before to prove the certainty of it, you could not now tell well what
to say to it, for as in p. 16. you acknowledged that all infants have it not,
so these are your own words p. 18. viz. the spirit is not bound to work it in
all the children of Christian parents, nor barred from working it in any of the
children of infidels, so that no judgem^t of science can be passed till the
acts themselves be seen and examined for a po^ori only (and yet by the way be
it known unto you that every necessary consequence demonstrates a priori)
Demonstra^ (...) ex^oribus, (...), ^r causis.
the discovery of habits it made: that unless i^ could be certainly presumed
what children have the habit, what have not, for t^w ^ing of the spirit is not
known to us, he is not bound nor yet bard, th^re ^a conclusion made.

In which words see how plainly you acknowledge that no conclusion can be made
of it, that infants of Christians have the habit of faith, i. e. it is a thing
that does not necessarily follow, and cannot appear in infancy at all, nor be
certainly presumed, whether they have or have it not, till they come to years,
and be seen to act, so that then it may be known by your own confession, and
yet in this place I am now in hand with you say no more nor less, but in
effect the clean contrary, as also p. 16. where you seem to wonder almost, and
fault the difficulty in men's understandings that there are at all any doubts in
them about their having it, avouching that the Scriptures by necessary
consequences confirm the thing viz. that they have it, That the report of
Scripture concerning litt^ children, and the necessary consequences of the
former arguments do make it appear, yea plainly, yea more plainly then the
profession of any particular pers^ at years can make it appear of himself.

O Earth, Earth, hear the reasonlesse round abouts of these Logicians, they
tell us in one place, that it is to be concluded by no less then necessary
consequences, that believers infants (for of such only they assert it) have
faith and the holy spirit: by and by (to go round again) they tell us that it
cannot be certainly presumed what children have it, what have not, that the
working of the spirit is not known to us, he is not bound to work it in all the
children of Christian parents, nor barred from working it, in any of the
children of In fidels, so that there can be no conclusion made: in one place
they tell us that no judgment of science, concerning these or those infants
having the holy spirit and faith, can be passed in their infancy, till the acts
themselves be seen and examined i. e. till they come to years, and show forth
some fruits, and it appear (...) some acts and professions of it for a
posteriore only the discovery or habits is made: but elsewhere (to go round
again) they tell us that it does more plainly appear concerning believers
infants in their infancy, that they have faith and the holy spirit to any one,
that will not deny Scripture and reason, then the profession of any particular
person at years admitted to baptism, can make it appear of himself, as if it
could not half so well appear a posteriore when we are at years and capable to
profess and act faith, and show forth the fruits of the spirit, whether we have
faith and the spirit yea or n^; as it may do a priori i. e. in infancy, before
any act of faith or fruit of the spirit can be discovered, seen or examined.

Moreover (to animadvert this present passage of yours yet a little further)
whereas you say here, that the report of Scripture concerning little infants,
which is Gods testimony, and to be preferred before man's, does more plainly
prove it that infants have faith and the holy spirit then any particular man's
testimony does prove it concerning himself,

I answer, first by denying that God in Scripture gives any such testimony at
all concerning little infants literally taken, that they have faith and the
holy spirit.

Secondly, if that phrase Mat. 18. 6. viz. these little ones which believe in
me could have any such construction as of little infants literally, yet I deny
that he speaks of them any otherwise then by a Prosopeia as I said before.

Thirdly, if it were to be proved (as it never can be) that he speaks there of
infants, and not figuratively neither, but plainly and properly, yet it is most
plain that he speaks but indifinitely, not particularly of one infant more then
another, o^ of Christians infants more then of infidels, so as that you can
thereupon take on you (as you daily do) to distinguish which have the spirit
which have not, and accordingly to admit these to baptism, and debar those, yea
you your selves do ore and ore express it p. 5. 6. that what the Scripture
declares Infants to be, it declares them so to be in general, specially while
any particulars of them have not yet barrd themselves by actual sin, or
deserved to be exempted from what the Scripture has in general declared them
to be: so that all this that you have brought thus far has not the weight of a
feather, to warrant your good opinion of one infant above another, and your
practice of baptism to this or that particular infant (suppose a believers)
rather then an unbelievers.

It would be no plain but a muddy, tottered confused implicit shufling kind of
argumentation for me, if I were to give account why I baptize this or that
particular man or woman, and not others to argue thus indifinitly (as you do
all along) viz.

No man may forbid them to be baptized that believe and have the spirit.

But the Scripture declares that men and women may believe, and have the
spirit.

Ergo men and women must be baptized.

If I should (I say) go on thus in generals only not making it appear, that
there is any faith at all in these individuals whom I baptize, more then in
others, I should take him for little better then a fool, who should take me for
a wise man in so arguing, yet so and no otherwise do you argue, whilst when we
put you to prove that those infants whom you baptize have title to it, in
contradistinction to heathens infants, whose right to baptism you deny, you
give us your account in these indeterminate terms viz.

Those that have faith and the holy spirit may be baptized.

But the Scripture testifies that little children have faith etc.

Ergo little children may be baptized.

I say what a bald way of arguing is this? wherein you conclude no more
concerning the particular infants, whose right to baptism we put you to plead,
while you shut out other, then concerning those very infants also whom you so
shut out.

This is just as silly as if you being put to prove your own particular
salvation before Iudas's should do it thus viz.

Such as believe shall be saved; But men believe.

Ergo men shall be saved.

Without making any proof of your own faith in particular, whose salvation you
would so prove above his, whereas you should of right argue onward from the
Major thus viz.

We believe, and Iud as did not.

Ergo we shall be saved and not he.

And so had you dealt down rightly, and played above board in your Disputation,
since believers infants in particular is the subject in hand between us, you
should have spoken plainly thus, viz.

All and only those infants that believe are to be baptized.

But all the infants of believing parents, and those infants only believe.

Ergo all and only those infants are to be baptized.

But you know of your own selves this would be too broad a discovery, the
Mino^ being so app^rently false, that' you cannot hide your haking by it from
the view of the very vulgar, if you should so express it: for he that has but
half an ^ie may see, that as there is no more faith to be seen, so the
Scripture declares no more faith to be in believers infants, than in the
infants of unbelievers; or if you will needs have the Minor in such general and
indefinite terms, yet at least ^ant (...) a fair Conclusion concerning those
particular infants you dispute about, ^less than that can amount to so much as
inge^uty, and then it must run thus, viz.

Those that believe and have the holy spirit and so right to the Kingdom of
heaven (...) to be baptized.

But the Scripture does in general declare little children to be such as
believe, h^e the spirit and right to the Kingdom.

Erg^, the infants of Believers, and these infants only are to be bapti^ed.

But then you cannot so well shroud your shuffling from any observant eye, it
being equally absurd to argue to universals from mere particulars, and to some
p^ulars only from universals, or to these individuals from indefinite
declarations, and verily take your Minor term little children, which you so
frequently Syllogize by indiscriminatim not expressing what little children, or
else indefi^tely and more restrictively for some only, not naming which, its
equally ridiculous to argue thus, viz.

The Scripture gives good report of little infants in general.

Therefore believers infants only have faith and the holy spirit, and thereby
right to baptism, and not any other infants: Or thus,

The Scripture speaks well of little infants indefinitely, i. e. of some at
least (though not all, and we kn^w not which) as having faith, the spirit and
right to baptism.

Therefore undoubtedly these little infants whom we baptize are well spoken of
in that kind and must be baptized.

As ^is to argue thus, The Scripture declares that John Baptist had the holy
spirit.

Eego all the infants of believing parents must be supposed to have it in
infancy and may thereupon be baptized.

Yet these are but as it were the several streins which you dispute in, which
put all together into a bag, and shuffle as much as you will that which comes
out first will be a senseless non sequitur, do what you can. But you offer
concerning this and that particular infant, viz. a believers, of whom I denied
that if it were brought unto you together with a heathens, the spirit could
more appear to you to be in it than in the other, ^ou offer I say to make it
appear that that infant should appear to have the holy spirit above the other;
for that was indeed the business I then put you to prove, and this you do as
well as those may be said to do, who by mending make their matter worse than
it was before, whilst there is not a tittle to be found in your Argument, which
does not as fully prove the holy spirit to be in all infants, as in any at all:
on this wise it runs.

Disputation.
Da That which to doubt of is breach of Christian charity does sufficiently
appear.

^i But to doub^ these little children have the holy Ghost is a breach of
Christian charity

i. Ergo that these little children have the Holy Ghost, does sufficiently
appear.

The Minor is proved thus.
To doubt that these little children are such as the Scripture in general has
declared them to be, and that they have right to the kingdom of heaven etc. is
a breach of Christian charity, whose rule is, Praesumere unumquenque bonum,
nisi constet de malo; the Apostle saying 1 Cor. 13. 3. 5. it thinks no evil,
charity believes all things; especially since it cannot appear that those have
by any actual sin bard themselves or deserved to be exempted from the general
state of little infants declared in Scriptures.

Ergo, To doubt that they have the Holy Ghost is a breach of Christian charity.

Disproof.
Besides the salsity of both the premises, there is no more at all concluded
from them concerning any one infant, then might (if they were true indeed) be
as truly concluded from them concerning all.

First O the rottenness and infirmity of the Major! it is most manifestly
falls, for there are many things, which to doubt of may be a breach of Christian
charity, which yet do not at present sufficiently appear.

To doubt that this or that particular infant will hereafter live holily, and
embrace the Gospel, may be a breach of Christian Charity, whose rule is ever to
hope the best, till it sees the contrary, and yet that this or that particular
infant will live holily and embrace the Gospel when he comes to age, does not
yet so sufficiently appear, but that (as more plainly as things appear with you
in infancy then at age by particular profession) it may more sufficiently
appear when they are grown up, yea till then it appears not at all.

The Minor also is false, for to doubt that this or that infant has at present
the holy spirit is no breach of Christian charity at all; since (what hopes
soever we may have of them as to the future) yet at present there is no
evidence that they have it, nor yet any promise at all that it shall be given
to them in infancy, nor at years neither till they believe and obey the Gospel:
and as there is no promise of it to them in infancy, so in mere infancy there
is no such use of it to them, as it is promised to be of unto believers; neither
does it either quicken, inlighten, convince, convert, comfort, or any other way
officiate as a seal of redemption, and remission of sins to such as have no
sins as yet to be remitted.

Secondly, if both these premises were as true as you suppose them, yet would
it follow no more from them, nor from all you say toward the proof of either of
them that believers infants have the holy spirit, then it would that unbel
evers infants have it: in the evincing of which I shall only transcribe your
Syllogism, and proof of the Minor, and instead of your term these little
children, write little children of infidels, and so leave you, and all the
world to judge, whether your own Argument does not as clearly conclude
unbelievers infants to have the holy spirit, as the infants of believers, and
so consequently that all have it if any at all as well as some.

That which to doubt of is a breach of Christian charity does sufficiently
appear.

But to doubt that little children of infidels have the holy Ghost is a breach
of christian charity.

Ergo that little children of infidels have the holy Ghost does sufficiently
appear.

The Minor is thus proved.
To doubt that little children of infidels are such as ^he Scripture in
general has declared them to be, and that they have right to the kingdom of
heaven, etc. is a breach of Christian Charity, whose rule is presumere
unumquemque bonum, nisi constet de malo, The Apostle saying in 1 Cor. 13. 3. 5.
it thinks no evil, Charity believes all things, it hops all things;
especially since it cannot appear, that the little children of infidels have by
any actual sin bard themselves, or deserved any more then others to be exempted
from the General state of little children declared in Scripture.

Ergo to doubt that little children of infidels have the holy Ghost, is a
breach of Christian Charity.

In which though both propositions be flatly false, yet I call heaven and earth
to witness whether all that you bring in proof of the Minor do not prove it as
much breach of Christian charity to doubt that any infants, as it is to doubt
that believers infants have the holy spirit, one infant having no more deserved
ill by actual sin then another.

Thus all that ever you have done hitherto is utterly undone, for the Argument
you began upon, and the basis of your building is, that believers infants (for
their baptism only you plead, denying the baptism of other infants, as well as
we) have the holy spirit, this upon denial of any sufficiency in all your
former proofs to make it appear, is at last undertaken by you to be made
sufficiently appear in this last Syllogism; which if it do not make it as
sufficiently appear concerning unbelievers infants (considering your own matter
used to prove the Minor) as concerning the other, then my candle is quite gone
out, but if it do then surely the very light that is in you is utter darkness.

In the next place, you dispute upon us by way of Question and Interogation,
thus,

Disputation.
1. How do those men and women that are baptized at years make it appear to
those that baptize them, that they have faith and the holy spirit?

If it be answered by their profession.

3. Whether their profession, since it is possible they may lie, can make it
appear infallibly?

If it be answered no.

3. What judgment then can they that baptize them pass upon them to be the
subjects of baptism (as they call them) whether any other than that of charity?

If it be answered that of charity.

It Is replied, then let them pass the same judgment upon those little infants
of whom in general the Scripture has given so good a report, and against whom
in particular no exception can be raised, and the controversy between us is at
an end.

Disproof.
First whereas you quere how those we baptize make it appear that they have the
holy spirit before we baptize them.

I answer I know no necessity of making it appear that persons have the holy
spirit before their admission to baptism, for though we find once that God
Anticipated his promise, and gave the holy spirit before baptism, Act. 10. yet
I know not, nor yet do you, any promise there is, whereupon in an ordinary way
we can expect it, of receiving the holy spirit of promise till after faith,
repentance obedience, turning to God, baptism, and asking of it, Prove. 1. 23.
John 7. 38. 39. Act. 2. 38. chap. 5. 32. chap. 8. 16. 19. Luke 11. 13. Ephesians.
1. 13.

Secondly, as for the holy spirits appearing infallibly.

I answer first it may possibly appear infallibly to be in some, in whom it is,
as Act. 10. 44. 45. 46. 47. by sundry fruits, and manifestations of it, which
may warrant us to say God is in them of a truth: Mat. 7. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 1
Cor. 12. 7. 1 Cor. 14. 25.

It may I say undoubtedly appear to be in men and women, but cannot any way at
all so appear to be in infants, if we may believe your selves, who tell us p,
8. that infants have not the exercise and fruit offaith, and p. 18. that
instruction of the understanding in matter of faith in some sort must go before
any act of faith can be discovered, and that no judgment of science can be
past upon infants, till the acts themselves be seen and examined, for a
posteriore only the discovery of habits is made, and that unless it could be
certainly presumd what children have it, what have not there can be no
conclusion made.

And howbeit I am not of the seekers mind, that an appearance of the holy
spirit in any person before baptism in water does exempt him from it, but am
well assured that it strictly rather ingages him to it, or else Peter could not
have commanded them in name of the Lord to be baptized in water, upon whom the
holy spirit fell Act. 10. but must rather have forbid it, as frustraneous, and
altogether superfluous; yet that the spirit should appear at all to be in men,
in order to their baptism, much more that it should appear infallibly to be in
them, is a matter of no necessity that I know of, since in the word its not
required that persons be baptized with the holy spirit first in order to their
baptism with water, but that they be first baptized in water, in order to their
receiving the holy spirit Act. 2. 38. for the baptism of the spirit as it is
promised only to believers; so we believing, obeying the Gospel, and asking
the holy spirit, it is signified to us as one thing that shall be given among the
rest, in that very way of water baptism: so that its enough for us (as to the
baptism of persons) to take cognizance of it that they believe and repent,
which things though they cannot do without the spirit performing its common
office of striving, drawing, moving, inlightning, convicting of good and evil,
sin and righteousness etc. in all which it acts to the whole world, Genesis 6.
Romans 1. 20. John 16. 8. Act. 7. 51. yet they not only may do them without, but
must dothem before they can by promise expect the spirit, in those special
respects, wherein he is promised to believers, and called that holy spirit of
promise.

And now because you ask how we know they have faith whom we baptize? I answer
by their profession, which gives though not infallibility; yet by your leave,
for all your preferring the Eulogies given in general to all infants above any
man's personal profession for himself in this case a far clearer and better
grounded judgment of charity concerning them, that they have faith, then that
you have concerning infants, which at best is but charity mistaken for cruelty,
whilst it takes that to be in infants, and that on pain of their damnation too
they dying without it, viz. believing see p. 8. which infants are utterly
incapable of; and whilst it takes even that too, without which it holds no
infants are saved, to be in but very few infants viz. believers infants only,
and so damns all other dying infants, which are far more innumerable, and as
capable of faith, and as little barring themby actual sin from salvation, and
as little deserving damnation, as the other, so that whether we or you plead
the cause of innocent infants let the world judge.

And whereas you suppose that because in charity only we judge men and women
to believe, therefore we pass no other judgment then that of charity only on
them to be the subjects of baptism: herein you grossly mistake our grounds of
baptizing, for though that of charity only is the judgment whereby we judge
them to be believers, yet that is not the only judgment whereby we judge them
to be the subjects of baptism, but as to that we go upon a judgment of
certainty and infaellibility also, for though it be not infallible to us that
every one that professes to believe, does as truly believe as he professes, yet
this is infallible to us concerning him that professes viz. both that he
professes, and also that professing to believe with all his heart, so that we
in charity may judge him so to do, whether he lie or no, he is by the rule of
the word quoad no^ a warrantable, undoubted, and (as no infant is) infallible
subject of baptism, for the word requires us to baptize such, as after our
preaching the faith to them, do truly profess to believe whether they believe
as truly as they professed or no, for that indeed is not so infallible to us, but
it warrants us not to baptize any infants, who can neither believe nor profess.

Moreover since you say let us pass the same judgment upon little infants as
you do, of whom in general say you the Scripture gives so good a report, and
against whom in particular no exception can be raised, and so the controversy
shall be at an end.

I tell you we do pass not the same, but a far surer judgment then that of
charity upon infants dying in infancy; and have an hundred fold moreclear, and
more tender opinion of them then your selves, whilst we have from the word well
grounded hopes and assurance that no dying infant is damned, but you with over
pleading the bare outward privileges of some, most ignorantly damn 20 dying
infants to one. But as to your judgment of charity concerning infants
believing, and being thereby inrighted to baptism, or that same judgment of
charity which we act toward professors of faith; you may dream as long as you
will on such erroneous Enthusiasm, but those that are awake to righteousness,
and resolved to sin no more by popish superstition, know well enough that
infants (though nere the worse for want out yet) cannot believe in Christ of
whom they are not capable to hear, much less can they profess so to do, and
thereby give that good ground, which right charity must have, whereupon to
build her faith of this, i. e, to believe that they do believe, and believing
are certainly to be baptized, so that we have charity well grounded concerning
infants, and such as comparatively to which your tender mercy to millions of
them is mere cruelty, and yet the controversy is not ended, nor is likely to
come to an end in such a way.

Give me leave therefore a little to play upon you here with your own weapons,
and to call for an answer from you to your own queres, and so it may be in a
fair way toward an end in time, whereas then you plead the baptism of
believers infants and no others, upon such a sufficient appearance that they
have faith and the holy spirit. I ask

First how do these make it appear that they have faith and the holy spirit
since they cannot do it by profession.

Secondly, how far forth do they make it appear to you? infallibly? or but
probably? your selves say not infallibly, for the spirit is not bound to all
the children of Christian parents, nor barrd from any of the children of
infidels.

Thirdly, what judgment do you pass upon believers infants to be the subjects
of baptism, rather then other infants? that of charity? or that of certainty?
that of certainty you disclaim p. 18. in these words, no judgment of science
can be passed, till the Acts of faith themselves be seen and examined, and in
these also viz. unless it could be certainly presumed what children have the
habit, what have not, for the working of the spirit is not known to us, he is
not bound nor barrd, there can be no conclusion made.

That of charity then is the only judgment you pass on these, and, whereby
you judge believers infants and no other, to have faith, the spirit and right
to baptism^ which charity teaches us praesumere etc. to believe and hope all
things and hope the best concerning all till ye see the worst, especially since
little children of believers have not by any actual sin barrd themselves, or
deserved to be exempted from the general state of little children declared in
Scriptures.

Well then to close up all, let me but desire you to pass the same judgment
of charity on all little infants, as you do on some, even upon the little ones
of unbelievers, Infidels, Turks and Pagans (whilst infants) of whom in general,
and indiscrimmatim the Scripture gives a good report, not commending believers
infants above them, and against whom in particular no exception can be raised,
more then against the other, saving that one fault (of theirs) only that they
were not born of believings parents, which I hope you have so much charity as
to pardon.

Hope, I say as well of the infants of unbelieving parents, that they have
faith and the holy spirit, specially since it cannot appear that these have by
any actual sin barred themselves, or deserved any more then the other to be
exempted from the general state of little infants declared in Scripture, and
then the controversy between you and me, which is whether little children born
of believing parents only, may be lawfully baptized, is like to be at an end,
for then certainly you will either agree to it that all infants in the world,
even of infidels, Turks, and Pagans (there being in the judgment of Charlty as
undeserving damnation as others) may be and are (dying in infancy, though this
with you is as heinous a thing as to say the Devils may be saved p. 7.) in as
much possibility to be saved, and so at least in as much right as the others to
be baptized, or else that no infants at all (it being not possible to be
presumed certainly which have the spirit, and which not, and charity judging a
like of all, till it see a difference) are at all to be baptized, both which
being the very truth, I am content for my part to agree with you therein with
all my heart.

To which Dilemma I am well enough assured you can answer nothing in the least
measure satisfactory, as the most judicious readers (if you Ministers inquire
of them) will undoubtedly affirm also. and so I proceed to your other Arguments.

Dispuration.
That opinion which makes the Covenant of the Gospel worser then that under
the Law, contrary to the Apostle in Heb. 8. 6. is a wicked and false opinion.

But the opinion of the Anabaptists, which denies baptism to little children,
whereby a moity of the Christian world is cut off at once from being members of
the Church, makes the covenant of the Gospel worser, then that under the Law,

Ergo that opinion is a wicked and false opinion.

Disproof.
The Major here is most undeniably true for what opinion soever does make the
Gospel covenant worse then that under the Law contrary to Heb. 8. 6. is indeed
both false, and wicked.

But the Minor wherein you say that the denial of baptism to little infant^
makes the Gospel covenant worse then that under the Law, contrary to Heb. 8. 6.
where the Gospel is said to be a better covenant then that of the Law, in this
respect as it is established upon better promises, this is most palpably false;
yea I appeal to every man, who does not wilfully shut his eyes against the
truth, to judge between us, whether our opinion or your own rather does most
clearly contradict that Scripture of your own alleging Heb. 8. 6. in order to
the true discerning of which,

First, Mark well what it is that is there asserted concerning the meliority of
the Gospel covenant above that of law, and you shall find it to be this, viz.
That the Gospel covenant whereof Christ is the Mediator is a covenant that
promises better things, better enjoyments, (...) a better inheritance then that
of the Law did, whereupon it there bears the name of a better Covenant, then
that of which Moses was the Mediator.

Secondly, Mark whether our denial of infant baptism do at all contradict that;
for what if infants be not baptized, does that make that the promises of the
gospel are worse than the promises of the Law? nay verily who ever is or is not
baptized, the promises of the Gospel are both in our opinion, and our constant
manifestation of it too in this particular, better and as far beyond the
promises of the Law, as the substance is beyond the shadow, the City it self
beyond the map of it that is on the wall; for the promises of the Gospel are of
the whole world Romans 4. 13. of a heavenly inheritance, incorruptible Canaan,
Crown, Kingdom, 1. Pet. 1. 5. Iam. 2. 5. Rev. 2. 10. of eternal salvation Heb.
5. 9. and this not to the Jews only, upon obedience to Moses voice, but to all
men in case of obedience to the voice of Christ the Mediator of it, in point of
faith baptism, and other things which he requites in order thereunto, of those
only which are capable to perform them; but the promises of the Law were but
of a spot of the world, of an earthly Canaan, inheritance, kingdom etc. to the
posterity of one man only viz. Abraham and not to all his fleshly posterity
neither (for his posterity by Hagar and Keturah were excluded, and that
covenant established with Isaac and his seed only, and that in case of
obedience to the voice of Moses the Mediator of that Testament, when God should
give out his mind to them by hi^ in that covenant more perfectly then he did in
the days of Abraham, and in case of observance of the Law, whereof
circumcision was a part, though given before, and an Engagement to them to keep
the whole, when it should be given, and all this but as a Map, and type for a
time of the Gospel Covenant, which was made and established on better promises
with a better seed, i. e. not a carnal, but spiritual seed, not such as are of
Abraham's own much less of any inferior men's flesh, but such as are of Abraham's
faith, and do his works, i. e. believers themselves this is our opinion, which
if it do not rather confirm then contradict that meliority of the
Gospel Covenant, and its promises above that of the Law, which meliority is
spoken of Heb. 8. 6. (your very selves being Judges of it) then surely Satan
has shut up your eyes from seeing that you see.

But now as for your selves, who stand so much in vindication of the Gospel
covenant, as a better Covenant then that under the Law, and that in that very
respect, in which it is said to be a better Covenant Heb. 8. 6. viz.
established upon better promises, i will show you plainly how you are so far from
making, it better then the Law, as that you make that of the Law at least equal
to it, for whereas that Scripture which you quote says plainly that the Gospel
is a better Covenant than that of the law; forasmuch as it stands on better
promises, yet that is never the better for you in your cause whose tenet
utterly denies, and flatly contradicts that, for you say that the things
promised in the word of the Law, which were signed, and (as your phrase is, not
ours) sealed by circumcision, were the very same things that are promised in
the word of the Gospel, and signed and (as you say) sealed in baptism, viz. the
kingdom of heaven; and howbeit this is most manifestly false, for in reality,
though you jumble them together into one when it seems to serve your turn so to
do, in such a confused way as preaches to the world your present ignorance in
both the Law and the Gospel, the Law and Gospel are two distinct Covenants,
established on two distinct kinds of promises whereof the one was typical of,
and so inferior to the other, the one an old o^e, and a first that vanished
before the second and new one, Gal. 4. Heb. 8. 6. 13. 9. 1 -- 12. 18. and
though all that was then promised in the Law, and signed in circumcision, as
well as circumcision it self were types of things under the Gospel yet the
things then promised upon keeping the Law, and immediately signed to Abraham
and all his fleshly seed by Isaac (save Esau and his seed that slighted it) in
that covenant of circumcision, which God gave him, were no other then that
literal Canaan, that earthly land of promise flowing with milk and honey, and
not the heavenly inheritance, Genesis 17. 8. etc. for they that were heirs of the
other according to the Law, are not thereupon heirs of this also according to
the Gospel Romans 4. 13.

Now howbeit I say that be very false, yet you asserting it that the promise
under the Law, and under the Gospel is the very same, do therein deny the one
to be a covenant of better promises then the other: for to say the promise of
the law is the very same that the promise of the Gospel is; is to say that the
one is as good as the other, and so to contradict that of Hab. 8. 6. which
says the Gospel Testament, and the promises thereof are better then the
promises under the Law.

And secondly if you say the Meliority that you hold to be in the Gospel
covenant consists not in the Meliority of the promises of it above the other,
but in the Meliority of the administration of it, the Gospel ordinances
belonging not to the same only, but to more subjects, then the ordinances of
the Law, in which respect we denying Gospel ordinances to infants, which were
admitted to the ordinances under the Law, and so cutting of a Moity of the
Christian world from the Church, which stood members of it before do streiten
the Gospel, and make it worse and of less extent the Law.

I answer first, That the Meliority of the Gospel covenant spoken of in Heb. 8.
6. lies in the Meliority of the promises of it above the others, which
Meliority we affirm but you deny, in saying the promises of both Covenants are
one and the same, therefore it is your selves however, and not we that by your
tenets make the Gospel Covenant at least no better than the Law, contrarily to
that of the Apostle, Heb. 8. 6. and so your opinions and not ours are false and
wicked by your own Argument.

But secondly if it be in very deed to make the Gospel covenant worse than the
Laws (as you say it is) to hold infants no capable subjects of Gospel
ordinances, some of which were capable subjects of the ordinances of the law,

I shall first disprove your charge of us together with your proof of it in
that particular.

Secondly prove that if notwithstanding all that I shall say toward the
clearing of our selves, we must needs be held guilty of lessening the grace of
God under the Gospel, in comparison of what it was under the law, because we
deny the ordinances thereof to infants, to whom the ordinances of the law were
dispensed, then you that judge us, condemn your selves also as being in the
same kind guilty of the same, to this purpose lets see what you bring in proof
of your Minor, in the last Syllogism; and how punctually it concludes to your
present purpose, thus you argue.

Disputation.
Under the Law the seal of the Gospel Covenant was by Gods appointment set to
little infants, viz. circumcision, which was the seal of the righteousness of
faith, which is the Gospel covenant, and therefore is called by God an
everlasting covenant, and that I my self confess it to be the seal of the
Gospel Covenant, and that even Ishmael only because born in Abraham's house
had right to it, and received it.

Ergo this opinion denying the seal of the Gospel Covenant, which the
defenders acknowledge baptism to be to little infants, makes the covenant of
the Gospel worser to the spiritual seed of Abraham, then it was to the carnal
seed under the Lax.

Disproof.
How often shall I adjure you the next time you write to write no more then
truth at least in matter of fact? if you will needs utter falsehood in matter
of Doctrine? do not your selves bear me witness before all the world not above
two pages behind that I denied circumcision to be a seal of the righteousness
of faith, to any but Abraham's person only, and avouched it to be no such thing
to his posterity and yet how quickly have you forgotten your selves so far as
to the contradicting of your selves, as well as the truth, to represent it here
as if I had confessed it? and having began to faulter, and falsify things for
your own ends, how easily do you multiply misreport, and run from ore shoes,
as the Proverb is, to ore boots too, for no less than a pair of pretty ones are
here recorded; for how be it my declared judgment then was, now is and I
believe ever will be, for ought you can say to clear the contrary, that
circumcision (though a seal to Abraham to honor the greatness of that faith he
had, and to notify him to be the father of the faithful, as it is plainly
expressed Romans 4. 11.) was not set as a seal in any sense at all to any other,
but as a bare sign and token in their flesh to mind them upon sight thereof,
immediately of the Covenant that then was, remotely as a type (as every other
thing under the law did) of something in the Gospel Covenant viz. circumcision
of the heart, and that baptism it self is no seal at all, but a bare sign of
the Gospel Covenant, and is not so much as a sign, or any thing else, but a
mere nullity to little infants, yet the world is here belied into the belief of
it, that I confess both that circumcision was a seal of the Gospel Covenant,
and that under such a notion as a seal of that Covenant Ishmael himself had
right to it, and received it, for so you express it p. 7. and that baptism is
the seal of the Gospel Covenant, even to little infants themselves as well as
others.

I do therefore in answer to this last piece of yours, and in order to your
better understanding of me for the future, and of the truth too, as it is in
Jesus, at present profess against two things herein,

First your forgeries and misrepresentations of my opinion to the world, which
was not so darkly declared at that time as that you must needs mistake it.

Secondly, against the falsities and mistakes that are in your own opinion in
this point viz. in stiling both circumcision, as dispensd to Abraham's fleshly
posterity and baptism also as dispensed not to others only, but even to
infants by the name of seals of the Covenant of grace. As for circumcision that
it was not so, though I might add much more to what has been before spoken in
proof hereof in my animadversion of your account, yet I Will save my self that
labor, and refer you for fuller understanding, what circumcision was, and was
not, to a certain book, that is extant of one Mr. Iackson, once of Bidenden in
Kent, styled 19. Arguments, proving circumcision to be no seal of the Covenant
of grace, whereunto is annexed the unlawfulness of Infant baptism upon that
ground, of which book I must needs give testimony thus far to the world, that
it being brought to me, whilst it was but a manuscript, and my self a Presbyter
of your high places, in some confidence that I could answer it, how easily I
might have shufled it off, had I set my self so to do I will not say, but I
could not answer it solidly, nor salva consciencia, and therefore I let it
alone for a time, till considering further of it, and of other things I was
stirrd up to the study of by it, I was at last converted to the truth,
whereupon as the best answer I was capable to give, I signed it in such wise
(as I find Luther once signed another book in the like case) viz. memorandum
that taking this book in hand at first to confute it, I was at last convinced
by it.

Which 19. proofs of circumcision to be no seal of the Covenant of Grace, if
they be weak, and invalid, such a multitude as you are have time enough among
you to disprove them, but if you yield to them, be silent and say nothing.

As for baptism I confess it to be truly and properly a sign, and that of the
Covenant of Grace, remission of sins by Christ his death and resurrection,
which are both not only signified, but also lively represented, and resembled
in the true dispensation of it to believers, yet that it is so much as a sign
at all to infants in infancy, or when grown to years either (if dispensed in
infancy) I absolutely deny, and affirm that the very nature, use and office of
it (as a sign to its subject) is totally destroyed by such immature
administration: for a sign (specially proprie dictum) that is properly, and not
improperly so called in reference to that person, whose sign it is, is some
outward thing appearing to the senses, through which some other thing, some
inward thing is at the same time apprehended by the understanding, This is the
most true and proper difinition that your Divines give of a sign in general,
but in special of these signs, viz. baptism, and the supper, so Pareus and
Kekerman both do define a sign out of Austin See Pareus p 357. and Kekerman
System. log. p. 12. lignum est quod seipsum sensui, et preter se aliquid animo
ostendit. or R^s. p^eter speciem, quam inger^ sensibus, aliud aliquid facien^
incognitionem veni^e.
and so do you all define these signs viz. in oculis incurrentia signa, but
such a thing baptism cannot be to infants in their infancy, nor after their
infancy neither, if dispensed while they are infants, the sign and thing
signified being not possible in that way to be ever apprehended both together
as they must be viz. the sign by the senses, the thing signified by the
understanding, and that at the same time when the sign appears to the senses,
or else the sign is a mere Nullity, and of no use and benefit as a sign at all,
for though infants may have the sense of the thing so as to see and feel if
they were dipped in infancy, yet have they then no understanding of its meaning,
and though when they come to years they are capable to gather the meaning of
things, or from an appearing sign to conceive what is signified thereby, yet
then the sign it self is fled out of sight, and so far out of the reach of
their remembrance, that as there is nothing now presented, so neither ever was
there any thing (for ought they can conjecture any more then by mere human
hearsay) objected to their senses at all: when the Jews required a sign of
Christ, they required something that might be seen, what sign show thou that
we may see and believe?

A sign then must be some memorandum, some object obvious to the senses, of
that person to whom it is a sign properly taken, either continually, or at
sometime or other, even then which the understanding drinks in the thing
signified, else if there neither is, nor ever was any such sight or sense of
the sign, as from the then, or now present appearance of it, while the
understanding of the party, whose sign it is, is lively acted on the thing,
then to that person the sign (unless improperly, and improper signs the
sacraments are not) can possibly be no sign at all, this Pareus teaches us to
the life, p. 35. 7. where desining baptism and the supper to be signa in oculos
incurrentia, hoc est visibilia, signs that are, or once were to be seen by him
whose signs they are, even at that time while he is to learn something by
them, he further backs it, as I have set down in his own words in the margent,
and for the use of the unlearned Englished thus viz. for they ought to be such
Taia enim debent esse, utres invisibiles significent, (...) enim debent esse
adminicula ^idei, oporter percipi externo sensu, quo movetur sen sos intern^s,
quod enim non vides non est tibi signum, qui sacit signum invisibile, implicat
contradictionem et sacit signum non signum: res sunt invisibiles non signa,
alioqui signa non possent significare res, multo minus confirmare, quia
incertum confirmaretur per aeque incertum, hinc veteres sacramentum ita
definiunt sacramentum est signum visibile invisibilis gratiae.
that they may signify things invisible, for if they ought to be helps to our
faith, they must be perceived by the external sense, whereby the internal sense
is moved, for what thouseest not is no sign to thee, he that makes an invisible
signim plies a contradiction, and makes the sign not a sign at all; they are
invisible things, not signs, otherwise also the signs could not so much as
signify the things, much less confirm them, because an uncertain thing would
be confirmed by a thing as uncertain as it self hence the ancients define a
Sacrament thus, a sacrament is a visible sign of some invisible grace.

So then we see that according to your selves a sign is no sign at all to him,
that is never seen all by him, who is to observe it, and that too at some time
or other after he comes to observe what is meant by it, whereupon I testify
that what was done to us in infancy had it been the true sign of Christ's own
institution viz. baptism as it was rather a sign of mere man's institution viz.
the sign Rantism, and the sign of the cross, neither was nor is, nor ever will
be any sign at all to you or me, if at any time it be a sign to us it must be
either while we are infants, or when grown to years, but not while infants, for
then we apprehend not the thing signed, nor when at years, for then we
apprehend not the sign. How mighty your memoties, and how exquisite your
apprehensive powers are to bring these two, I mean the sign and thing signified
together in your thoughts. I know not, but I plainly acknowledge
(notwithstanding Dr Channels council to the Auditory at the Dispute at Petworth
Ian. 5. 1651 to remember, and call to mind what was signified to them in their
infant baptism) that as in infancy I perceived not to what purpose I was
signed, so now (save what I have by hearsay) I perceive not, nor ever did of my
self to my best remembrance that I was then so signed at all. As for that true
baptism, which I have since submitted to some 4 or 5 years ago, as it then
preached (so far as a sign may be said to preach) most precious things to my
understanding, so it lively appeared to my senses, and left such impression
upon then and such an Idea thereof in my mind, that me thinks I both see and
remember it still, and so shall I hope have good cause to do whilst I live. I
conclude then that to signify things to infants by baptism in infancy is a
mere blank, and utter nullity, a silly cipher, that stands for nothing and is
of no use to them at all.

Yea as it would be thought no better then mere mockery, or witless wisdom, for
any Priest to stand talking, and making signs over one a sleep, while he is
understandingly sensible of nothing, and then after he is awake, and as little
a ware of any thing as before, begin to make the application, and will him to
divine both what was done to him, by whom, and why, and to take cognizance and
clearer evidence of such, and such things, by the same token that they were
told him, and signified to him by what was done while he was asleep, by certain
signs, which he never saw yet, nor never shall: so is it to me to baptize meet
infant^: or as it were no better than flat folly for any father (in a serious
and not lusory way) to show the form of the City Jerusalem to his infant i^
infancy by the figure, and draught of it in a Map, saying look here child, this
stands for the Temple, this signifies, and sets forth the manner of Mount Sion,
and and all this is showed thee now, that thou may remember it another time,
that Jerusalem is thus and thus situated, and then when he comes to age
(without any more resemblance of it to him in the map) to indoctrinate him in
what was done in his iafancy, and bid him reflect back, and call to mind what
was shown him in that map, in which it was manifested to him what manner of
city Jerusalem was, and other such like ridiculous stuff and prate of the
things so long since done, that they are now flown both out of sight and mind;
even such and no better is it, yea such piteous poor, and mere painted piety is
it, for persons, whether Priests or parents to stand prating to and ore poor
ignorant infants and signing them at a Font or Basin, whilst (if they be not a
sleep, as my ow^ silly experience teaches me they have been many a time, while
I have been sprinkling them in the midwives, or the mothers arms yet) they are
at best no better then asleep, because as heedless of what is done, saying to
them very seriously by name, as if they would have them mind what is said,
Thomas -- ^nne -- etc. I baptize thee in the name of the Father, etc. in token
of remission of sins, and then to sign them with the sign of the Cross, in
token to them still that hereafter (when it is impossible) they must by what is
now so clearly manifested to their senses, understand, and remember that they
must not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified etc. and then when
they are grown up, to set them to School to the Font again, and wish them to
learn by what was once done to them there, that this and that is signified,
saying, you must understand that Christ was crucified, dead and raised for the
remission of your sins, and that you are now to leave your sins, to die to them,
live a holy life, take up your cross and follow him, and all these things I now
inform you in by word of mouth, you must call to mind how they were most
plainly manifested to you, and lively evidenced to your very external senses,
and thereby to your internal senses in your baptism, which is a visible sign to
you, and a most sensible demonstration thereof, a most lively preaching and
resembling of them before your eyes; these things you must remember by the same
token, that you had once such a most not able, remarkable, memorable matter
done unto you (so long since that you cannot possibly observe, perceive,
discover, remember, that ever it was done at all, but as we tell you)

Babist.
This reflects with no small disparagement on the wisdom of God in appointing
the sign circumcision to be set to infants even in their infancy.

Baptist.
No such matter; for God did not appoint it to be set to infants for any such
end, or use as to be a sign of any thing to infants themselves in their
infancy, but when at age.

Babist.
Nor do we set baptism to infants for any such end as to signify any thing to
them in their infancy, but when they come to years.

Baptist.
Circumcision being a permanent mark in the flesh remained Genesis 17. 13. and
though set in infancy, yet was a sign visible to the persons to whom it was
set, and to be seen by them as long as they lived, but to baptism being a
transient thing, which vanishes soon after the dispensation, without making or
leaving any mark or impression upon the body, whereby any one that nores it not
while dispensed to him, can possibly be capable to note it another time it is
gone and lost, and can be no sign to him any more for ever.

A permanent sign may be set at any time without prejudice to their use of it
as a sign, to whom it is set, but the use of a transient sign must be made when
it is set, and it must be set at such times when its subject is capable to
catch the meaning of it whilst it passes before the senses, and upon occasion
to recollect an Idea of what was done, or else it perishes from being a sign to
those persons from thenceforth even for ever.

Babist.
Then Circumcision might have been as well for born till the persons were of
years, the use being not made till then, yet God who does nothing in vain, and
out of season, did for all that enjoin it long before, why therefore may not
baptism by the like reason.

Baptist.
Besides that baptism is transient and that permanent, which is enough to
satisfy in this particular, there was much other use and end for which
circumcision was rightly dispensed to the infants of the Jews, for which there is
not the like reason in baptism, as namely to distinguish and sign them out to
be what they were, viz. heirs of the kingdom by birth.

Babist.
That is the very end on which we baptize infants and no other, viz. to sign
and distinguish the seed of believers from the seed of unbelievers, and sign
them out to be what they are by birth, and what when they come to years they
learn that they were made in Baptism, viz. heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Baptist.
When you have the same evidence of believers seed in infancy (that the Jews
had of theirs, viz. that they are heirs of the kingdom, then I will allow you
to do as they did, viz. to sign and distinguish them as such: but of the one of
these you have evidence in nonage, not so of the other^: the kingdom that the
Jews by very nature were heirs of according to the promise was that of the
Earthly Canaan, of which (and that as a type) they were apparent heirs by no
other then very natural birth, and that so soon as ere they were born, and
therefore full well within a while might they be signed.

But that which you take upon you so timely to sign persons as heirs to in
baptism, is the Antitype or heavenly Canaan, which no creature is an apparent
heir to according to the Gospel promise, upon mere natural birth of any
parents, whether Jew or Gentile, till he appear to us (unless he die before he
has deserved exemption by actual transgression, and then Charity teaches us,
to hope as well of all as, of one) to be born by faith in Christ, which birth
(if any infants were capable of it (as to us none are yet) because we cannot
presume which have it, and which not, the workings of the spirit being so
unknown to us, that there can be no conclusion made, we cannot by dispensation
give right distinction: but as in the type they signed them well nigh as soon
as they were born with that natural birth of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob after the
flesh, upon which alone they were heirs by promise of that earthly Canaan, so
we sign them so soon as they appear to be born with that birth of Christ by
faith, by which they are heirs of the true Canaan, and that's all the baptism of
new born babes can possibly be found any where in the word, this birth if it
could be in any infant at all, at least cannot appear to be in one living
infant above another, for either they die before actual transgression has
barred them, and then though our hopes are the same of them all, yet are they
past signing by baptism, or else they live and are seen to believe, or not
believe, and so as they do, or not do they must without distinction, or respect
to natural descent, be signed or not signed alike.

Baptism therefore though a sign in its nature use and office to believing men
and women; yet is never so much as a sign to that person to whom its dispensed
in infancy.

But as for your signing it with the name of a seal, I should wonder much more
at your ignorance, had not such a wonderful thing as ignorance been threatened
to those wise men, that teach Gods fear after men's precepts Isay 29. in that
you make both your sacraments to be seals, for so runs your ordinary difinition
concerning them viz: in oculis, incurrentia signa, et sigilla, considering how
clear the Scripture is against you, for verily though you receive that
denomination of a seal, together with all your vain conversion and worship, by
tradition from your fathers, yet you never learned it from our fathers in the
word, wherein show me (if you can) from the beginning to the end (save in Romans
4. 11. where in anosense sense viz. not to strengthen a weak faith, but to
honor great faith circumcision was set (as Gods broad seal) to confirm Abraham
in his fatherhood) any one of the four which you call Gods seals viz. either
circumcision, or the passover, baptism or the supper is called a seal by God
himself.

Babist.
The formal term of a sign is no more to be found in Scripture to be given
either to baptism or the supper, then the term of a seal, yet you grant it to
be properly called a sign, and so why may it not be called a seal, though it be
not so called in Scripture?

Baptist.
Though the express denomination of a sign be not given in Scripture to either
baptism or supper, yet no less is sounded forth in sense and signification,
but the other term of seal (as to these things) is not consonant to the rule of
faith, for verily as no other is expressed, so no more then one seal of the
Gospel Covenant is so much as implied or hinted at in holy writ, and that one
seal is no other then the holy spirit by which those that believe, are said to
be sealed Ephesians. 1. 13. Ephesians. 4. 30. and howbeit God preaches the Gospel to us
outwardly by words, oaths, signs, and visible resemblances viz. baptism and
the supper, and this in the ministration of men, who may minister to us all
these, and set them close to our ears, and to our eyes, yet when he preaches it
to us inwardly, so fully; and firmly as by seal, he preaches it himself alone,
and though by a baptism, yet a better baptism then that of water, that is the
holy spirit, which (though the sign may be set, first, to professed believers
that are not so indeed, secondly, and this very visibly and openly to the view
of others, thirdly by men like our selves) yet first is never set to any but
believers in truth, secondly, and that secretly and indiscernably to any but
themselves that are sealed, thirdly, by none but God himself, who only sets
that baptism close to the conscience within, which baptism no man under heaven
can administer: what we set i. e. the sign may very easily be to a blank, our
ministration being liable to mistake, but what Christ sets i. e. the seal that
makes us most sure from himself, that cannot possibly be misplaced, for where
and whenever the spirit of God within is sent to bear witness, and cry Abba,
i. e. father, there and then God is a father indeed: your own selves say that
where the seal is, that soul is sure at that time, a real heir, and from that
time forth say you also for ever, and so say I, if that soul continue for ever,
cleaving to the Lord, not quenching, resisting, or so grieving that holy
spirit, as to cause it to depart for ever (for if so there is another tale told
you from several Scriptures, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Heb. 6. 4. 5. Heb. 10 29.)

But if it be so as you say, that Gods seal seals up none but such as are both
true heirs by faith at present, and must necessarily abide so for ever, then
first here is an Argument (ad hominem) how ever, i. e. an evidence to you out of
your own mouths, that your baptism is none of Gods seal, since it is set by you
not only to 1000s that after it fall from him, but indeed to 1000s that never
knew him their father, nor never will. I again therefore once more for all
(that I may not trouble my self with them, when I meet them in other places)
protest against these your expressions of circumcision and baptism by the name
of seals, Gods seals of the Gospel Covenant etc. first as none of mine,
wheresoever you are found fathering them on me, as p. 6. 7. 14. Secondly as
none of Gods expressions, though (I know not how many times ore viz. p. 4. 6.
7. 8. 13. 14.) you aver the ordinances to be Gods seals, and father that very
phrase on God himself, who as he uses not such a phrase, when he speaks of
those foolish things (as the world counts them 2 Cor. 1.) which he chooses as
his outward witnesses, shows, signs and love tokens from himself to us, so he
uses no such tools indeed as these Instrumental signs are, when he ministers
himself, for these he appoints men to minister in; these are the instruments of
the foolish sheapherds Zach. 11. 15. even the outward instruments which God
has chosen for the under sheapheards to act by, he uses none of these I say as
his own seal and inward witness, for that's no less then the holy spirit,
which whattypes, shows and signs of the Gospel Covenant soever there have bin
outwardly both before and since the Gospel begun, has bin, is and ever shall
be the only earnest that God has given, the only witness that him self has
used, the only seal that he has set in any age, whether before the law, or
under the law, or under the Gospel, Psalm. 51. 11. 12. Ephesians. 1. 13. 4. 30. 2 Cor.
5. 5. Romans 8. 15. 23.

So having removed the rubbish of rude expression, with which your last
argument was clouded, and not a little over loaded (as you delivered it) I come
now to consider it nakedly as it lies substantially enough comprised in these
expressions viz.

Under the law circumcision was by Gods appointment dispensed to little
infants, Ergo under the Gospel baptism must be to infants also, or else the
Gospel Covenant is worse to the spiritual seed of Abraham now, then it was to
his carnal seed under the law.

This is in short the plain sense and ordinary way of urging this argument.

By way of Answer to which let me be so bold first as to ask you this one
question viz. why you stand so stiffly to have baptism dispensed so strictly
after the manner of circumcision, and yet stray and vary your very selves from
the fashion of that administration in a manner as much as any men in the world?
for verily though the way of circumcision be that you stickle for, yet you
stragle from it, and as to the very subject it self, vary from it as much as in
any thing else; if that be the rule after which men must baptize (as you plead)
why then do ye not baptize (for so they circumcised)

First only males, and no females?

Secondly all male servants upon the masters single faith, as well as male
cchildren on the fathers?

Thirdly, on the eighth day only, and neither sooner nor later, nor one day
before it nor behind it?

Fourthly, by the hands of parents, fathers, Mrs. Mothers, as well as by the
hands of the Priests only?

Fifthly, any where viz: at home or abroad, in Inns or other places, as
occasion is, but only or for the most part in your great stone houses? for
this is both the liberty and the bondage of your late directory, that baptism
must be dispensed by a Minister only, not in any case by a private person,
much less by a mother, or any woman.

Secondly, in the places of public worship only, not in private places or
privately.

Thirdly, on any day, not specifying he eighth, so it be not unnecessarily
delayed.

Fourthly, to any child whether male or female for ought you express to the
contrary, if so be the parent be a believer.

Fifthly, to no man servant so far as I find on the masters belief, though a
Christian may chance to hire into his house an Indian or infidel: when as its
most notoriously known that thus it was then viz. that not the public Priests
only in the public places, but masters might and must circumcise all their
male servants, fathers or mothers their male infants, on the eighth day only,
and that either at home (as Abraham in his house Genesis 17.) or any where else
(as Zipporah at an Inn Exodus 4. 24. 25. 26.)

O the prodigious proling that you Priests make from your own pattern! how
crookedly close do you keep to your own copy? there are about some seven
several modifications of actions, in respect of which one may be said to differ
from, or be like another, which for memories sake are coucht altogether in this
verse of interrogatories.

Quis? quid? ubi? qualis? quando? quibus auxiliis? cur?

In all which if inquisition be made, how far forth your baptism and
circumcision do agree or differ, though you contend or rather pretend them to
be like one another in each, yet we shall find a deep disparity between them in
no less then all.

First, if we ask (as de subjecto) this question quis? who is the true subject
of circumcision, who of your baptism, yea even your own so circumcision-like
baptism (much more that baptism which is rightly dispensed) how far is the one
diverse from the other? though this is one of the main things wherein you
profess they must be alike, for that (as I showed before) did belong to males
only, this you dispense to females also; that to the natural infants of the
Jews though the parents were known to be unbelievers (for Joshua circumcised
the seed of all those murmurers that were cut off for unbelief) this (as to no
natural infants at all by right, no not to the Jews infants) so by your own
confession, not to any infants whose parents are unbelievers, whereby you may
see that as the law is changed, so there is a plain change also in the subjects
of these two ordinances circumcision and baptism not only as we, but as you
your selves contend to have baptism dispensed, for as only so all the male
children of the Jews both might and must be circumcised though their parents
were never such wicked unbelievers, but even your selves say the Jews seed are
all cut off from baptism and the Gospel Church, because their parents are un
believers; both all the Jews and their males might be circumcised though none
of them believed, while that Covenant of circumcision stood, merely as they
were of the stock of believing Abraham, but might not be baptized when the
Gospel Covenant began in John's Baptism upon that account, unless they now
believed in their own persons though they were of the stock of Abraham still as
much as ever, nor may to this day in your own opinions.

Secondly, if (as to the nature, matter and essential form or being of the
Rites themselves) we ask the question quid? what circumcision was, and what
your baptism? how far do they differ? the one being a cutting off the foreskin
of the flesh, the other a wetting of the foreskin of the face only with a few
drops of water, no more like it then chalke's like cheese.

Thirdly if, as to the place where, we ask the question ubi? where circumcision
was dispensed, and where your selves say baptism ought to be? how greatly does
your manner of baptism differ from it? and how much more then ours? for
circumcision might be dispensed any where but in the Temple, where I find not
they were to be brought at all till circumcised, as Christ himself Luke 2. 21,
22. but your Rantism no where else by appointment but in your Temples; herein I
say our baptism squares more with it than yours, who pretend so much to baptize
after the manner of it, for all places are to us alike, where there is
convenience of water enough to baptize in, and therefore we must except the
Font and Basin.

Fourthly, if, as to the quality, special properties, uses, ends and offices of
these two dispensations, the question be asked in quale quid? what were the
special properties, purposes, uses, ends, and offices of these two several
administrations? what things persons were specially obliged to by them? what
was specially signified to persons in them? and such like how little do these
look each like the other? for circumcision tied men to the observation of a
certain carnal, cumbersome, costly service, Law, Priesthood, in order to their
inheriting the Earthly Canaan, which all are now clean changed and confiscate,
but baptism, as dispensed by us according to the word, binds to the observation
of another Law, and the voice of another Law giver, High Priest, and Prophet
Christ Jesus, whom Moses spoke of, and God has now raised up accordingly, and
this in order to a future enjoiment of a heavenly inheritance typed out by the
other; and as for your rantism it ties to neither this nor that, but to a
certain service, and law of Ordinances, and Gospel, and Church posture, and
priesthood of man's own making, which one knows not well what to make of, nor
what part of speech to call it but a participle, for it takes part of the Law
and part of the Gospel, and is neither perfectly, but patcht up out of both by
the politic power of the Priesthood, so as it may make most for the peoples
painted piety, and their own pay together, in order to their labor for their
pains Mat. 15. 9.

Again, Circumcision pointed as a type indeed at the circumcision of the heart
but as a sign so it signified a promise of outward felicity in Canaan, and that
Christ should come of Abraham after the flesh, etc. true baptism signifies the
death, burial, and resurrection of Christ, and remission of sins by his being
crucified, and such things as were no ways resembled by the other, your
rantism just nothing.

Fifthly, if as to the time of those two services, the question be asked Quando?
when circumcision, and when your baptism are by right to be dispensed? how
miserably do you your selves miss of hitting right with it here too? though it
be a main matter you intimate to us your imitation of circumcision in,
circumcision being punctually to be performed on the eighth day, true baptism
not till the day wherein persons appear to believe withal their heart, and so
not in any infancy at all but the infancy of our faith, and even your rantism,
though in infancy, as circumcision was, yet on what day you please besides the
8th, sometimes after a fourt'night, or a month, and sometimes at the half year
or years end.

Sixthly, if, as to the administrator, it be ask quibus auxiliis? by whose
hands these ordinances are to be administered? how different are they?
circumcision being dispensed by the Master, Father, or mother, but as for
baptism (as you dispense it at least) none but men in holy orders are to
administer it, in which you go not only besides the Gospel which records
Ananias, and Philip dispensing baptism, who were but gifted disciples, and
neither of them in any orders to the ministry, save that Philip was in office
as a Deacon to look to the poor, by virtue of which Deaconship if you
Presbyters judge (as the Bishops did before you) that Philip baptized, and not
rather by his Discipleship, I deem you will dote at last as much as they; but
also besides the Law you live by.

Seventhly, if (as to the account and warrant) it be demanded Cur? why they
circumcised infants, and why you baptize them? how far do you fall short of the
Jews in this also? for they had express precept, and institution to circumcise
infants over and over again repeated in Moses Testament, besides the president
of Abraham's own family the self same day wherein the command was given to
circumcise all the males at eight days old, whereas if that which we call the
New Testament, be indeed the Register of Christ's will there is, as is confess
by the most ingenuous of your coat, witness Mr. Hunton at a public dispute at
Warbleton in Sussex, neither one plain precept, nor so much as one president of
such a matter as baptizing infants: God never appointed such a thing, neither,
to speak in that figure in which God speaks of himself Ier. 19. 5. came it at
all into his mind.

So like are circumcision, your rule for baptism, and your baptism which yo^
profess to act in by that rule of circumcision, that to say the truth your run
ou^ from your rule in every line you write after it, so that I much wonder that
you above all men should argue baptism comes in the room of circumcision, so
that they are both as one, and the one must be ordered after the example of the
other, who in your baptism come no nearer circumcision then so. For verily they
meet one another very little nearer then in that general denomination of a sign
or token of a Covenant, in which the Rainbow may be said to be like them both.
That two things should be one thing, for so with you your Rantism and
circumcision are, and yet be adequate well-nigh in nothing is riddle me what is
this with a witness.

And by all this we may see how forcible your Argument is that is drawn from
the Analogy of baptism with circumcision, which Argument your Dr. Featly says
may be truly called, in regard of the Anabaptists, Pons Asinorum, a bridge
which these asses could never pass over, for to this day they could never, nor,
quoth he, hereafter will be ever able to yield a reason, why the children of
the faithful under the Gospel are not as capable of baptism, as they under the
law of circumcision p. 40. but by your leave, through whom that Doctor being
dead yet speaks, the Dialogy and discrepation that is between, not only your
Rantism, as is above mentioned, but also the true-baptism and circumcision, is
such a reason to the contrary, as all the Classes of Clergy men combind
together in one Synodicall Convention, will never be able clearly to refute as
long as they breath.

As therefore to the Argument of yours which I am now in hand with, I come now
directly to deny the consequence thereof, for it follows not in any wise that
because circumcision was by Gods appointment dispensed to little infants
therefore baptism must be so now, and that not only for those many reasons
above specified, but even for this also, because God did appoint that
circumcision should be dispensed to infants under the Law; but did never
appoint any such thing as that baptism should be dispensed to infants under
the Gospel, nor is there the least tittle in all the Testament of Christ
tending to the manifestation of one crumb of commission for that matter.

Babist.
What you jest is not Mat. 28. 19. commission plain enough to baptism infants,
where all nations are bid to be discipled and baptized?

Baptist.
That very Scripture which is commonly conceived by you, and consequently
urged as Christ's commission to baptize infants, so plainly commissionates the
very contrary, that if some self interest or other had not besotted you
besides the true sense of the spirit in that place, you could not be so
abominably absurd as to argue infants baptism from s^as you do, for to say
nothing here, as anon happily I shall, of the contradictorie doings that is
among your prime penmen and patrons of infant-sprinkling in their verdicts
about this place, some ventring to draw it in to the vindicating of that
foppery, some, seeing they cannot thus maintain it, willing enough to let it ly
dead, supposing themselves pretty well apaied from this place, if they can but
barely evade the receiving of bangs from it; and therefore will not be too
busy with it themselves, but are content to assert no more then this from it,
that it is no prohibition of infants baptism.

Of this sort is Dr. Holmes, who p 7. of his Animadversions, disclaimes it to
be Christ's commission to the Apostles, and D^ Featley, who, howbeit he is so
bold as to mention it as Christ's command for baptizing of infants, and to argue
from it as such p. 39. yet in answer to Mr Cornwell, asserting infant baptism
to be against Christ's commission Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15, 16. professes, that
there is no mention at all of infants in either of those texts, much less a
prohibition to baptize them p. 62. among those that assault us from this place
Dr Featley and M^ Marshall are the Chrieftanes and this is the common way of
argumentation from it, viz.

All nations are to be baptized.

But children are of the Nations.

E^go, etc.

To this purpose your approved D Featley argues, but as falsely as a man can
likely do: whose Syllogism is this p. 39. viz.

That which extends to all Nations belongs to children as well as men, for
childern are a great part if not the half of all nations.

But Christ's command of baptizing extends to all nations, Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16.
15. 16.

Ergo Christ's command of baptizing belongs to children and they ought to be
baptized as well as men.

On this wise also Mr Marshall reasons in his answer to Mr. Tombs p. 214. by
way of repetition of what he more largely delivered in his Sermon, viz.

In every nation the children make a great part of that Nation, and they are
always included under every administration, whether promises, or threatenings,
privileges, or burdens, mercies, or judgments, unless they be excepted.

Much after the same sort also does Mr. Blake express himself, p. 20. of his
birth privilege concerning Mat. 28. 19. viz.

The words there comprize infants, they are no more excluded then men at years,
serving to make up a Nation as well as parents, the infants of any nation make
a part of the nation.

But who would think such goodly geer as this should manifest it self to the
whole world, as a fruit of the most serious meditations of men so eminently
polemical as they by the Clergy are esteemed to be in their several Tracts in
this point, and that it should pass without the least item of correction for
it, from any one of their brethren, who rather seem all to consent to, then
contradict them? However I shall make as serious Examen of it as I can.

First, then is it so Sirs, that what ever administration extends to all
nations belongs to infants therein, as well as men, so that they are no more
excluded, from it, then men at years? how is it then that preaching the Gospel,
and prayer with laying on of hands for confirmation, for the spirit, which Dr
Holmes dotes was dispensed to these infants that were brought to Christ, and
therefore much more baptism in infancy, and as a proof thereof brings testimony
that it was never used in the primitive times to be dispensed till past
infancy; how is it (I say) that these, and also fellowship in the supper are by
your very selves denied to belong to infants in infancy? what is the reason
that you exclude infants here? are not these privileges belonging to men, why
then (if yours and Mr Marshalls assertion be true) not to infants as well as
men? are they not mercies, administrations, merciful administrations of God,
extended to all nations? yea is not preaching an administration to every
creature that extends not to infants? and yet (saving Mr Marshals cunning
insertion of this clause (unless they be excepted) whereby to salve his
proposition, from default of falsity, though thereby he renders it plainly
uslesse to his purpose) are infants any where by name excepted from any one of
these administrations, any more then they are from baptism it self? yea is it
not an administration of God extending to all nations that persons should work,
or else not eat, in which infants are not included, for then must they starve,
and yet no where at all excepted? yea he that believes and is baptized shall
be saved, he that believes not shall be damned; Christ is the Author of
eternal salvation to all them that obey him; Christ shall com^ in flaming
fire, taking vengeance on all them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel;
be that confesses me before men, him will I confess before my father which is
in heaven; he that denies me shall be denied; whosoever is ashamed of me and
of my words of him will I be ashamed; he that denies not himself, and takes
not up his cross daily and follows me; and hates not his father and mother,
and his own life, and all that he has, cannot be my disciple; him shall ye
hear in all things whatsoever be says unto you, and whosoever hears not his
voice shall be cut off from among his people: if any man love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, (...) him be Anathema Maranatha, repent and be baptized, and an
hundred such like, are not these Gods Gospel-administrations of duties,
promises, threatenings, privileges, burdens, mercies, judgments extended to
all nations, from which infants are not excepted? and yet do these include and
comprize infants as much as men at years? or are infants excluded by express
exception from any of these, any more then from that one amongst the rest viz.
the duty and ordinance of baptism? how then dare you aver so peremptorily, so
universally that every administration that extends to all nations, belongs
to infants as well as men? yea (that I may shame and silence you in this out of
your own sayings) some of you, namely Mr. Marshal perceiving that if you grant
that Infants did eat the passover it will follow from that to their eating the
supper, as well as from their circumcision of old to the baptism of them now,
do assert that infants did not eat the passover, yet was not the passover an
administration to the nation of Israel, from which infants were never excepted?
and if so, how then can your other sayings be true, that every administration
that extends to the nations, belongs to infants as well as to persons at
years, unless they be somewhere excepted?

Babist.
We mean not of a formal exception, but a vertuall exception, an exception in
effect at least infants must have, or else be supposed as included under every
administration that is given to the nations, and thus infants are excepted from
all those last mentioned precepts, promises, threats etc. forasmuch as it is
most notoriously known they are not capable to do the things upon the
performance, or nonperformance of which those mercies and Judgments are
promised and threatened, for they cannot hear Christ's voice, nor know, nor love,
nor obey him, nor deny themselves, nor hate their lives, nor confess him, nor
deny him, and whereas it is said that if any will not work let him not eat,
infants must necessarily be understood to be excepted there, though not by
name, because they cannot work, and so (unless excepted) must perish by Gods
appointment for want of food; so concerning eating at the supper, Infants are
excepted, not expressly, yet implicitly, and in effect in those words, let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat, because there is that required in order
to eating there viz. self examination, discerning the Lords body and blood
which infants cannot do.

Baptist.
It Is very true, they are excepted from all these as you say implicitly, and in
effect, though not expressly, but then (let it be considered) is there not as
fair, and as clear an exception of them from baptism, as from any of these, or
in particular as from that service of the supper? in as much as there is that
required in order to baptism which infants can no more do, then they can do
what is required to the supper? viz. to believe with all the heart, Act. 8. 37.
and to be discipled i, e, to be taught, and to learn the Gospel Mat. 28. 19. If
any should ask this question, what hinders why I may not eat the supper? you
would answer thus, if thou examinest they self thou may eat of that bread,
and drink of that cup: so when the Eunuch enquired of Philip, what hinders why
I may not be baptized? he answers him in the very same viz. if thou believe
with all thy heart thou may: for whoever shall say these answers viz. let a
man examine himself, and so he may eat, let a man believe with all his heart,
so he may be baptized, or if thou examinest thy self thou may eat, or if
thou believe with all thy heart thou may be baptized, are not the self
same in sense and signifification, shall never go for a wise man more with me,
and whoever shall say that the phrase of Philip to the Eunuchs question, what
hinders why I may not? viz. if ^hou believe with all thy heart thou may be
baitized, is as not exceptive of infants from baptism, as that phrase of Paul,
let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, is exceptive of infants from the
supper, can seem no other to me then one, whose reason is basely captivated to
some carnal interest or other, yea the word (...) Act. 8. 37. does full as much
(if not more) imply an unlawfulness of their admission to baptism, that
believe not with all the heart as the word (...) 1 Cor. 11. 28. does imply an
unlawfulness of their admission to the supper, who do not first examine
themselves, what ever exception therefore ye can find in the word of infants
from the supper, the self same will I find of infants from baptism, and what
ever ground of admission to baptism you shall find there for them, the same
will I bring for their admission to the supper.

Babist.
Those places where its said if thou believe thou may, he that believes
and is baptized, repent and be baptized, go teach and baptize, imply only an
unlawfulness of baptizing persons at years without instruction, belief, and
repentance, and are phrases that relate to such only, and not to infants, who
may notwithstanding any thing to the contrary there exhibited, be baptized
without any of these.

Baptist.
So you use to say still indeed of these Scriptures, that they speak of persons
at age and not in nonage, and so say I too, but I wonder then where are the
Scriptures that speak of infants baptism? if all the places of Scripture that
speak of baptism at all, speak only of the baptism of adult ones (and so you
are fain to confess they do when we come to examine them one after another,
yea I remember that at two public disputes, when we have put you to assign
what Scripture infant baptism is commanded in Mat. 28. 19. has bin nominated
as your warrant, out of which when it has been plainly proved that Christ
commands no more in that place to be baptized, then such whom he commands also
first to be instructed, reply has been made to this purpose viz. that Christ
there requires that such as are capable of instruction should be instructed
first, but that hinders not why infants may not be baptized before instruction)
but if so I say I wonder still where that place is that warrants it that
infants may be baptized at all, si^h you are fain to confess that that phrase
go teach and baptize, yea even you your selves sometimes, who just before
assigned it as the warrant for infant baptism, that it speaks only of persons
capable to be taught, and not of infants.

As you say therefore that these places speak of the baptism of men and women
only that are capable to learn, believe and repent, and not exclusivly of
infants, because they are not capable to do those things, who yet may be
bap^ized for all that, so I say of these words, let a man examine himself, and
so let him eat, they imply an unlawfulness in men and women only to eat the
supper without self-examination, but not in infants, who being not capable to
examine themselves, may (any thing to the contrary there notwithstanding) be
admitted to the supper without it: it is men and women only, and not children
who upon non-examination of themselves are excepted.

As you argue therefore that every administration to an Nation includes
infants, as well as men, unless the be excepted, and therefore they must be
baptized: I conclude the same from those premises, concerning their right to
other ordinances viz. therefore they must be preached to, therefore they must
eat the supper, two administrations given to all nations, from which infants
are no more excepted then from baptism. As therefore you take it for an
implicit exception of infants from the supper, in that they cannot perform what
is required in that place to the receiving of it, i. e. not examine themselves,
nor discern the Lords body, though by name they are not excepted, so (if you be
not partial) your own consciences will compel you to take it for at least as
implicit an exception of infants from baptism, in that they are no way capable
to perform those things which are required of persons in order to their
admission to baptism in other places viz. nor to believe with all tbe heart,
nor to confess ^in, nor amend their lives, nor repent, nor call on the name of
the Lord, all which were required of adult ones that come to baptism, as we see
Mat. 3. Act. 2. Act. 8. Act. 22. and also in the Rubric where it being asked
what is required of persons to be baptized? answer is made thus, viz.
repentance whereby they forsake sin: and faith whereby they steadfastly believe
the promises of God made to them in that sacrament, though by name they be not
excepted in any of these places.

Your cui signatum ei signum nisi obstet etc. your thredbare Argument viz. to
whom the thing signified belongs to them the sign, unless there be some
impediment or in capacity to perform what is required in order to the receiving
of the sign, if it had one farthing worth of force in it to give infants
access to baptism, would equally avail to give them access to the supper, if
we were minded in good earnest to plead their right to both, in evidence of
which I shall argue upon you with your own Argument, thus

To whom the thing signified belongs, to them the sign also belongs, unless
there be some exception or incapacity to perform what is required to the
receiving of the sign.

But the thing signified in the supper which is the same that's signified in
baptism viz. Christ and his benefits belongs to infants, and there is no more
exception of them from it, them from baptism, nor more incapacity in them to
perform that which is required to the supper, then there is in them to perform
what is required to baptism.

Ergo if they may receive the outward sign of baptism, they may receive the
outward sign of the supper also.

But in truth as they are no more capable of one of these signs then the other,
so are they in very dead both incapable of, and plainly enough alike excepted
from both.

Secondly, is it so Sirs, that infants being a great part (if not the Major
part) of all nations must therefore be baptized, because its said baptize all
Nations, unless they had been excepted, then I answer again, if you mean thus,
viz unless they had been some way or other (at least vertually or implicitly
excepted) then infants are most manifestly and clearly excepted in this very
text it self, Mat. 28. 19. if there were no other in all the Scripture to
exclude them: for first though that be Christ's commission and direction to his
disciples whom to baptize, yet there is no mention

at all of children, nor yet in Mark 16. 15. 16. where the same will of Christ
is declared in other ter^s, concerning the baptism of such as are converted to
the faith by preaching, and this Dr Featley himself more then confesses, for he
urges it with earnestness p. 62. in these words, viz. there is no mention of
children in either of these texts, and if so that there is no mention at all then
they are not implied, as both Mr. Marshal and himself (to the contradiction of
himself) affirms they are in the word Nations, for for children to be both
implied, and included in that word Nations, and yet neither to be mentioned,
nor meant therein at all, are inconsistent, and such a bo-peep as is
impossible, and if they be not so much as implied, and mentioned in the
commission they must needs be understood to be excepted and excluded.

Secondly, as there is no mention of children, so there is such a plain
limitation, and restriction of baptism to such persons, as infants in infancy
are not capable to be viz. Disciples of Christ, alias persons so taught and
instructed by the ministration of men, as to believe the Gospel, that they are
more then purblind, who discern not infants (for they are incapable to learn by
the teachings of men) to be in that place excepted: for it is said go ye and
teach all nations (...), i. e. not (...) the Nations, but (...) understood in
the verb (...), or if (...) the nations, as by the figure Synthesis, which is
oration congruae sensu non voce, I grant it may, yet not the Nations by the
lump, but (...) persons in the Nations, that are indoctrinated and instructed,
as infants cannot be, i. e. them that you have taught, and that have learnt,
and are become disciples by your teaching: it is as plain as the light, that
not any more of the Nations are here bid to be baptized, than those, even those
very individuals, that are first bid to be taught, or made disciples by man's
ministry: for the Pronoun [them] that is put after the participle [baptized]
can possibly have no other substantive then [those persons in those nations]
who ever they are, that are both capable subjects of teaching, and also
actually instructed, and discipled; it is most evident that teaching of persons
is here commanded before the baptizing them.

Babist.
The order of words, by which teaching is here set before baptizing proves
nothing, for in Mark 1. 4. that order is inverted, and baptizing set before
preaching, thus, viz. John did baptize, and preach the baptism of repentance.

Baptist.
So says Dr. Holmes indeed p. 7. and it is also a common saying among you all
but I tell yod if you were not minded more to pervert, then to preach the
Gospel, you could not be ignorant, that that inversion M^rk 1. 4. is such, as
altars not the sense so, but that it is in sense, and signification the very same
as we contend for out of Mat. 28. 19. viz. that preaching is to go before
baptizing, for though it be said there John did baptize and preach the baptism
of repentance, it must necessarily be understood thus, viz. that he preached
baptism to persons before he practiced it to them; for you cannot be so silly
sure as to imagine that John first baptized persons when they came to him,
before he opened his Mouth to tell them wherefore; yet I know one that being in
a streit, did not stick to strein himself out by such a simple saying as that,
but for all that, if that honest man who said thus (I forbear to name him least
I shame him) were as true a Minister of the Gospel, as he supposes himself to
be, and should go forth with his Gospel to a Nation as ignorant of the truth of
baptism as himself, and offer but such a small matter as his rantism, much
more so worthy, so weighty and burdensome a business to the flesh as the true
baptism is, viz. to overwhelm them in water, withour declaring to them first
for what end, and purpose, either he would show himself an Egregious and Arrant
simpleton in once conceiving they would, or they themselves but senseless
Animals, if they should so suddenly submit to him.

Moreover its apparent to any, but such as are resolved to shift off truth as
long as they can, that the same passage of Mark 1. 4. as it is recorded Mat. 3.
1. 5. Luke 3. 3. 7. shows that John first came preaching the baptism of
repentance for remission of sins, and then and thereupon people came out to him
and were baptized of him in Jordan confessing their sins.

Out of that place therefore Mat. 28. 19. which is so usually assigned by your
selves, as the main Scripture, in which Christ commands infant baptism, though
upon examination it is often asserted to be a place that neither mentions at all,
nor once meddles with infants, and that by the self same persons that so assign
it, I argue thus in disproof of them who assign it, as Christ precept for
infants baptism, and in proof that its a plain prohibition of such a thing,
viz.

If Christ there commissionates and commands his Disciples to baptize none but
the very same persons whom he commands them also first to teach, and make
disciples by teaching, then that place is a plain prohibition, and not at all a
precept to baptize infants; for men cannot teach or disciple infants.

But Christ there commissionates and commands his disciples to baptize non^ but
such as he also commands them first to teach, and make disciples by teaching.

Ergo, that place is a plain prohibition, and not at all a precept to baptiz^
infants.

The Minor, which only you can rationally require proof of, is so clear^, that
the blindest of you may see it in the text it self, where the Pronoun them,
that is governed by the participle baptizing, can possibly relate to no other
substantive, but to the self same persons that are immediately before commanded
to be taught, or made disciples, and whether you will have the substantive to
[(...)] to be [(...)] understood in the verb (...) (as when it serves your
turn, so far as to furnish your selves by comparing this place with Act 15. 10.
with matter of proof (prate I should say) for infants discipleship, you will
needs have it, for upon this account Mr. Cotton, Mr. Baxter and many more seem
to proceed) or [(...)] by the figure Synthesis (as some of you will rather have
it) it is much at a pass, yea not a strawes worth of advantage to you, take it
which way you will, for still it will amount to this, that whether you make
[(...)] to agree with [(...)] or [(...)] the nations, it is not the nations in
gross (as Dr. Holmes also tells you p. 7.) for then all must be baptized (says
he and truly too) if the word Nations, universally taken, does there note the
subjects of baptism) but it is the Nations with restriction, the nations
discipled, i. e. so many in all Nations as are first made disciples by
teaching, and not more, that there are commanded to be baptized: and this Mr.
Cotton, and Mr. Baxter, and Dr. Featley, and Dr. Holmes, and wellnigh all your
champions are well aware cannot be denied, and therefore rather then assert
such a thing, viz. that any more are here bid to be baptized, then such as are
first bid to be discipled, they choose to take so hard a province upon them, as
to proceed to the promotion of their cause by way of proof that infants are
disciples.

Babist.
In Christ's precept teaching does not go before but follow baptizing Mat. 28.
^0. teaching them to observe all things. etc.

Baptist.
So Dr. Featley fiddles this ore indeed p. 39. for these are his very words; to
which I reply, who denies that in Christ's precept preaching follows baptizing?
but what of that? does it follow, and is that the Drs. meani^g trow, that
therefore it does not go before it? me thinks the man should not be so
senseless, nor do I think he was so senseless as to think so, but the ground he
stumbles at is the new found meaning of the word (...), of which I shall be
occasioned to say more anon, only here it shall suffice to say thus much viz.
as it is clear there is a teaching to follow baptizing in Christ's precept, so it is
as clear that there is a teaching to go before, of all persons to whomsoever
baptism is dispensed, a teaching a priori, and a teaching a posteriori, the
first in order to discipleship and baptism, the other after baptism in order to
perfection, baptism is by precept to be immediately after the first, and the
other is to be by precept so immediately after baptism, that infants being
incapable of both the one and of the other, viz. of being taught just before
baptism and presently after baprism, are thereby universally excepted from it,
yea these two teachings, neither of which is to be used to infants, are to come
by precept so near together, that there is no room for infants baptism to come
in between them.

Babist.
They are not so much excepted by the words [TEACH] v. 19. and [TEACHING] ver.
20. but they are as much concluded to be the subject of baptism under the word
[All nations] because they are a great part, if not the half of all nations (as
Dr. Featley) and serve to make up a nation as well as their parents (as Mr.
Blake) and in every nation make a great part of that nation as well as their
parents, as Mr. Marshal urges.

Baptist.
As if the precept for baptizing did extend it self to all persons in every
nation without any limitation, or restriction, or any praevious preparation to
it save only barely being of the nations, Nec mediante doctrina, nec
disciplina: but is it so Sirs, then let me ask you, are not the infants of
Turks, Pagans, Tartars, Indians, Jews, unbelievers a part, yea a far greater
part, and do they not serve much more to make up the number in nations, then
the Infants of believers? why then (if that be the ground you will needs go
upon) must not these be baptized as well as the other? yea surely if this be a
good argument to prove any ones right to baptism from this place, because he is
of the nations, then stark natural fools, as well as infants, yea very professed
profa^ ones, open enemies against the name of Christ, as Turks and Pagans,
being a great part of all Nations, have as good right to baptism as any of
those you rantize, or we our selves baptize either, for shame therefore forgo
such rude kind of ratiocination.

This therefore that all Nations are bid to be baptized, cannot make Mat. 28.
19. to be a precept for baptizing infants, though they be of the Nations,
unless they were capable to be taught, which because they are not, that place
^mmanding no more to be baptized, then the same whom it commands also to be
taught, and that not only before but immediately after baptism, is a plain
prohibition of infant baptism.

A second way wherein it is argued by you that there is command in Mat. 28. 19. for
the baptizing of infants, is from their being disciples, which weak twig,
seeing your selves as it were sinking in your cause, you all catch at: yea I
meet with none of you almost, but in one place or other of your writings I find
your fortifying your selves in that foolish practice by this childish
consideration, thus does Dr. Featly, Dr. Holmes, Mr. Marshal, Mr. Bailey, Mr.
Blake, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Cook, Mr. Cotton, among all which Mr. Cotton being the
most formal and Syllogistical in his argument from this place, and beginning
his book with it (as Mr. Baxter also does, with whom I may chance to deal more
then I will do in this place before I have done) I Will begin with him and in him,
and after him, speak to you all sooner or later (as occasion is) about this
particular.

Thus then he reasons from thence.

Such as be disciples they are to be baptized..

But the children of the faithful are disciples.

Ergo the children of the faithful are to be baptized.

The former proposition is clearly expressed in the text (says he) make
disciples and baptize them, therefore all disciples are to be baptized, but had
he concluded according to mood and figure, or the tenor of this text, or had he
not been both blinded, and minded to go besides the sense of the spirit in this
place, he would have said therefore all that are first made disciples by
instruction are to be baptized, and then he had mard all his proceedings
concerning infants.

As for the second proposition which is the assertion of you all viz. That
infants are disciples, Mr. Cotton toward the proof of it so miserably
misapplies 2. pieces of Isaiah, that he rather proves himself thereby to be yet
but an infant in discipleship, and Gospel understanding then proves infants to
be disciples from thence.

The first place is Isa. 54. 13. whereby its said, by way of promise to the
Church of the New Ierusa^em, when once it shall be established a praise in all
the Earth (as it is not yet, nor ever shall be till Christ's second appearing)
when God shall wipe away all tears from her-eies, and secure her for ever from
all future sufferings, and oppressions, That all her children shall be taught
of God, and great shall be the peace of her children: from this place, which is
meant of all the Saints, and that immediate teaching which they shall once
have, he argues thus, to all the natural infants of believing parents in the
Church now, viz. if they be taught of God, then are they disciples, for that is
the meaning of the word disciples.

Disciples are taught or learned of God.

His second place is Isay. 65. 20. where its said there shall be no more
thenceforth an infant of days etc. in which place, what ere the meaning is, it
matters not a rush as to his purpose, so long as its spoken of a time that is
yet to come* Now here is such a mess of mistakes as may well make a wise man
amazed, and and make him muse whether the penman of this proof of that Minor,
that infants are disciples, and consequently to be baptized according to Mat.
28. 19. were well awake, or asleep when he set it down, concerning it I Will
propound four things to be well examined of you all,

First whether he be not egregiously mist^en in the persons to whom those
promises are made, which if they be all infants of the faithful, considered as
in their minority, then is there a mighty mist before my eyes, for really by
the b^ improvement I can make of my understanding, I can possibly ken no such
matter, nor that it is any other then the Saints, and faithful ones themselves;
even all of them, and not any of their children after the flesh, but as they
prove faithful, and do ^ome Saints in their own persons as well as their
parents.

Secondly whether he be not grossly mistaken about the time wherein these
promises are to be fulfilled, in fuller evidence of both which consider, first
as to the first Scripture, who ever they are that are there expressed by the
term [thy children] they are all and every of them without exception* partakers
of the Lords teaching, and of all the other privileges there promised, for its
said, All thy children shall be taught of the Lord etc. at that time therefore
wherein this shall be fulfilled this promise shall be performed to every
individual of those kind of persons, to whom its made, not one excepted, which
shows that it is meant only of the Saints, for they are the Churches children,
and not their natural seed, and of that time only when the New Jerusalem,
which is not yet, shall come down from God out of heaven, for so shall it then
be with all the faithful that shall inhabit that City of the Lord, whose people
are said also to be all righteous, Is. ^0. 21. but this is not performed to all
the children of the faithful now, neither are they all taught of God, with
that effectual teaching there promised, as is evident, in that many of them in
time prove reprobates, when wicked men's children prove elect.

Secondly, It is expressly showed in the 17 v. who are the persons whose portion
and heritage these privileges are, for this (says he) is the heritage of the
servants of the Lord.

As for the second place, so far is it from speaking of infants in infancy,
that it rather shows that there shall be no infant of days, i. e. that shall
die an infant, nor old man that has not filled his days in that time, but the
very child shall die an hundred years old, i. e. he shall be counted as dying
young, or a child that lives but an hundred years, so long lived shall they be
in those days, yea as the days of a tree shall be the days of my people
(says God) and mine elect shall long enjoy the works of their hands.

And as to the time when these things shall be, it is not now, but in the reign
of Christ, when the New Jerusalem shall be built with Saphirs, and all precious
stones, and when the Lord shall make the New Heavens and the New Earth, which
is not yet in being, but is looked for of all the Saints at the coming of
Christ, and the redemption of Israel (as Peter says) according to his promise,
which appears plainly by comparing Isa. 65. 17 -- 66. 2^. with 2 Pet. 3. 13,
14. and also by the last text of the two, which Mr. Cotton abuses, viz. Isa.
65. v. 20 which says this shall be from thenceforth; i. e. from the time of
Gods creating that new heavens and new earth.

Thirdly, Whether he does not most palpably depart from the matter he took
first in hand to prove unto another thing, which is no more to his purpose,
then if he had said bo to a goose; yea he runs clear away from the Scripture he
began upon and never returns to it more, as if he were afraid to come near it,
scarce ere so much as facing about, or looking behind him: for what he ought to
have cleared (but surely he thought he could not, and therefore was not minded
to meddle with it) was this, viz. that in order to being the subjects of the
baptism there injoined infants are disciples, in such a sense as is there
spoken of viz. made so by the Ministry of the word, and teaching; for says
Christ go teach all nations baptizing them, but his is not to the same, not ad
idem, but ad aliud quoddam, a certain other thing, which if he did prove (as he
does not) it could in no wise prove what he brings it in proof of, viz. that
infants of the faithful, upon the account of some uncouth, unheard of, strange,
secret sort of teaching and learning, which these infants have from God above
any other, may be truly said to be disciples, and thereupon to be baptized.

And this though it be not spoken so broadly by any as by Mr. Cotton, who makes
it his business so far as to wrest and pervert certain Scriptures into the
proof of it, insomuch that some of his fellow fighters for infant baptism are
ashamed on it and disclaim it, (witness Mr. Bailey p. 145. where, speaking of
infants being disciples, I speak not (says he) of that which diverse maintain,
viz. the application of that in Esaias to infants, they shall be all taught of
God) yet is it more tacitly hinted to be the opinion of most of you, whereupon
you attribute both discipleship, and baptism to infants, as if that were the
main thing meant in Mat. 28. 19. where Christ means no such matter as the
inward secret and unknown teachings of God, but the teachings or making
disciples to him by the Ministry of men.

Thus says Mr. Cook in his Answer to the vanity of childish baptism, p. 33.
Infants of believing parents are made disciples of God and Christ.

And Mr. Marshall in his reply to Mr. Tombs, p. 216. though they be not
capable of receiving instruction from men, yet they are capable of Gods own
teaching even in their infancy.

So Dr. Holmes p. 8. God can preach to the heart and so to children.

So Mr. Baxter, page 2^ If they can learn nothing of the parents, yet Christ
has other ways of teaching then by men, even by the immediate workings of his
spirit.

So you Ashford Disputants* p. 8. and 18. infants have an hearing the spirit
opens their ears, quo magistro, quam cito discitur, quod docet?

But Sirs first is there any Scripture that teaches you this twattle, unless
you misuse to that end those Scriptures Mr. Cotton does, that God teaches
believers infants thus?

Secondly, does it appear to you, that any one of the infants, that you
sprinkle in particular, is taught or has learned any thing of God before you
sprinkle it?

Thirdly, is it any more evident to you that all believers infants are taught
of God, then it is that unbelievers infants are taught by him? have ye not
instance, that unbelievers children, not in infancy, but so soon as ever they
are capable to learn any thing are often taught of God, and as often believers
children are not? as Iosia at eight years was taught of God, and became a
precious Saint, though the child of wicked Ammon, when all the children of this
good Iosia himself, were left untaught by him, I mean unconverted under all his
teaching.

Fourthly, if it were as sure (as the contrary is sure, for who sees any
effects of Gods teaching them from the womb, when as we see not that they know
a jo^ more then other children, till God teaches them by the instruction of
men?) were it sure I say that these infants are taught of God in infancy, yet
what is this to prove infants to be the persons commanded to be baptized in
Mat. 28. for (...) Christ does not bid them go, and make disciples to him by
Gods inward teachings, for that was more then they could perform, but he bids
them go, and disciple the Nations, and instruct them, and baptize them, i. e.
those that by there teaching are made disciples: nor is there one crumb of
commission there for their baptizing of any other: and in this sense taking the
word [disciples] his Minor is most false.

Fifthly, Let it be examined, whether the words of Mr. Cotton do not clearly
contradict sundry of your expressions about the meaning of that word [Disciple]
about which several of you not a little also contradict your selves, about
which therefore either he, or you must be mistaken: for he confesses the true
meaning of the word [Disciple] is taught, or learned, and Disciples are such as
are taught and have learned: but several of you say that Discipling is not
teaching, and breeding Scholars, or making them learned, nor to be discipled,
to be taught, or learned, but that baptizing may well be rendered a discipling,
and to make disciples, or disciple persons, is to admit Scholars, and to admit
to be taugh^.

So Mr. Marshal says he learns from certain Critics, better then Mr. Tombs,
in his reply to Mr. Tombs p. 212. 213.

So Mr. Cook p. 33. To make children disciples (says he) is to give them up
unto God, i. e. in baptism, promising to bring them up in the knowledge of God,
so soon as they shall be capable of outward teaching, so that they are ipso
facto disciples in respect of that promise, and of Gods obligation to teach
them, and such like stuff.

So Mr. Bailey p. 254. (...) is not to teach, but make disciples, i. e. to bring
to them to the School of God, the visible Church, to dedicate them to Gods
discipline to give their names up to be Gods subjects and Scholars.

So Dr. Featley p. 39. Though children in their nonage cannot be taught, yet
they may be made Christ's disciples, by being admitted into his school, their
parents giving their names to Christ, both for themselves and their fami lies.

So Mr. Baxter p. 22, 23. they say, says he, they cannot learn, but they may
enjoy the privileges of the family, and School, and be under his charge and
dominion, and that is enough to make them capable of being disciples. As if so
be when Christ commissionated his disciples to disciple N^ions, he meant not
that they should teach them; but in a sense abst^act from their own teachings,
he means thus, go and admit Scholars to be taught, b^ptide persons, and thereby
give them up to me, consecrate them to me, put them out to School to me, so
that though they cannot learn, yet they may partake of my protection and
provision, and such like confused foppery as this which to assert is un^ound,
shamefully non-sensical, and unbeseeming the judgments of any men, but such as
devote themselves (unawares) to the delusion of themselves and others.

But howbeit you are all of one mind in this, and are agreed to shu^ out
teaching from being any part of that work of making disciples unto Christ, that
you may uphold that mere tradition of admitting infants unto baptism, as if the
act of b^ptizing were ^o make persons disciples, more then the act of teaching,
yet I shall close with Mr. Cotton he^e against you all, and undertake to make
good, what he says ^owards your confutation herein, viz. that (...) true
meaning of the word [Discipl^] is one that has learned by instruction, and not
one that i^ admit^ed to be taught, before he is so much as capable to learn, as
is frivolously fained by Dr. Featley. Mr. Marshal and others: yea though Dr.
Fea^ley does shift off all teaching before baptizing, by saying that the words
of our Savior are not [(...)] but [(...)] p. 39. make disciples, not by
teaching but admitting into Christ's School, yet (to let pass his false rendering
of the word, for want of looking into his greek testament, which is not [(...)]
but (...)) I must tell all you that so adhere to him, and Mr. Marshall also,
who holds the same with him, and Criticizes out of the Rabini^ Doctors, and
Spanhemius, saying that with them (...), is not as (...) make Scholars learned
by teaching, but only to admit them to be taught, Non quia erant docti. sed ut
essent, and that [(...)] signifies not only to teach, p. 212. 213. of his
reply to Mr. Tombs.
but to make disciples* which is done (says he out of Spanhemius) by these two
actions viz, baptizing and teaching: I must tell you I say, and them and their
Cri^icks also, first if their own wo^ds were never so true, yet they make much
more for us, who deny infants to be disciples, then you, and are much more
exclusive then admissive of such younglings as you sprinkle to the name of
Scholars, disciples: for if it be but so as the Rabbis say that [(...)] be
only to admit Scholars to be taught, does it not signify much more then
infants of eight days are capable of? and were not he more simple then sober,
and well in his wits, that being a father should enter his child, or being a
(...) should entertain a child of 7 or 8 days old to be taught, whilst he is
yet, and is long like to be incapable of the least tincture of tuition? and
does he deserve to be called a Scholar himself (as to that particular, how
learned soever otherwise) who both calls and contends to have persons called
Scholars, not only before they have learned ever a letter, but some years
before they are capable to be taught a ^ittle: as for circumcision which was so
timely dispenst, its intent was not to admit the subjects to be taught, as Mr.
Marshal vainly contends, saying that they were then discipled when circumcised
i. e. then first initiated and admitted immediately to be taught, but somewhat
else (as I have showed above) for when it was dispenst to infants it was set to
a subject utterly incapable to be taught, and when to grown men, that subject
was to be instructed before it; and as for baptism to which from circumcision
Mr. M^rshall analogically argues the same, that is not by intent and
institution the first admission of persons to be taught, though persons are to
be further taught after it in other doctrines, Act. 2, 42. Mat. 28. 20. but it
was one of these doctrines of Christ it self which was to be taught before
dispensed, and as it were a certain sermon, wherein the person submitting is to
be instructed and showed many precious things viz. Christ dead, buried, and
raised while dispensed, and though it is one of the six principles, or first
doctrines of Christ that is to be preached, believed and practiced by new born
babes, and (I (...) not in your sense but another) by beginners in Christ's
School, yet is it not the first among the six in order, but the third, to which
two other Doctrines, viz. faith and repentance ought to be Antecedent, Heb. 6.
1. 2. 3. Act. (...). 38. Mark. 1. 15. Mark. 16. 15, 16.

And if it be so as Mr. Marshall says Spanhemius affirms, giving go^d reason
(though its but bald reason as I shall show by and by) for his Analysis viz.
that [(...)] to m^ke disciples does not signify simply to teach, for the^
there would be found Tautology in Christ's words, because he repeats teaching
again after baptizing, but to baptize and teach both, so as that Christ's
meaning is this (as he says) viz. go and make me disciples out of all nations
by baptizing and teaching, and so as that this business of making disciples is
to be accomplished or attained by two, and not under these two actions at least,
viz. baptizing and teaching (as he says it is) then let all the world judge,
whether infants be not still by that opinion as incapable to be made disciples
as before, for whether [(...)] to make disciples be a matter, or end attainable
simply by that one action of ^eaching only, or whether not under these two
mediums viz. baptizing and teaching both, still no men in the world are able to
make infants of a few da^es old disciples, for howbeit they are capable to have
one of these actions acted on them viz. to be baptized; yet till they come to
years they cannot be instructed or taught, ^ill when (as Spanhemius says well)
the end of making them disciples is not attained.

By those very testimonies therefore, whereby Mr. Marshall would prove infants
to be disciples (o how is the understanding of the prudent brought to naught)
that infants are not capable to be made disciples in Christ's sense and present
'Dialect, he has in print proved it to the world, and that for ever.

Moreover what if notwithstanding all that Mr. Marshal and his curious Critics
conceive, his Rabinick phrases (as he calls them) viz. his [(...)] and his
[(...)] which are in sense the same, be both found to signify otherwise then
his learned Spanhemius, and reve^end Rabbis do render them? viz. not merely to
admit to be taught, much less to disciple one barely by baptizing (as Mr.
Marshall would persuade us, quite contrary to his own quotation out of
Spanhemius, in this very application of it, for Spanhemius says (and so ^e
quotes him) that to disciple is to baptize, and teach both, but he that
baptizing only is discipling) I say what if they be found to signify neither
baptizing only, nor baptizing and teaching both, nor admitting one by baptism
to be taught, or consecrating, or initiating into Christ's School by baptism, or
any such like thing, as you Divines dream on, but rather mainly, if not only,
the acts of teaching and instructing persons, till they have learned what is
taught them, abstract from the acts of baptizing, and admitting into the
Church? will it not appear much more plainly then, that infants are not capable
to be made disciples? and yet to the contradiction of Mr. Marshal, and all the
rest, Mr. Cotton declares this to be his opinion, viz. that the true meaning of
the word [disciple] is taught or learned: or if Mr. Cotton may not be credited,
if Mr. Marshall will take Christ's own word for it, which is more worth then
either Mr. Cottons, or those Rabbis, and from whose use of the word, and not
theirs, its best to be understood^, [(...)] is to make disciples before
baptism, and not by it, and (though baptism is necessitate praecepti, and for
many ends viz. the visibility of the thing to others, and fuller evidence of
things believed to themselves, ^ssarily and immediately to follow after i^) to
teach an instruct men in the Gospel, for th^re can be no other way of making
disciples but this of teaching, assigned as Antecedent to baptism: and in proof
that that phrase so signifies in Scripture, see John 4. 1. where its said of
Christ, (...) i. e. he makes and baptizeth more disciples then John, which
phrase [(...)] you see by the conjunction copulative [(...)] is set down as a
distinct action from [(...)] he made disciples and then baptized them,
therefore he did not make them by baptizing them, but by something he acted
toward them before viz. by preaching and instruction so it must be, for else,
if you talk of tautology, here had been t^utology in the Ev^ngelists words
indeed, for if he had said thus, viz. he made or baptized (as it must have
been, if the words [he made Di^ciples and baptized] had been Synonimaes, in
sense just one and the same) then you had had some color for your conception,
but since he says he made Discipes and baptized them, it shows plainly that he
made them before he baptized them, and that these two words [(...)] and [(...)]
are not one and the same in signification, for then there had been tautology in
using them bot^, and though the expression be different yet the sense is no
other then if i^ were said thus, viz. Jesus baptized, and baptized more than
John.

I appeal also to your own consciences, whether what Christ speaks in this very
text we are yet upon, viz. Mat. 28. 19. by the participle [(...)] may not
without any violation of the sense, be read imperatively by the verb [(...)]
thus viz. teach all Nations, and baptize them, and if so whether [(...)] and
[(...)] would be terms equipollent in that praecept, and if so whether it wete
not tautology to say (as in sense you would make Christ to say there) go and
baptize all Nations, and baptize them, and little better then such vain
repetition is it though you read it by the participle, if [(...)] to disciple
be rende^ed to baptize, and (Retro) baptizing may well be rendered discipling
(as Mr. Marshall says it may) for then at the best it is but thus, viz. go and
b^ptize the Nations, baptizing them, which kind of geminations, though they are
not more frequent, then elegant in the Hebrew tongue, yet are but tautology in
your own judgments among the Greeks: Besides that [(...)] (...) to make
disciples is to teach persons till they have learned, and nothing else
(properly taken) is plain to any that considers what these substantives
signify, and the several roots, from whence they are derived, in the several
tongues to which they appertain, for as [(...)] in the H^brew comes of (...)
didicit, and ^s rendered dis^ens ab alio, and used in Scripture for one that
learns, and is actually under teaching, 1 Chronicles. 25. 8. so [(...)] in the Greek
is of [(...)] disco, and signifies the very same, viz. one that learnes at
least, and is so used in Scripture, yea so necessary is it to learn the
commands of Christ, in order to the being his Disciples, that he himself
professes whoever has not learned to bear his cross* and follow him (which
infants cannot do, and yet may b^ sav^d nevertheless (dying infants) these
things being not required of infanc^ as neither to be Christ's disciples or to
learn of him) cannot be his disciple: which term disciple comes also of the
Latin word [disco] to learn, and signifies one l^arning, and is never used in
Scripture for any other, yea further that [(...)] does (contrary to what Mr.
Marshall, and his Critics say it does in M^t. 28.) signify elsewhere, if not
every where else simply and only to teach, is to be seen by Christ's own usage
of i^ in other places, for speaking in the passive Mat. 11. 29. viz. learn, or
beye taught of me, for I am meck etc. he has this very phrase in the Greek,
viz. [(...)] so John 6. 46. [(...)] every one that has learned, so sa^es Paul
Phil. 4. 11. [(...)] But if you will not learn of Christ and Paul, yet be
pleased to learn this one from another, that [(...)] in that place, M^t. 28.
signifies only a general teaching, for if either you that follow Dr. Featley
who says [(...)] is not teach, or Mr. Bailey* or Mr. (...) (who above all the
rest has most reason to hearken to Dr. Holmes, since he mannageth the very same
cause of infant baptism with him, and that against the very same Antagonist Mr.
Tombs) will but consult Dr. Holmes p. 7. he tells you that as [(...)] is ver.
19. so [(...)] ver. 20. therefore most likely in v. 19. it signifies only a
general teaching, and this he says not of his own head, but out of as great
Critics, as Mr. Marshall quotes to the contrary, viz.

Legh Crit. S. Novar. in Matthew. 28. 20. The great Arias, who renders it only
[docete] teach. So the Renowned Vatablus. So the Sir. (...) and the Arab.
(...). So many other which for brevitie he omits.

See also his Alphabetical Index in the Letter D, where he says that [go
teach] is not rendered to disciple, or make disciples by the Arabic, Syriack,
and Saint Mark, or the exactest Latins, or by the best translations of the new
Testament in French, Dutch, Germain, Hebrew, another Sir. Italian Margin, or by
the holy spirit, which (says he) p. 8. renders this text (meaning Mat. 28. 19.
and that term [(...)] by plain [(...)] preach the Gospel Mark 16. 15. much
more in proof that [(...)] cannot be any other than teach, he has p. 8. and
all this over again p. 102. yea so (says he) the Great Critics, or learned
men in the Greek tongue say, that [(...)] is to teach them that are strangers
to doctrine, that they may become diseiples, [(...)] to teach them that are
Disciples so say we that are no Critics, viz. that there is a first general
teaching to acquaint persons with the Gospel, which when once they believe, and
are baptized, there is a second teaching to bring them on toward perfection;
by all which, though the words of Christ, who says go teach, baptizing,
teaching, are vindicated from tautology, yet you will never be vindicated from
the fault of flat Antalogy, or contradiction among your selves, who quote
Criticism against Criticism to the overthrowing and falsifying of one another
opinions, and principles, and all this in edification of the same practice of
infants sprinkling, which must needs be believed to be a good one, when in
prosecution of it, O Woman that ridest and misguidest the Nations, thou art so
contrary to thy self, some saying that [(...)] Mat. 28. signifies only to
teach; some to Disciple not by teaching, but baptizing, or admitting to be
taught; some to make disciples by both these actions not either of them alone,
viz. teaching and baptizing; some arguing thus viz. infants are disciples, and
therefore they must be b^ptized, as Mr. Cotton, and Mr. Baxter, Mr. Bailey, Dr.
Holmes, Dr. Featley, Mr. Blake, Mr. Marshall, and who not? some again thus,
viz. that they must be baptized, and thereby made disciples, as Mr. Marshall,
Mr. Baxter, and others of you, who tell us that by baptism they must be
discipled, i. e. entered and admitted into Christ's School that they may be
taught: O pure round abouts! for thus it runs up and down in your writings,
viz. that they are not made disciples but by these two actions, baptizing, and
teaching, and yet to go round again, they cannot be taught, nor made disciples
in that way of teaching, and learning, but must be discipled by baptizing; and
yet to go round again, infants of believers are disciples, and upon the account
of their being so are to be baptized.

Lastly, as to tha^ frivilous flim slam from Acts 15. 10. into the blind belief
of which you are all indoctrinated, and discipled one by another (for there is
scarce any of you that write but you have a touch on it, witness Mr. Cotton p.
7. Mr. Marshall in his Sermon p. 39. in his reply to Mr. Tombs p. 217. Mr.
Bailey p. 145. Mr. Baxter p. 15. Dr. Holmes himself, that denies utterly that
they are bid to be discipled in Mat. 28. p. 7. yet asserts that in Acts 15. 10.
infants of believers are called Disciples p. 8.

I shall say a little to your folly in that also, and so leave you to consider
it at your leisure. And because Mr. Marshall is the main man I had last in
hand, and the man that frames the most formal argument from that Scripture,
whereby to prove infants to be disciples, i will single out what he says, and see
what may be said in answer to it, and in him you will all stand or fall in this
particular: the form in which he reasons Sermon. p. 39. is this.

Babist.
All they upon whose necks those false teachers would have put the yoke of
circumcision are called disciples.

But they would have put the yoke of circumcision upon infants as well as grown
men.

Ergo infants as well as grown men are called disciples, and to be called so.

Baptist.
The Minor which is so undeniable that it needs no proof (for who denies, but
that they who taught the brethren or disciples at Antioch, would have put
circumcision upon the necks of their male infants as well as of themselves? for
after the manner of Moses, though not of Christ, so it was to be) he falls pell
mell upon the proof of that, but as for the Major which is so palpably, and
apparently false that it needs no disproof, that (says he) is undeniable, and
so he slides away without once offering to make any proof of it at all.

I shall therefore show you how plainly he perverts the text, how false his
foundation or Major proposition is, and consequently how rotten and weak his
whole building.

That Scripture hints only thus much to us viz. that they would have put the
yoke of circumcision upon the necks of the disciples, out of which, but how
inconsequently a very Idiot may understand, he publishes this proposition viz.
All they upon whose necks they would have put the yoke of circumcision were
called disciples, but what monstrous solaecism, what ignorant incongruity is to
be seen in these two sentences, if laid together? what naked arguing is this,
they would have put the yoke of circumcisiin upon the necks of the disciples,
therefore all they were disciples upon whose necks they would have put it? I
appeal to Mr. Marshals own conscience to judge whether it be any better then
this viz. Caesar put the yoke of Tribute upon the necks of Christ's disciples.


Ergo all they, upon whose necks Caesar put that yoke, were Christ's disciples.

I am hardly persuaded within my self that such a man as Mr. Marshall could
first preach this ore, Secondly, print it ore; Thirdly, repeat it, reprint i^
o^e again, with so slight an answer to it as he gives to Mr. Tombs p. 217. of
(...) ^eply, and not see the nake^nesse of it, which if he does see, I charge
him as he will answer it before the Lord Jesus at the last day, that he declare
it to the undeceiving of 1000^, that for ought he knows may be dangerously
deluded by i^, and that he do not dare any longer thus to darken counsel by
words without knowledge: as for that sorry allusion whereby he puts off Mr.
Tombe^, who denies his Major for this reason, viz. because it is not said, they
would have put the yoke of circumcision upon the disciples only, its but a
further delusion of himself and others. I hope says he you will receive the
same law you give, therefore when your self do plead, meaning against infants
baptism, John's and Christ's disciples required confession of faith and sins of
those whom they baptized, I answer says he, that its no where said they
baptized only such.

But Sir, though it be not said totidem verbis they baptized only such, yet it
is said in t^rminis aequivalentibus, in words that can imply possibly no less,
for when its told us by way of true narration Mat. 3. 5. 6. that Jerusalem, and
all Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan were baptized, confessing
their sins, it is in sense as if he had said, that all they of Jerusalem,
Judea, and about Jordan, that were baptized, were baptized thus, viz.
confessing their sins and consequently that only those who confessed their
sins were baptized, and when its told us for truth, to the end that we might
know who, and how many that day were baptized and added to the Church, Act. 2.
42. in these terms, viz. Then they that gladly received his word were
baptized, and the same day there were added (meaning to those 120. that
continued in supplication Act. 1. 14.) about 3000 souls, those terms [they
that gladly received the word] must needs be exclusive of all others that did
not gladly receive the word, and consequently of infants that could not, or
else we are clearly cousen'd by that story; for if I undertake to relate truly
by way of Chronicle, who and how many were executed at such an Assize, or slain
in such a battle on such a day (as Luke does in Act. 2. to show who and how
many were baptized on that day) and express it in such terms as do include the
third part of them only (for the several households to which those 3000 souls
did belong, would surely have amounted to thrice as many more, had all those
whole households been baptized with them) I should be reputed as no better then
an Impostor: but the case is not the same in Act. 15. 10. for the end and
intent of Luke the historian, and Peter the spokesman in that place was not to
relate how many they would have yoaked with circumcision, but the drift of
Peter was only to reprove the false teachers, and of Luke only to declare how
Peter did ^eprove them for offering so to subjugate, and subvert the brethren,
for so they are called ver. 1. even the very same persons which are called
disciples ver. 10. which shows also that by the word [disciples] he means not
infants, for they were persons capable to be taught, yet this is the strongest
hold you have whereby you argue infants to be disciples, and taking it by force
from thence, that infants are disciples, you run headlong with it to Mat. 28.
19. where Christ says, go teach, or by teaching disciple the Nations,
baptizing them, and from thence rest an argument for their baptism, but I am
ashamed that I must take occasion (unless I Will betray the truth) to reprove the
rudeness of such renowned men, and conclude (all their conceits to the
contrary notwithstanding) that Mat. 28. 19. is no commission nor command for
infant baptism. It follows not therefore from the wonted circumcising of
infants, from which you A^hford Disputants dispute it, that therefore they are
to be baptized, for this reason viz. because there was a command for the
circumcising of infants, but (as I have showed above) none at all (no not from
Mat. 28. 29. nor Mark. 16. 15. much less from any other piece of Christ's will
and Testamen^) that they are to be baptized now. But Mr. Marshal fetches it
about another way yet, and because Christ's own Testament is somewhat barren of
provision by way of precept for infants baptism, he runs back to Moses
Testament, and fetches what help he can from thence, and undertakes to prove
the command for the circumcising of infants, to be a consequential and vertual
command and commission for the baptizing of them now, p, 35. 36. 37. of his
sermon.

In prosecution and proof of which position, he spends himself in above 40
pages of his reply to Mr. Tombs, in which great compass, who ever lists to
follow him, and tumble ore all that talk of his to Mr. Tombs, may soon be lost
in a laborinth of legal customs and institutions, into which he leads men back
from the plain simplicity of the Gospel, then find on inch of Evangelicall
institution of infant baptism, of all which I may safely say seriously, before
^such as know the law of Moses from the Gospel, as Mr. Tombs is taken (if not
mistaken) by him to speak Ieeringly p. 197. that though in bulk and show it
look like the travel of the mountains, yet the birth and result of all is but
a mere silly mouse, for this is the conclusion of that whole matter viz, That
that very command for circumcision of infants, that was expressly given before
Genesis 17. and expressly bound Abraham to sign his infants with it in infancy,
so teaches and reaches us now by Analogy and good consequence, that even that
alone, that old testament institution without respect to any reviving thereof
in any part of the new testament, may serve our turns as a sufficient command,
that does vertually bind us to baptize our infants now: to which absurdity,
though many a wise man would afford no other answer then a laugh in his sleeve,
yet as very a fool as I am, I shall only soberly reply to it as follweth.

First, is it so that the command to circumcise infants is vertually a command
to us to baptize them? then Sirs why do you not keep close to your command, and
by Analogy baptize precisely on the eighth day, but on any other as you see
good?

Babist.
The variation of the time is but a circumstance, but an accidental thing,
neither here nor there, nor much material when ordinances are administered,
whether at this time or at that, as Mr, Marshal well observes p. 202. 203
saying the eight day only was an accidental thing, and therefore binds us not,
as nei there the time for the passover binds us to the same time for the
supper: you must not make every thing a substantial part of the Sacrament,
which God has made a part of the outward administration only, that
circumstance of time had some peculiar relation to that manner of
administration, and had nothing common to the nature of a sacrament in
general, or to the end and use of that sacrament as the seal of admission.

Baptist.
Say you so, that the time is but a crcumstance, and such an accidental thing
in circumcision, peculiar to that administration only, not binding us to the
same time in the administratton of baptism, but left to us to do it ad libitum,
according to our own discretion? then pray tell me, since to do it on the eight
day is not needful, wherher to do it on the 10th 12th or 20th day be any more
needful then that, and whether to do it on the 8000th day be any more then a
mere difference though at a greater distance in that circumstance of time, and
so whether I may not consequently let it alone till the 20th or 30th year of
their age unless they profess faith and desire it before, before I baptize my
children by your own opinion and assertion: for it appears by you there is no
time prescribed, more then other wherein baptism is enjoined to be dispensed,
unless you say that time wherein they appear to believe, and therein we will
join with you with all our hearts, let it fall out when it will early or late.

Babist.
No such matter neither at any hand, for by that means the subject will come to
be altered to, which by such a degree of delay must necessarily be men and
women only, and no infants at all: for as we must so far keep analogy with
circumcision in our administration of baptism, as to dispense baptism to the
same subject at least, though we differ in that mere circumstance of time, so
we must differ no further in the time then is consistent with the Iden^ity of
the subject, which is one and the same in circumcision and baptism, this is not
an accidental, but a substantial business in the Covenant, and so altogether
in ^terable, that there may be no variation of it without violation of the
Covenant Genesis 17. for though we need not stand particularly upon the precise
time of the eighth day, yet at least we must keep within the general time of
infancy, so as that we must baptize infants under the Gospel consequentially,
and by virtue of that command to circumcise infants of old.

Baptist.
That's the great matter pleaded by you indeed, as wherein of necessity there
must be such an Analogy between baptism and circumcision viz. an Idendity in
the subject of both: you flee to the institution of circumcision as your
supreme warrant for baptizing infants; but is there not as much deviation from
the manner of circumcision, as touching the subject it self among you, as there
is in any thing else? ^f you must keep so strictly to one and the same subject
in circumcision, and baptism, why do you alter the subject your selves? why
bap^ize you any females, when God commanded males only to be circumcised? and
why not male servants though unbelieving Moors, Turks or Pagans if of
believing masters? or have you a certain dispensation or liberty lent you to
dispense baptism, as much besides your rule as you please, and yet to be
accounted as conformable to your Rule still?

Babist.
We find the New Testament injoining baptism, and dispensing it to females, as
well as males, for its said Act. 8. that when they believed the things spoken
by Philip pertaining to the Kingdom of God, they were baptized both men and
women: and therefore there is warrant enough for us to vary so far from
circumcision, though it be vertually a command to us concerning bap^ism, as to
admit of Females to the one, when Males only were adm^ed to the other.

Baptist.
You say right: for howbeit indeed under the Covenant of Circumcision, all the
Males whether children or Servants born in the house or bought with money; and
they only (not any females were admitted to that administration, yet it is most
evident that (as to baptism) it matters not whether persons be male or female,
for they are all one in Christ's account, according as they believe in him, one
sex having no more right thereto then the other, Gal. 3. 26. 27. 28. But if you
betake your selves to the New Testament only as your rule for baptism, though
you find warrant there for men and women, yet you find none at all there for
infants to be baptized: yea that is as much warrant to us in our varying from
the manner of circumcision in the point of infants, by omission of it unto
them, as it is for you to vary from circumcision in the point of females by
admission of them unto bap^, for as you are fain to plead for all your strong
hold of circumcisions being ^ted, and of old dispensed to infants, no less then
New Testament institution, and instance for the admission of females, so if we
insist upon only the New Testament institution, and example we can as truly
say there is neither precept nor president for baptizing infants, as you can
say there is both for baptizing females, and with as much confidence as you can
say it is evident there, that both men and women were baptized, may I say it is
evident that infants were not, at least it is not evident that they were, and
that is enough to serve our turn in this case, wherein it lies upon you, who
practice infants baptism, to produce some proof or other that it was practiced in
the primitive times, and some precept direct, or consequential, from the law of
Christ, and not to content your selves, and cousin the world with such a poor
pretense, as to say that the command for the circumcision of infants is a
consequential and virtual command to us to baptize them, which as binding as
you say it is to us in this case, when it comes to be examined, you see it
binds us as little to the same subject, as to the same circumstance of time,

You ly groaping for a warrant for your way in the Old Testament, and Law of
Moses, and being not a little aware that you have not warrant enough in the
new, you look after that Law-Giv^r, that is long since out of Date to the
church, for the doing of which you need no other to accuse you then he, even
Moses, in whom you trust, who instead of inviting you to learn of himself under
the times, and promulgation of the Gospel, how Gospel ordinances should be
administered; rather conjures the very Jews themselves, that were as we never
were, his own disciples, whilst his Testament stood John 9. 28. and that with
a curse, from any longer attendance unto his voice, to attendance unto the
voice of another Prophet Christ Jesus, when God should raise him up unto them,
you forget Sirs that we are now under the new Testament, and the teachings and
Law of another Lawgiver, another Apostle, and High Priest of our profession,
who was faithful to him that appointed him as a son over his own house, i. e.
the Gospel Church, as Moses though a Servant, was faithful to him that
appointed him in all his house, the fleshly Israel: so faithful was Moses as to
make all things plain in his Testament, so that his Disciples during the time
of that Covenant, whereof he was mediator, might easily see, if they were
careful to look into his Law, the mind of God concerning them in every
administration of that Testament, so that they need not look any where else but
to his Law, yea in Heb. 9. 19. Moses spoke every precept to all the people
according to the Law, and shall we think that this man, who is worthy of more
glory then Moses, and who is now as a son over his own house, has not been so
faithful, as to make sufficient provision of plain precep^s, Laws, and
ordinances so as to speak distinctly, and to give out his will and Testament
clearly, so that his disciples may know it, without running back to learn of
his servant Moses? does not God himself say of this Prophet by the mouth of
Moses himself, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall
speak unto them all that I shall command him, him shall they hear in all
things, whatsoever he shall say, and it shall come to pass that whosoever shall
not hearken to my words which he shall speak in my name, I will req^ire it of
him, and he shall be destroyed from among the people, Act. 3. 22. 23.

Is it likely then that he has left his will so darkly delivered, concerning
his own institutions, that his Ministers should be fain to fetch it so far, as
you fetch infants baptism, who say there is a consequentiall, and virtual
command, and institution for it in the old Testament of Moses, for as much as
infants are there commanded to be circumcised? I am ashamed to see such Masters
in Israel (as you go for) so dishonor and disparage the great Master of the
Gospel house, and Mediator of the Gospel Testament, as to straggle and wander
and run from him to Moses, to learn how to administer his ordinances: from the
son to the Servant? from the living to the dead? from the Gospel to a law long
since ended? from the truth to the type? from the substance to the shadow? as
if there were not light enough shining forth from God in the face of Jesus
Christ, for the use of his household, without beholding the veiled face of
Moses; for that he gave circumcision as a part of his law, though it was of the
Fathers and was in being before him, as sacrifices also were, and other parcels
of that old Testament whereof he was Mediator, is showed abundantly above out
of John 7. 22. 23. certainly Sirs, that cause is none of Christ's, whose
defendants are so hardly beste^d, when they are put to clear it that they are
driven from Christ himself to call out to Moses, Master help us or else we
perish.

Babist.
Though there is no such Syllabicall, or express precept for infants baptism
in the New Testament, as there was for circumcision under the old, yet there is
precept enough to us, so long as we find no prohibition.

Baptist,
This was M Kents way of arguing the lawfulness of infants baptism in public
one day at Crambroke, and at Staplehurst also, the same evening following, with
my self in the presence of some others; it is not forbidden (says he)
therefore it is commanded: to which it was answeted to this effect, viz. that
it is not commanded therefore it is forbidden: for we being forbidden to add to
the words of Christ, and to preach any other than what was delivered to the
Churches by the Apostles Gal. 1. 8. 9. Revel. 22. 18. what ordinance,
dispensation and piece of worship, and service soever is not appointed by him,
must consequently and clearly be prohibited, and be but mere Will Worship, if
performed: in fuller proof of which, viz. that it is suffic^ently forbidden,
that of Philip to the Eunuch was made use of, whose words [if thou believe
with all thy heart (...), li^et, thou maiest] being made in answer to the
question quid ni? what hinders why I may not be baptized? as they express it to
be lawful for such as believe with all their hearts, so they must plainly
imply to any understanding, that is not resolved to be impudent in withstanding
truth, that non licet, it is not lawful for such to be baptized as do not, even
as (your selves being judges) there is not more permission for self examinants to
eat the supper, in that expression of Paul [let a man axamine himself, and so
let him eat] then there is prohibition of all such to approach in that service,
that are neglective of self examination: but all this would not then be
accepted for an answer, without an express Sillabicall, formal forbidding it in
such words viz. ye shall not baptize infants: (by the way I wonder where the
express prohibition was for circumcising females, if it lie not vertually in
this viz. that there is no command nor example for circumcising them) whereupon
in our after, and occasional discourse that night, I calling for an express
prohibition of that popish practice of baptizing bells, it was returned (in
sense I am sure, as I remember in words) to this purpose viz. that if it were
not forbidden then it might be done, but it was forbidden in this respect,
forasmuch as bells were not capable of baptism, to which I said nor infants
neither; and so we parted, since when I never saw him, nor now shall (since he
is departed this life) till we meet before the Tribunal seat of Christ in that
life, which is to come,

And least all this should be of as little weight with others, as it was with
him, I shall add a little by way of proof, that there is prohibition enough of
infants baptism, in case it be not clearly commanded, For

First, what is not commanded of God is but tradition of man, for which men
shall have no thank for their labor Mat. 15. 9.

Secondly, neither are we altogether without such positive prohibition, as may
be sufficient to satisfy you at least, who hold the command for circumcision
of infants to be a command for the baptizing of them: in order to your
understanding of which, I shall refer you to Act. 21. 21. where its said of
Paul, that he taught all the Jews, which were among the Gentiles, to forsake
Moses, saying, that they ought not to circumcise their children, nor to walk
after the customs. In which Scripture I beseech you in the fear of God to
observe how it is rehearsed that three things were most expressly forbdiden, as
unlawful for the Jews themselves, much more to any believing Gentiles under the
days of the Gospel, by Paul's preaching.

First, they were forbidden (in general) to follow Moses, i. e. to live after
his law and testament any longer, they are charged to forsake Moses.

Secondly (in particular) they were forbidden to circumcise their children,
that being indeed a business the Jews still so doted on, that of all things
they were unwilling to let it go, which by the way, shows us plainly, that
there was nothing enjoined to be done to infants in the room of it, as some
(but simply) conceive baptism was by Peter Act. 2. in order to their comfort,
under the loss of the other; for if there had, then surely it would have been
specified, and Paul would have preached thus to the Jews, the more easily to
weane them from that ancient custom of circumcising their children (specially
considering how loath they were to part with it) viz. you ought not to
circumcise your children now, but instead thereof to baptize them, and this may
well serve in liew of, and satisfy you under loss of the other, as being not
so painful a service, but an easier sign, and that of better things then those
promised in the Covenant of circumcision: but he says no such matter, if he
had there would have been doubtless less ado, then it should seem there was,
to bring the Jews off from that practice of circumcising their infants, of
which even after they believed they were so zealous, as not to hear of the
abrogation of it without offense, for this would surely easily have contented
and satisfied them, if they might have had their children baptized, as of old
they were circumcised, but this doubtless made them so difficult to be
persuaded to a forbearance of circumcising there infants, because they saw the
gospel had no answerable dispensation belonging to their infants in the place
of it.

Thirdly, in general again, they were forbidden to walk so much as after the
manner of Moses, for the word here rendered customs is [(...)] the same that is
used in the singular number. Act. 15. 1. [(...)] which is there rendered after
the manner of Moses, which word [after the customes] or [after the manner of
Moses, prohibits not only all observation of those ordinances of the law it
self, but also all walking after the same fashion, way and manner as the
ordinances of the law were administered in, here is not only an injunction of
nonconformity to the law it self, but prohibition of all conformity to the
manner of it: they are not only taught not to do the same things that were
done under Moses, but also not to do under the Gospel in the same way and
fashion as of old: they are not only bid not to circumcise children, but also
not to walk after the manner of circumcision or after the customs of the law;
and therefore consequently not to baptize children now, which practice you of
the Priesthood not only confess to be agreeable, and conformable to that
custom of circumcising children under the law, but also contend with all your
might to ^ave them baptized now, upon no other account mainly then this, upon
which Paul plain ly seems to forbid it: for you say it was the custom and manner
of old to circumcise children, therefore though circumcision it self be ceased,
and baptism come in the room of it, yet thus far at least we must follow the
fashion of the Church of the Jews, that as they then circumcised infants, so we
in like manner must baptize them, but Paul says plainly, that we must forsake
Moses, and neither circumcise children now (as of old they did) nor yet walk
after the manner of circumcision, nor conform to such Jewish customs,
therefore we may not now baptize them, which to do your selves, as you contend
so to have it, so confess it to be after the manner of circumcision.

Whether therefore we shall believe him or you in this case judge ye.

This, as it is of weight in it self, so it must needs be an argument ad
hominem however, of force enough to stop the mouths of all such as though they
yield the law it self and circumcision to be ceased, yet will needs in point of
Priesthood, national Churches, Tithes, Temples, outward administration,
infants admission have all things at least after such a manner as the Jews had,
and specially to Mr Marshall and Dr. Holms, and all such as assert, that the
very command that was given to circumcise infants of old, is vertually the
command to us to baptize them: for thus says not only Mr. Marshall but Dr
Holmes also out of A^nsworth, p. 9. and 7. of his animadversions, fetching his
argument for infant baptism as far as from the first book of Moses called
Genesis thus.

Where there is a command for a thing never remanded, or contramanded, there
the thing is still in force.

But there is a command for signing the infants of a believer, with the sign of
the Covenant of Grace, Genesis 17. 7. 9. never yet remanded or contramanded.

Ergo signing believers children with the sign of the Covenant of Grace (namely
baptism now) is still in force.

The Minor of which argument has no less then three false assertions in it.
For First, circumcision was not a sign of the Covenant of Grace (as baptism now
is) nor did any further relate to the Covenant of Grace, then all other things
under the law did viz. as types and shadows of the things to come; but that
Covenant of which circmcision was giyen to be immediately a sign and token, was
of that earthly Canaan, made with Abraham's fleshly seed only: nor Secondly,
were they believers infants only, who were there commanded to be circumcised,
but all the male infants and male servants also of every household of Abraham's
posterity by Isaac only, through their several generations, though the parents
and masters were unbelievers, as the Jews were (for the most part of them) in
all ages, and both they and theirs nevertheless to be circumcised, while that
Covenant of circumcision lasted.

Thirdly, whereas he says that circumcision of infants (for that's it he
falsely signs there with that name, viz. the sign of the Covenant of Grace) was
never yet remanded, or contramanded, it is as false as all the rest for we see
plainly that it was remanded by that text I am yet in hand with, viz. Act. 21.
22.

Babist.
But baptism, which is the sign now was never remanded.

Baptist.
I grant it is not, yet i will prove it to the faces of you all, that it is as much
remanded, and contramanded, as ever it was commanded in Genesis 17.

Since then Mr. Marshall and Dr Holmes both say (and so indeed you say all in
effect) that the command for circumcision of infants was a command to us to
baptize them, and therefore (unless we can show that command to be remanded
again) it is still in force to bind us to baptize them, I dare be bold to tell
them that if infant circumcision, and infant baptism were both commanded
together in that one and the same precept Genesis 17. 10. where God bidds Abraham,
and his seed to circumcise their children, then they are both uncommanded again
in that one and the same prohibition, wherein God by the mouth of Paul forbad
the Jews to circumcise their children any longer: I say if infants baptism were
commanded in that very command for the circumcision of infants, then by
Analogy, for contrariorum contraria est ratio, infants baptism must needs be
remanded in the remanding of infants circumcision, the remanding of which by
Paul, among all the Jews that dwelt among the Gentiles, where he mainly
exercised his Ministry, is related plainly Acts 21. 21.

To conclude then though I utterly deny, as being well assured that nor Dr.
Holmes nor Mr. Marshal neither have yet, nor ever will make it good, that the
precept for circumcision, is so much as a virtual or consequential command to
baptize infants, yet, if it be, I hope they will receive the some Law they
give, and rest satisfied in it, that this Countermand to circumcise infants, is
a consequential and virtual countermand also to baptize them.

By all which it appears still that there is not only no precept, but also
plain prohibition enough of infant baptism.

And as there is no precept, so neither is there any president of baptizing
infants, as there was of circumcising them of old, from which practice of
circumcision therefore there is no consequence to infant baptism: there is not
one example to be found any where upon the file of such a thing, as infant
baptism, unless it be in your Parish Registers, and there indeed you may show
us, not only three or four hundred (as upon occasion of our calling for
example, Mr Kentish in a discourse we had with him and Mr Glenden at Swevenock
said he could) but as many as we can show you of baptized believers in the
Scripture-Register, viz. no less then three or four thousand: but this, though
it satisfy them that live by the example of the world, yet will in no wise
serve their turns that live by the example of the Word, and therefore Ms Kents
negative precept, of non express prohibition, and Mr Kentish his popish
president of parish church admission may go both together, as things that can
never pass for current among the true Christians of Kent, though they pass for
good proof of infant baptism among most Kentish Christians, and Priest-ridden
people: As for the Scriptures, there is not so much as the least show of any
example of baptizing infants i^ them, for howbeit you draw in the several
households, that were baptized, as that which you would fain seem to make
somewhat of, to this purpose, yet how well they serve your tum that way judge
ye, when as whether there were at all any one infant in any one of them, is
confessed to be uncertain by your selves: so Mr. Blake, Birth-priv. p. 22. and
also a matter so immaterial that the cause does not depend upon it at all; so
Mr. Marshall to Mr Tombs, p. 218. yet both he, and Mr. Blake and Dr. Featley
p. 42. 43. and I think well-nigh every one that writes presses all these,
households as a president, and forces from them all they have in them, and more
too in proof of infant baptism.

Babist.
We have examples not to be contemned of the baptism of whole households (says
Mr. Blake) and whether infants were there or no, as it is not certain, though
probable, so it not material. The president is an household he that follows the
president must baptize households, it appears not that there were wives there
yet he that follows the president of baptizing households, must baptize Wives,
and so I may say (quoth he) Servants if they be of the household.

Baptist.
Pray stay Sirs, not to fast at ^st least you run your selves out of breath at
last. Is this a competent account upon which to baptize wives, and servants
too, as well as infants, viz. if they be of the household, then tell me whether
unbelieving wives, and unbelieving servants, may not be of the household, where
the husband, and Master believes; and if so must these also be baptized? for
shame call in that again, this is a pigge of the old sow, believers children
are of the Nations (and I wonder what man, woman or child is not) therefore
they must be baptized. For shame also forbear to name those households any more,
as presidents of infant baptism, wherein your selves confess that it is not
certain that there were any infants, nor material whether there were any or no.

Babist.
You shall find, says Mr. Marshall, the Gospel took place just as the old
administration, by bringing in whole families together, usually if the Master
of the house turned Christian, his whole family came in, and were baptized with
him.

Baptist.
Just so Sirs, and not a jot otherwise? what not one way, nor other otherwise,
then of old?

Then first me thinks the wife and other females should not be actually
baptized with him but rather virtually, be baptized in the husband; for you say
just so it was in the administration of circumcision.

Secondly, Then I marvel in my heart how it came to pass that there was such
quaerying whether believing husbands, and unbelieving wives, believing wives,
and unbelieving husbands, believing Servants, and unbelieving Masters, etc.
might not live together, and resolution given affirm^ively that they might, if
that there were whole Families taken into the Gospel all together.

Thirdly, But most of all I wonder how there was such quarr^lling as there was,
and Christ said there would ever be in families about the Gos^el, that instead
of embracing it all together, they would be divided against t^emselves for the
Gospels sake, so that from thenceforth that the Gospel began there should be
five divided about it in one house, two against three, and three against two,
the Father against the Son, aad the Son against the Father. the Daughter
against the Mother, and the Mother against the Daughter, the Daughter in Law
against the Mother in Law, and the Mother in Law against the Daughter in Law,
the husband against the wife, and the wife against the husband, so that he must
be fain to keep the doors of his lips from her that lies in his bosom, Mich.
7. 5. and a man's foes (for the Gospel sake) should be those of his own house
Luke 12. 51, 52, 53. and also such oppositions on earth in countries, and
Nations, whereby Christ's disciples should still be d^agged before the Rulers,
and Governors, that under one pretense or other should still persecute the
Gospel till Christ coming (for till then the term of Nursing Fathers falls not
to them) which immethodical, and tottered face of things, which was at the
beginning of the Gospel and is to be again toward the end, at the Gospels
resurrection from under popish superstition and man's tradition, that has made
it void, I have often seen, and do see daily in that true, though troublesome,
way of the Gospel we now walk in, but I never saw it in all my days in that
false, smooth, fine, fashionable, formal, forced, national Gospel of yours,
where whole families, Countries, and Kingdoms. i. e. all the folk within such
a Dominion, are threatened into one Mock-Christian Religion, whether they will
or no: I wonder I say how all this should come to pass, if as of old the whole
Nation, and therein the whole families of the Jews were taken in at once to
that covenant, so now (and so you say all it is now) whole Nations, and therein
whole families, and households without exception, are to be brought in and
baptized all at once into the Gospel.

Sure I am that though persons were so born Christians to the Popes, Prelates,
and Presbyters crooked Christianity, viz. of the flesh and of blood, and of the
mere will of man, m^king laws to compel them so to be, yet none are, by
right, to be admitted to Christ's Christendom, but such Ioh. 1. 12. 13. as
appear by faith to be born of God.

Babist.
But me thinks (as Mr. Marshal says well) the whole household of Co^nelius, the
household of Stephanus, the household of Aristobulus, the household of Crispus,
the household of Narcissus, the household of Lydia, the household of the Jailer,
these are examples for baptizing whole households (and so consequently infants)
not to be contemned.

Baptist.
I muse much why the household of Caesar is not named as well as all the rest,
but then Mr. Marshall had clearly contradicted his own assertion, viz. that
whole families were taken in all at once: for there were many famous disciples
and Christians that embraced the Gospel in Caesar's household, though Caesar was
no Saint nor Christian himself.

Babist.
It is not said the household of Caesar, but they of Caesar's household.

Baptist.
Nor is it said the household of Aristobulous, and Narcissus, but them of
Aristobulus, and Narcissus's household, which shows that though with him these
two masters were disciples themselves, yet but some of their households were
disciples with them, yet he alleges these as examples of infants baptism, when
in the Scriptures nomination of them there is no nomination of infants, or
baptism either.

As for all the rest if they are not to be contemned, yet are they not to be
confided in, unless there were much more then is expressed, at least implied to
such a purpose, as exemplary proof for infants baptism: for if those whole
households were all, and every one in them baptized, yet possibly no infant, for
all that: for at this hour I know some whole households of baptized believers,
that have not so much as an infant within them: yea one where there is or
lately was both parent, children or grand children all baptized, and yet no
infant nor infant baptism amongst them neither: and indeed howbeit the word
[whole houshold] is no where named in the new Testament in relation to this
case, yet I do believe that whole households might sometimes be baptized then as
well as now they are, from whence yet it will not follow that infants were
baptized, yea whole thousands were ba^d sometimes in one day, and yet no
infants among them* and that all the ^sholds you so often instance in, either
had no infants in them, or if they had yet none baptized however, is evident
enough to those that are not blind, if ^ll ^e particular instances be examined.

As for the Iaylor, the Apostles, who never used to preach to infants, spoke to
him the word of God, and to all that were in his house, the effect of whose
preaching was not only his rejoicing and belief, but the belief of all his
house also, as well as the baptism of all his house together with him, Act. 16.
32. 33. 34.

And as for Crispus, whose household is not reported to be baptized (though no
doubt they were so) its said that all his household believed in the Lord as well
as he, Acts 18. 8. and as for such as were baptized with Cornelius, which were
more then they of his own household, that none of them were infants, it is
evident, forasmuch as they were all both ready and capable to hear, and the
holy spirit fell on them all in hearing the word, so that it was evident to
Peter, and as many as came with him, that they embraced the glad tidings of the
Gospel; upon the account of whose gladly receiving the word only, and that
apparently; Peter says who can forbid water why these may not be baptized and
(...) and he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord, Act. 10. 44
to 48.

And as for Stephanus's household, as they are said 1 Cor. 1. 16. to have been
baptized, so are they all said to have addicted themselves to minister to the
Saints which are actions exclusive of Infants 1 Cor. 16. 15. besides, if
households must needs be taken as comprising infants, then that phrase salute
the household of Onesiphorus 2 Timothy 4. 19. must be taken so to, and what
absurdity were it, to tell Cradle-bed-Infants, that Paul the prisoner remembered
his respects unto them: as for that of Lydia, as its likely enough she then had
none, so no man knows whether ever she had any husband at all, if she had she
might have no children, if she had children she might be an ancient widow,
whose children were grown up to believe wi^h her, and besides that those of her
household, whether children or servants or both, that were baptized with her,
were not infants but adult disciples is evident, both by that compellation viz.
the brethren (a denomination never given to them) and mostly because they were
such as the Apostles did actually comfort (as we never find they did any
infan^s in their infancy) Act. 16. 14. 40. By all which by that time you have
laid it to heart, so little ground will be left you from all these instances
for the baptizing of infants, that it may without crouding, be well written
within the inside of a cherry-stone.

And now whereas Mr. Marshal, more downrightly then rightly, denies that
children did eat the passover, which most undoubtedly they did, I demand of
him why, if households be a term so conclusive of infants, when its said
households were baptized, the same word does not as much conclude children, when
its said households did eat the passover.

Babist.
Mr. Marshal himself gives you good reason for that p. 40. of his Sermon, the
Argument (says he) from the term household, is not so strong to prove that
infants did eat the passover, as it is to prove they may be baptized, because
no other Scripture shows that the passover does belong to children, but we
have other plain Scripture proving that baptism belongs to infants, as well as
grown men.

Baptist.
I remember indeed that Mr. Marshall speaks thus: yea more (and more absurdly
then thus) does he speak p. 219. in his reply to Mr. Tombos viz. that we shall
never find so good evidence out of the households eating the passover, Exodus
12. thereby to prove that women did eat the passover as this proves that the
^nfants of the house were baptized: but I must tell him first, that what
influence other Sciptures give toward the proof of either one or the other
makes these never the stronger simply, and in themselves, so but that their
particular strength and weakness stands the same, but Secondly, how dares Mr.
Marshall say there is no other Scipture save that, is not that one particular
sentence wherein the word household is expressed as eating the paschal lamb
enough? specially when the next verse, or the latter part of the same verse
viz. Exodus 12. 4. says plainly, that it was to be taken and eaten according to
the number of souls in the house, and by every one according to his eating, and
if the family were too little to eat it, they should join families together;
are not children expressed undeniably here? are they not among the number of
souls capable to eat, every one pro suo modulo, according to the measure of his
eating and digestion? and does not this evince as much for women? And whereas,
for the exemption of women (not as holding these did not eat it, but to secure
himself the more from that deadly wound, which he is aware will light upon him
if he grant that children did eat the passover viz. our arguing upon him from
thence to their right to the supper, acccording to his own arguing from infants
circumcision to their baptism) he brings this reason viz. because according to
us they were not circumcised, and no uncircumcised person might eat the
passover, I have to or three things to say to it.

First, that phrase, no uncircumcised person shall eat it, must either
necessarily be understood concerning those uncircumcised ones only, who were
both capable of circumcision, and of whom circumcision was required, or else

Secondly, it must be understood that the females were accounted as vertually
circumcised in the males.

Thirdly, that very phrase that excludes all, and only such uncircumcised ones
from the passover as were capable of circumcision, and of whom it was
required, serves us against you thus far however as to include and enright all
them to the passover that were circumcised, and so if women did not (as none
need doubt but that they did) yet all circumcised males, and cons^quently male
children, as soon at least as they were capable to eat, were under a right to
eat the passover, and so as to prove you who deny them the supper, to be
engaged in the guilt of diminishing Gods grace, and robbing poor infants of
their right, as well as we, if your own arguments be true, viz. that to deny
such dispensations to infants under the Gospel, the answerable ones to which
were dispensed to them under the law, is to lessen the grace of God in the
Gospel Covenant, and make it strai^ then it was under the Law, and to bereave
little children of what belongs to them.

Thus Mr. Marshal, where by the word households he should understand children as
well as others, for his own ends he leaves them out; but where by the word
households such families are expressed, as in which he knows not that there was
one infant, and may know (if there were) by the very places themselves, that
they were excluded, yet there he winds things aboutto wind them in.

By all this you see how little consequence is in the Argument, children were
circumcised.

Ergo they must be baptized.

Yea (say you Ashford disputants in the tail of your argument) or else the
Covenant of the Gospel is worse to the spiritual seed of Abraham, then it was
to the carnal seed under the law.

Bus Sirs (to conclude this matter) I say no, for if by spiritual seed you
mean Christians natural infants, I must (as before) cry shame on you still, for
stiling them the spiritual seed of Abraham, for if Abraham's own semen carnis be
not (qua sic) his semen fidei, are the semen carnis of believing Gentiles
Abraham's semen fidei? but if by his spiritual seed you mean such as are so
indeed i. e. true believers, are this spiritual seed ere the worse because a
mere fleshly seed, may not without faith be signed as heirs together with them?
how will you ever be able to make that good? yet again (to take your words so
punctually as may be) by mere denial of baptism to your carnal seed, is the
Gospel made worse to Abraham's spiritual seed, then the same Gospel was to
Abraham's carnal seed of old? no such matter, surely Sirs, for the Gospel was
preached but darkly to the Jews of old, which were Abraham's carnal seed, viz.
only in types, and figures, and shadows, and prophecies pointing out only
Christum exhibendum, a savior to come, but now its preached not only to
believers (that is Abraham's spiritual seed) but also to unbelivers, and to the
whole world, and this more plainly too, and without a vail, holding forth
salvatorem exhibitum, a savior that has already offered himself a ransom, and
salvation by him in common to all, Jews and Gentiles, bond and free, even every
creature that puts it not away from him, when tendered to him, Mark. 16. 15.
16. 1 John 2. 2. so that the Gospel is as good now to the full to all men in
its administration as it was of old, and in many respects far better, though no
infants at all be baptized, and so I have done with this argument, and come to
the next.

Disputation.
That opinion which destroys the comfort that the holy ghost administreth
over the loss of our children by death, is a desperate and ungodly opinion.

But such is the opinion of the Anabaptists concerning little children.

Ergo, it is desperate and ungodly.

The minor proved.
It destroys the hope that parents can have of the salvation of their
children, for it makes them in no better condition then Turks and Pagans, and
so our Respondent himself professed, and when the Apostle says 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
I would not have you sorrow as those without hope, the grieved parents might
reply; what hope can we have of our child, who is in no better condition then
the children of infidels? what comfort can we have from the Covenant made with,
and the promises to our children etc? therefore why should we not sorrow as
those without hope?

Our Respondent replied to this, that for ought he knew the children of Turks
and Pagans might be all saved, and one replied, Perhaps he thought the devils
might also, which was the end of the argument, there being no other answer
given, nor to be expected.

Disproof.
As I replied then, so I reply still, that for ought I know the children of
Turks and Pagans (dying in infancy) may be all saved, yet will it not follow
(so much as probably) that therefore in reallity, or in my opinion either, the
Devils may be saved also, which rude return is recorded by your selves to be
then given, and stands for ever before the world, as the end of this your
argument, and of your Disputation also, there being to this assertion of mine
viz. for ought I know the children, or dying infants of Turks and Pagans may be
all saved, no other answer given by you in the Dispute, nor yet since in your
Account, nor yet ever to be expected.

But Sirs, as great an Ecstasy as you seem to be in about this position, yet I
assure you if I had not learned it before, yet I have learned it since from
your very selves, who so strange at it, to be a thing not so strange as true
viz. that the dying infants of Turks and Pagans may be all saved, and that the
dying infants in your Christendom are in no better condition then the dying
infants of Turks and Pagans (for so I said, and not as you here misrelate it,
then Turks and Pagans themselves) for if the dying infants of infidels are in
no worse condition then your dying infants, then surely yours are in no better
condition then they, and that they are in no worse condition then yours,
nothing need hinder you more then me (for ought I know) from a belief thereof,
unless you will refuse to believe your selves, who preach no less both to me,
and all men no further off hence then in the next page, and the next save one
above; for do you not say there that unless we will violate Christian charity,
whose rule is praesumere etc. to presume every one to be in a good condition,
till he appears to be in an evil, we must believe and hope all things of the
little children of believers, since it cannot appear in infancy, that they have
barred themselves, etc. and if so ^hy not of the infants of Turks, Pagans, and
infidels? specially (to speak in your own dialect) since it cannot appear that
these have any more than the other by any actual sin barred themselves, or
deserved to be exempted from the general state of little children declared in
the Scriptures, which is this, viz. That of such is the Kingdom of heaven.

You see then how you teach us this precious piece of truth your selves p. 4.
5. therefore I hope you will learn it your selves, viz. that we are to hope
well of such infants as have not by actual sin barred themselves from
Salvation, and allow us to teach it too in time, though hitherto you seem to be
so far from giving way to us to teach the same, that when we speak well of
inf^nts, that have not by actual sin deserved exemption, and hope well of their
salvation so dying, you so wretchedly forget it to be the doctrine your selves
deliver, that with detestation you ptotest against it as abominable, as if
there were as little hope to be had of the salvation of such dying infants, as
are not born in Christendom, as of the salvation of the very devils: but your
first doctrine shall stand of the two for truth with me, from which, though you
often contradict it your selves, I shall not be frighted by your bigg words, but
still hope as well of one dying infant as another.

Secondly (Risum teneatis amici?) it is enough I think to set him on smiling
who is never so deep in his dumps, to see what a most pat, and pertinent place
of Scripture you have here dragged in to the proof of infant baptism, viz. 1
These. 4. 13. from whence (as the wheel barrow goes rumble to rumble so) it
follows that infants are to be baptized: you might as well have said you may
find it in the fifteenth of go look it, as send us to a text of so little
tendency as this is of, to your present purpose: for what if we are not to
mourn over the death of Saints, and Godly friends that sleep in Jesus, as those
that can have no hope of such friends as they see to (...) (which is indeed the
direct drift of the place) will it therefore follow that all those infants,
that die without baptism, are universally, and unavoidably damned? yet no less
then this is here told by your selves to be your tenet, whilst you say our
denial of baptism unto them destroies all hope of their salvation.

But Sirs is it so in earnest in your opinion, that no baptism no hope of
salvation?

Then thirdly, I have a treble charge to draw up against you.

1. of unchristian cruel^y.

2. Of point blank popery.

3. of clear contrariety both to your selves, and to those very authors you
refer us to, to read and learn by, and also to the very professed doctrine of
the church of England whereof you profess to be the Ministers.

First I must cry out oh the Unchristian cruelty that is hatched in your
hearts, and here expressed, not only to these thousands of infants, even of
Christians that happen to die unbaptized, at least to whom baptism is at this
day denied to be dispensed, but specially to that numberless number of infants
of Turks, Pagans, and infidels, to whom in infancy your own Doctrine denies
baptism, as well as ours, and consequently (if your own bloody tenet of no
baptism no salvation to dying infants were true) all hope of their salvation.

It Is your common course to clamor and cry out against us, as having no
christian charity, as being most inveterate, and cruel enemies to infants,
only for denying the baptism of those few, to whom you dispense it, as well as
those Myriads of little ones, to whom your selves deny it together with us: but
I appeal to all people, who are not already so perfectly prejudiced against us
by your prating, as to stand resolved to believe nothing but your blind
dictates, to judge between us whether we are so cruelly opinioned toward
infants, who barely deny them baptism, believing the salvation notwithstanding
of all that die in infancy without it, or your selves rather, who deny that
dispensation to all infidels infants, which are twenty to one in the world, and
yet hold that dispensation so necessary to salvation, that there is no hope of
other then damnation to whomsoever it is denied, whereas in confutation of you
out of your own mouths (if your own sense of Mat. 18. 14 be true, where you
contend to have the word litt^ ones taken literally for infants) Christ himself
says there, that it is not the (...) of my Father that so much as one of these
little ones should perish.

Secondly, oh the palpable papistry which is here openly professed by you, who
yet would seem to protest against every inch of it, for it is one of the
grossest pieces of popery to hold no salvation to infants without baptism, and
one great controversy between them and protestants; yet you give the cause
thus far, as to grant it to be necessary, and effectual to salvation of infants
(whether ex opere operato or no, as you are silent in it here, so pray tell us
another time) that there need be neither doubt nor fear of such dying infants
damnation to whom its dispensed, and can be no hope of the salvation of such as
die without it, or at least to whom doctrinally it is denied.

Thirdly, oh the wretched contradiction, that is here given.

1. To your selves, who say above p. 5. that it is breach of Christian charity
to presume otherwise then well of such little infants, of whom it cannot
appear, that by any actual sin they have barred themselves or deserved
exemption from salvation, and such are all infants in infancy, whether baptized
or unbaptized, whether of Christians or heathens; and yet here you say, there
is no hope of the dying infants of infidels, and in case we deny baptism to
them as little hope of the salvation of such dying infants, as are born of
Christian parents also: Hay-Ho! I dare say the dog is not good Mutton, if this
be not uniform Divinity.

Secondly, not only to other writers on this subject, as Mr. Cotton, who p. 85.
of his book called, The way of the Churches in New England, says, one may
remain a member of the invisible Church of the first born, when yet he has
neither part nor portion, nor fellowship in the particular flock and visible
Church of Christ Jesus; which shows (to the confutation of you, and Mr. Baxter
also, who pins the salvation of infants so much upon their Churchmembership and
baptism) that infants may be supposed to be out of the Visible Church, and yet
be hoped to be in a state of salvation also; I say not only to other writers,
but to the writers your selves will us to peruse, viz. Calvin, and Ursin.

For first, Ursins Catechism, (as insufficient as it is to prove infant
baptism) furnishes us with enough wherewith to confute this unsavory stuff you
have here recorded, viz. the hopelesness of the salvation of such infants, to
whom baptism is denied, whose words are these viz. Privatio sacramenti non
damnat si non accedat contemptus, christus non adimit salutem eis, quibus
adimitur baptismus.


The want of the sacrament does not damn persons, that die without it, if those
persons do not contemn it (and whether infants in infancy can possibly be said
to contemn it though their parents permit them to die without it, needs no great
explanation) again Christ does not ere the more deny salvation to whom baptism
is denied.

Secondly Calvin's institutions confesses at large that baptism is not so
necessary to salvation as you seem to make it: his words are these Li. 4. c.
15. S. 20. Quantum damni invexerit dogma ill^d, male exp^, baptisma esse de
necessitate sal^is, pauci animadvertunt: Ideoque minus sibi cavent, nam ubi
in^t opinio perditos esse o^nes, quibus aqua tingi non contigit, nostra
conditio deterior est quam ^eteris populi, quasi restrictio^ esser Dei (...)
quam s^b lege, venisse enim Christu^ censebitur non ad implendas prom^iones sed
abolendas, quando promissio, q^ae ^unc ante octavum diem, saluti conferendae
per se erat satis (...), nunc absquo signi admi^iculo rata non (...).


What mischief that opinion brings viz that baptism is necessary to salvation,
few consider, and therefore they take the less heed in asserting it, for where
that opinon grows on once, that they are all damned that dye unbaptized, our
conditiis worse then that of the Jews, for hereby Christ may be thought to come
not to fulfill, but to abolish the promises, if the promise which then was
efficacious of it self to salvation before the eighth day, be not now available
thereto, without the administration of the sign. and a little below Sect. 22.
he says thus:

Infants are not shut out of the kingdom of heaven that dye before baptism, Non
arceri a regno caelo^m in^ntes, quibus e prae senti vi^a migrate continget,
antequam ^qui m^gi d^um fuerit, at^ (...) j^m vi sum est fieri non leve^
injuriam dei saede^i, nisi in eo acquiescimus, acsi per se infirmum esset, quum
ejus effectus neque a baptismo, neque ab ullis acessionibus pendeat.
therefore there will no small injury be done to the Covenant of God, unless
we rest in that alone, as if it were not valid enough of it self, when its
efficacy depends neither on baptism, nor any other matters accessory to it.

By all this it may be easily perceived not only who they are that streiten
the Grace of God under the Gospel, and make it narrower then of old under the
law, viz. not our selves (as you feign) but your selves, who say denial of
baptism to infants destroys the hope, that else might be had of their
salvation, but also what an individuum vagum your Pamphlet is, wandering and
swarving clear aside from the stars, you direct us to for light, and would s^em
to steer your own course by, Thirdly, to the doctrine of the Church of England,
which though it own baptism as a sign and (falsely enough) as a seal of the
Covenant of Grace that may lawfully at least be dispensed to infants, yet
rejects that tenet however, as spurious, and popish that makes salvation and
damnation depend so much up* the dispensation, or denial of it to infants, that
there is no hope of the salvation of those infants that dye without it: witness
R^gers his Analysis of the 39. Articles, of the Catholic doctrine of the
Church of England p. 167. 168 we condemn (says he) the opinion of the Russeis,
that there is such a necessity of baptism, that all that dye without the same
are damned, we may see how well the Church of England is served among you,
whose own ministers swerve from the sense of those Articles she makes them
swear to.

If you mean that a denial not de facto, but de jure i. e. not of baptism it
self to infants, but of their right to baptism damns them, and that doctrinally
only, not really, they dying without it, you might have said so then if you
had pleased, but your blunt delivery of your selves here, without any
modification of your meaning, makes it out, as if you meant to fright the whole
Country to baptiz: all their infants in all have, as ever they mean to have
any hope they shall be saved: besides if they be but doctrinally damned, and
not really by the denial of baptism to them the matter is so much the less,
for as they are not one straw the better, whether living or dying in infancy,
if they have it, so they cannot be (as to salvation) one straw the worse, if
they want it, and die without it, and then what need such thundering out of
terror to the parents, as if there were no way but one, that is damnation to
their dying infants out of hand; if they do not see to the baptizing of them in
infancy before they dye? moreover, if it be doctrinally to damn all infants to
deny their right to baptism, then how damnable is your doctrine to that
innocent age, who deny it to no less then 20 to one viz. all the dying infants
of unbelievers? but the best out is though your doctrine is so desperate and
ungodly as to declare naught but damnation to all such, as the Pope doctrinally
damnes i. e. all that are not born within the pale of the Church, yet there is
salvation enough for these infants, as well as for the other in Christ Jesus,
whereby till they deserve exemption by actual transgression, they may be saved
really, though with you they are doctrinally damned, and with us as well as you
denied to have, or so much as to have any right at all to baptism.

Thus Sirs I have done with your deep Disputation, there remaining no more but
a certain magisterial moderation or determination, in which you are your own
carvers, taking upon you to manage it by the mouth of him, whose only
arguments all these are, in which piece of your Pamphlet I shall briefly take
notice of some passages wherein you speak very fairly of your selves, very
fowly, falsely and injuriously of your respondent, very conrradictorily to what
you said before, very ignorantly of the word, very impertinently as to the
proof of faiths being in, and baptisms belonging to those infants you plead
for, more then those you plead against, and then come to consider your Review,
you speak as follows.

Determination.
Sin^e it has been proved that little infants have the holy Ghost etc. (here
let there be a recapitulation of the former arguments) therefore baptism is not
to be denied unto them.

Detection.
Doubting belike whether any stander by can find in his conscience to give so
good a testimony, as you afford, and such ample approbation to your Arguments,
as you desire and they deserve not, you ingrosse the dijudi^ation of the
disputation between your selves and me, into your own clutches, and then claw
your selves in the face of the world, and bestow such commendatories upon your
simple shuffles as if it were proved, and put out of doubt thereby that
believers infants have the spirit, faith, holiness, and such apparent right
both to heaven and baptism as no creatures have in the world besides them, but
having showed how shallowly, sillily and slenderly you have argued all this
above, I decline, detest, and disclaim this your positive dijudication, and
make my appeal from the high Commission Chair of you Clergy men, who for ages
and generations have sat judges in your own cause, unto the people, whom you
have ever misled by your blind guidance, to judge between us, among whom not
they who have so long commended themselves (as Orthodox) will be approved at
last, but those whom the Lord commends.

Determination.
If any doubt be raised concerning particular infants, the judgment of Charity
will cast that out, especially considering no other judgment can be past upon
those that are Adul^i.

Detection.
That the judgment of charity concerning faith, the holy spirit and right to
the kingdom can in infancy be past no m^re upon believers infants, then upon
all infants is told us so plainly by your selves, that if you be not resolved
that you will never learn any thing that is truth, from your selves you must
needs see it as well as we, since you say. p. 18. there is no discovery of the
habit of faith, but by the asts, and none by the acts in any infants at all in
infancy, and that the spirit is neither bound to work it in all the children of
Christians, nor barred from working it in any children of infidel^, and p. 5.
that the judgment of charity must so pass, that we are to presume well of all,
who by actual sin have not barred themselves, and deserved exemption, and that
there is better ground to build a judgment of charity concerning faith, and the
spirit in adultis, then ^ibus, viz. profession and visible manifestation by the
fruits and acts, and a better judgment, then that of charity viz. of
certainty, is to be had of adult persons right to baptism, we seeing them
certainly to profess faith (as infants cannot) which whether they deceive us
in that profession or no, is clear ground to baptize them on, this I have
showed so sufficiently above, that there needs no more be said of it here.

Determination.
Our Respondent has confessed that Ishmael who was that carnal seed of
Abraham, yet had right to the seal of the Gospel Covenant circumcision, and
that the spiritual seed and their children have under the Gospel, as good
right to the seal thereof, which is baptism.

Detection.
O rare and base! what again Sirs, what again? I professedly denied baptism to
be a seal at all (witness my then disavowing the Scotchmans proceedings in the
dispute of baptism under the term of initial seal) I also denied circumcision
to be the seal of the Gospel Covenant, or that it was set to Ishmael under such
a notion, yea, you your selves are my witnesses but three pages above that I
said, circuncision was a seal to Abraham only, and not to his posterity, and
yet here again, (as well as before) you turn false witnesses against me, and
will needs fasten this upon me for a farewell, that I grant all for truth, that
your selves ignorantly assert in these particulars, and not content therewith
(a matter more monstrous t^en all the rest) you say I confess not only Abraham's
spiritual seed themselves, i. e. believers, but their children also to have
under the Gospel as good right ^o baptism, as the seal of it, as they, the
direct contrary to which is the Position I stood then to evince, yea which I
both then did, do still and ever shall, till you disprove it better than you
have yet done, maintain against you or else wherein do we differ?

Sirs, you should have done well to have expressed your minds in plain right
down English, and then the scope, sum and scum of them would have risen, and
appeared thus, viz. we the Disputers and S^ribes of the Ashford disputation
having more mind that victory then verity should befall us, and having first
given and granted to our selves the priestly prerogative, of being sole judges
and determiners of that days disputation between us and our respondent, do
thereupon determine, and by these our letters, pattents, give and grant the
cause, and the day to be wholly ours, and least it should be hardly confessed,
and yielded to by fair means, we will have it by foul, and wrest it from our
Respondent as fully granted by him, though we know it was not, and take it from
him pro confesso by force, even by forged cavillation, and false accusation,
and therefore know all men by these presents, that though it be most expressly
denied by our Respondent that infants of believers have right to be baptized,
yet it is most expressly confessed by him, that infants of believers have good
right to be baptized: had you said thus, well indeed might the world have cried
shame on it more then now but in effect it had been but the proper paraphrase
of what you have more closely, and covertly presented it with in this place.

Wherefore, Sirs, I do you and the world to wit once more, to prevent any ones
being charmed into a misbelief of me by your juggles, how little I concur with
you in these things, and to say no more then what I have showed above, viz.

First, That baptism is no seal at all of the Covenant of Grace, but a sign of
it only.

Secondly, that believers infants have no right at all to be signed with it in
infancy.

Thirdly, That circumcision was no seal of the Gospel covenant, but a sign
only, or token between God and Israel of the old Covenant, concerning the Land
of Canaan, and some other particular personal promises, and privileges
pertaining to that people (though it was a type of Circumcision in the heart,
wherewith Abraham's spiritual seed are circumcised, and thereby inrighted to the
heavenly inheritance.)

Fourthly, that it was no seal at all to any but Abraham's person, and that in
another sense then the word seal is accepted in with you;

Fifthly, that it was dispensed to Ishmael under no such notion as a seal of the
Gospel covenant, but merely as he was a male of Abraham's house, on which
account it was set to every male born in his house, or bought with his money;
though visibly an heir to neither the earthly, nor the heavenly Canaan, as
wicked servants were not, and no doubt to his Sons by Keturah also, as well as
to Ishmael, though both he and they before known to Abraham to be no heirs of
that covenant of circumcision, which God gave him in Genesis 17. and told him that
he would establish that with Isaac only Genesis 17. 19. 21.

Determination.
It is further added for satifaction how children have faith, viz. in Semine,
radice, munere, habitu, actu primo, not in fructu, folio, usu, actu secundo, in
a word, they have the habit, and the seed, not ths exercise and fruit of it.

Detection.
You asserted above p. 3. from Mat. 18. 6. that little ones do (...) credere
believe in Christ, which phrase [(...)] as also [(...)] [(...)] etc. to
believe, to drink, to eat, to read, to teach, to hear etc. do ever express
productionem potentiae in actum, not simply the habit, faculty, gift,
inclination, power, seed etc. but the very second act, the use, the fruit, the
putting forth of these faculties into their several acts, and exercises, this
(as all well studied Scholars know) so your selves cannot but acknowledge,
that to believe, is not only to have faith but to act faith, and it cannot
properly be said of any that they d^ believe, but such as (quoad nos) do so
indeed.

As for such as are only in potentia ad fidem, though proxima, and such as are
in capacity to believe, and do not, they cannot be said by wisemen to believe,
for then all men may be said to believe, who have facultatem, munus credendi,
as well as intelligendi, ratio^andi, Eligendi etc. though they never do it: I
appeal therefore to your own consciences, whether your saying that infants do
believe, and yet cannot act, nor show that faith by any fruit of it, has not
in it plus Idiotae quam Idiomatis, and be not as palpable a contradiction as
can fall from men's tongues or pens.

Determination.
Their not declaring of it themselves can no more conclude against infants
faith, then against their reasonable soul.

Detection.
The Reasonable soul is in them universally, essentially, in the highest degree
necessarily, and praedicable concerning them de omni, per se, and qua sic, as
being de esse consti^utive, for Animarationalis est forma hominis, quae dat
esse, the very essential form of mankind, so that he can as easily cease to be,
as to be without it, therefore there can be no conclusion against that in any
infants, since they are no longer then while they have it, but faith in Christ
is (according to your selves) Habitus ad placitum a deo infufus only, not
innatus, and is in them neither (qua sic) nor essentially nor universally in
all, nay but in a few infants, by your own confession, and you know not which
neither, for though you do altum sapere so f^r sometimes, as to conclude it is
in infants of believers yet you do insipere so far sometimes as to undote that
again, and say the spirit is neither bound nor barred in his working of it in
these or those, so that till they are at years there can be no conclusion made
p. 18. therefore me thinks you should blush at this illiterate, and indigested
assertion, viz. that there can be no more concluding against the being of faith
in them, then their having reasonable souls.

Secondly, if from their non declaring it there can be no more concluding
against their having faith, then against their reasonable souls, then there is
no more concluding against the being of faith in one infant more then its being
in another, or against its being in unbelievers infants than in those of
believers, for the reasonable soul is in all, even in the infants of
unbelievers, as well as of believers.

Secondly, if their non-declaring it be no ground to conclude against their
having faith, yet I am sure it is ground enough to bar you from concluding that
they have it, specially that this infant has it, more then that, for though
you confess there can be no conclusion made till you see the fruits of their
faith, yet that is the bold conclusion you undertake to make.

Fourthly, whether we can upon its non appearance conclude against their having
faith yea or no, yet upon its non appearance we may boldly conclude against
their baptism, and admittance into the visible Church here on earth, into which
not an invisible habit of faith gives right, but an outward appearance, and
profession to believe, witness not my self only, who am of little credit with
you, but Mr. Cotton also, none of the least of your Champions that appear for
infant baptism, whose very words p. 48. 49. of his Way of the Churches in New
England these are, viz.

It is not the seed of faith, nor faith it self, that knitteth a man to this or
that visible Church, but an holy profession of the faith, and professed
subjection to the Gospel of Christ in their communion.

Be ashamed therefore of such a monstrous position, that persons not appearing
to believe in Christ can conclude no more against their faith in Christ, then
against their reasonable souls.

Determination.
The seed of faith sown, after discovers it self when the season comes.

Detection.
Yet so audacious are you, that whilst it is but in the seed at most by your
own confession, as in infancy, to attempt a discovery of it to all the world to
be in these infants, viz. of believers, and not in those, viz. of infidels
before the season.

Determination.
The testimony of Scripture concerning their faith, and the proofs taken from
thence are equivalent to the best testimony, and profession of any man
concerning his own faith.

Detection.
O Sapientia! as if the Scripture did as punctually, personally, and
particularly testify concerning this and that individual infant which you
sprinkle, that it does believe, and those infants that you deny to sprinkle,
that they do not believe, as men at years do to us by their words, and works,
that they do, or do not believe.

Secondly, there is but one testimony of Scripture alleged by your selves,
where you say its asserted of infants that they do believe, viz. Mat. 18. 6.
and that (as I have showed).

First, speaks not of little ones in your sense, but of little ones in Christ's
sense viz. believers indeed, and his disciples, whom he styles little ones also
a little above Matthew. 10. 42. a place where we read not that any infant was
among them.

Secondly, that Scripture testifies of those of whomsoever it speaks in actu
secundo, that they do believe: and so to do your selves yield is impossible for
infants; therefore it cannot be meant of them.

Thirdly, if it did speak of little ones properly so called, so as to say they
do believe, yet that they were believers, and not unbelievers infants is a
thing which a wise man may fumble himself 55 times over and become a fool
before he once find it so to be.

Fourthly, 'twere but a Prosopopeia however.

Determination.
If it be further asked, how faith is bread in them? it is answered by the holy
spirit, whose ways are inscrutable, who ties not himself to means works where
he will, and how, quo magistro, quam cito discitur quod docet? says Cyprian.

Detection.
And yet you scrue so far into the inscrutable ways of the spirit in this
matter as, though he works where he will, and how, both to bind and bar him,
and to determine both where he does, and must work faith, and where he does
not, and must not viz. in believers infants, not in infants of infidels, else
why do you refuse to baptize the one upon nonappearance of faith, and yet
plead for the baptism of the other, as in whom it appears to you so clearly,
that by argument you say you make it more plainly appear to any one, that will
not deny Scripture and reason that they have faith, then the profession of any
one particular person that ev^r I baptized, can make it appear of himself? for
thus you peremptorily conclude p 5. and then as prettily unconclude it all ore
again p. 18. saying, unless it could be certainly presumed what children have
the habit of faith, what have not, for the working of the spirit is not known
to us, there can be no conclusion made: why also do you say the promise is to
believers and all their seed? which is as much as to say, God is bound upon his
word and covenant unto these children, not unto others, and therefore must be
as good as his word (for I hope you all agree that God will not lie) p. 14.
though I confess p 18. you unsay all this ore again, and grant that he is not
bound to work it in all the children of Christian parents, nor bard from
working it in any of the children of infidels: O fine whisles!

Determination.
If it be inquired how faith can be said to be in them without their consent?
the answer is as well as original sin, to which they never consented, and that
Christ is more powerful to salvation, then Adam to condemnation.

Detection.
That original sin is in infants so far as it is in them without their consent,
I do not deny, it being a matter more imputative, as I have showed above, then
inhaesive, and that Christ is more powerful to salvation, then Adam was to
condemnation is an undoubted truth, which makes me believe otherwise then once
I did, viz. that whatsoever befell whomsoever merely by Adams sin is as
universally, as well in respect of the subject made miserable thereby viz.
whole mankind, as of the misery befalling that subject, by the coming of the
Second Adam taken away: for which tenet I could give more proof then you can
easily disprove, were it not besides the Argument I am in hand with, but that
faith is in any persons without the consent of those in whom it is, is a lesson
that I shall never consent to learn while mine eyes are open, I have found many
Divines defining faith by the very term of an assent or consent unto the things
promised, preached, proffered or propounded to us to believe, and making assent
or consent such a necessary ingredient to the very essence, being or nature of
faith, that faith cannot be faith without it, thus Mr. Baxter your fiercest
fellow-fendent of infants baptism, the very essence of faith, says be p. 98.
lies in assenting that Christ is king and savior, and consenting that he be
so to us.

Yea he denies them to have any true faith who do not thus assent and consent,
but of all the faiths that ever I have heard, or read of, and of all the kinds
of believing that ever were broacht in the brains of men, I never yet heard of
a believing of things whether one will or no, I mean a real believing, and not
such a feigned forced faith, as that of those who must say they believe as the
Church believes, when happily they know not what that is, nor did I ever hear
of believing without assenting to the things believed since I was born, till I
met with this figment of yours, nor ever shall again, I am persuaded while the
world stands from any men, but such as having uttered one absurdity, are
resolved rather then to recant it, to uphold it with an 100 worse then it self.

Determination.
It is further added, that there is no other way revealed for the salvation of
little infants but by justification, and that by faith: that way of the
presentment of the righteousness of Christ without faith is (...) figment of
the Anabaptists without ground or reason from Scripture, the Covenant of the
Gospel being the righteousness of faith.

Detection.
To which I contradictorily reply, that there is another way revealed for the
salvation and justification of little infants from all the guilt that lies upon
them in infancy, which is no other then that which comes upon them for the sin
of Adam only, and from all that mischief which comes on them only, merely and
simply for that sin, then that way of faith, and that is the presentment of the
righteousness of Christ to God on their behalf without faith, and this way is
no figment of the Anabaptists, as you No-Baptists do foolishly fancy, but that
which has such strong ground and reason from Scripture, as you will never
overthrow while you live, although to men at years that have acted
transgression in their own persons, and are capable to act faith and other good
as well as evil, the Gospel is granted to be a Covenant that gives
righteousness by Christ in no other way then that way of faith and obedience
to him.

We usually put clothes upon infan^s, but men put their clothes on themselves,
and so must we put on Christ by faith in order to justification, when we come
to years of discretion Gal. 3. 27. and not before.

I know the multitude of Scriptures that speak in general, or at least in such
indefinit terms, as are in sense equivalent to universal, concerning salvation
to all them that believe, and nothing but condemnation to all them that believe
not, as Mark 16. 15. 16. John 3. 15. 16. 18. 19. 36. 11. 26. Act. 10. 42. Act.
13. 43. Romans 1. 17. 3. 22. 25. 26. 28. 30. 4. 6. 24. a most monstrous mistake
of all which, as also of the whole Scripture makes you miserably misbelieve
this matter viz. the way that all dying infants are saved in, for you deem, or
rather dream that the Lord by these expressions, whosoever believes in me
shall never dye, he that believes not shall be damned, he that believes not
on the Son shall not see life, etc. delivers his will and testament not only
concerning persons at age, but concerning infants in their very infancy also:
whereas if you Divines had not Divined your selves to very dotage, you could
not but understand, that little infants are not intended in any of these, or
any other places that hold out faith as the way of our salvation: for do but
judge in your selves, were it not shameful senslessnesse to read thus out of
those places viz. God so loved the world etc. that whosoever infants in infancy
as well as men believe in him should not perish, but have everlasting life,
those infants that do believe on him are not condemned, but those infants that
believe not, are condemned already, and why? because they have not believed in
the name of the only begotten Son of God: And this shall be the condemnation
of infants as well as men, that light and life is come to them, and yet infants
believe it not, neither will come unto Christ that they might have life, but
but love darkness more then light, because their deeds are evil? for thus you
may read it, if infants as well as men be there meant: and so were it not
sottish to read thus out of Romans 4. 23. it was not written for Abraham only
that faith was imputed to him for righteousness, but for infants also, to whom
it shall be imputed, if they do believe on him, that raised up Jesus our Lord
from the dead etc. so would it sound any whit savourly in the ears of one that's
of a sound judgment to read Mark. 16. 15. 16. so as to understand infants
together with others viz. go preach the Gospel to every creature, who ere
believes, and is baptized shall be saved, but whoever believes not, man or
woman, old or young, infant or suckling shall be damned? would not this grate
harshly upon charitable ears? but surely infants are not spoken of here, nor
are they in any other Scripture (for ought I can find) with the best sight I
have, where faith is spoken of, as the condition on our part, without which
nothing is to be expected but condemnation: I am sorry Sirs to see you Clergy
men cloth your selves with such dark conceits, and confusednesse of mind, as
not to know of whom, and to whom things are spoken in the word, nor whom in
general the Scriptures, you profess to be so profound in, concern and preach
to, and I beseech you be not too wise in your own conceits to learn one lesson
at least from him that is a fool among you for Christ's sake viz. whereas you
say infants must believe, or not be saved, the Scriptures declaring no other
way to salvation but faith in Christ, that the Scriptures were written only for
our instruction, that are at years to understand them, and not for the use and
in^ruction of infants in infancy in the way of life, the Scriptures were given
as a copy of the testament, and the will of God concerning men and women, to
declare to them what he requires of them, and in what way he would have them to
wait upon him, in order to the attaining of that salvation he has purchased by
the blood of Christ, and will freely confer on them for his sake viz. the way
of faith, repentance, baptism, supplication, submission, self-denial, obedience
both active and passive, perseverance therein to the end, and in a word
attendance to the law of Christ the voice of that prophet, that he has now
raised up, in all things, or else to have no part among his people, from all
which conditions and performances (I say from every of them as well as any one
of them) from believing as well as obeying in baptism, or any other part of his
will, or any other works of God under the Gospel, among which belief is a chief
one John 6. 28. 29. little infants (as being yet incapable subjects to obey in
any of these) are universally exempred in their infancy: otherwise I dare a
vouch no dying infants in the world shall ever be saved; for can they do any of
these things in infancy? so such as are to be baptized are called to do, Act.
22. 16. and who ever so does shall be saved, and whoever does not shall perish,
Ier. 10. 25, if the way wherein men are to be saved must be walked in by all
infants too, in order to their salvation, then woe to all infants that die in
nonage, for alas how shall infants call on him, in whom they have not
believed, and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not yet heard,
and how shall they hear without a Preacher, and who can preach to them before
they can understand? Romans 10. 14. 15. so then they cannot believe, for faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, some way or other outwardly
as well as inwardly (...).

Babist.
The spirit here speaks de subjecto capaci only viz, of the way how men come
by faith, and not of the way wherein infants have it, and it is confessed that
faith in adultis, in them that are capable to hear and understand is begotten
by this means of hearing, but not so in infants who cannot hear, the spirit is
not tied to work by means in little infants, to the bringing of them to the
faith, as ^e does in men, but without the outward hearing of the word he works
faith in little children.

Baptist.
This same that you now say fits us very well to you ward again, when you say
justification comes by faith, for we grant that adultis, to them that are
capable to act faith, justification comes by faith, nor shall they by any means
obtain it who are capable to believe, and yet believe not, but not so to
infants who cannot believe, the spirit is not tied to work by means in little
infants to the justification or bringing of them to salvation, as he does in
men, but by the righteousness of Christ imputed without obedience in baptism,
or faith either he saves them in nonage, and farther that they cannot believe,
which is properly (as I showed before) not only to have, but act faith in
Christ, your selves tell us saying, they have not the use, the second act, the
exercise, the fruit of it, and so do not believe, and so must according to your
sense of Scripture, if the word speak of them, be cast into the lake of fire
Rev. 21. 8. but further grant they could have faith in both the habit, and act
of it also, yet can they not obey Christ in other things, which are required
necessarily to salvation in the word of the Gospel, at least concomitanter, et
consecutive, as well as faith it self, they cannot hear Christ's voice in all
things, they cannot confess Christ before men, nor to be come in the flesh,
they have not crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts of it, they
cannot deny themselves, and take up their cross and follow Christ, nor hate
father and mother and life for him, nor keep his commandments, nor abide in his
Doctrine, and many such like things, all which the Gospel says as universally,
whosoever does not, as well as whosoever believes not cannot be his disciple
Mat. 18. Luke 14. Is not Christ's Gal. 5. 24. has not God 2 John 9. is a ly^r,
and shall not enter into the holy City 1 John 2. 4. Rev. 21. 27. 22. 14. 15. is
a deceiver, and an Antichrist 2 John 7. shall be denied by Christ, yea punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of Christ, for non obedience to
the Gospel, 2 These. 1. 6. so that if the Scriptures speaking, of the ways and
means of salvation be to be understood as the terms, and conditions on which
dying infants shall be saved as well as men, and without which they must be
damned, then all dying infants must perish contrary to your sense of Mat. 18.
14. who take the little ones there for infants, for its said there it is the
will of my Father that not one of these little ones should perish, put the case
therefore that infants could believe, yet their case would be little the better
(as to salvation) so long as still they must be short of showing their faith by
other good works, without which faith is not saving nor worth a straw, for what
would it profit if infants could go so far, as to say they have faith, and yet
have not works, can faith save them? I^m. 2. 14. 26. no, its dead and helpless
for as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also.

Therefore the body of Scripture is to be understood, as spoken concerning men
and women, and the means and way of their salvation; and no^ of infants.

Babist.
Yea when the word speaks of works of holiness, self denial, suffering, mercy,
etc. as the way to life, which infants cannot do, it excepts them from the
doing thereof, as no capable subject, and not from the salvation nevertheless,
n^r yet does it except infants when it speaks of faith.

Baptist.
Is not faith a work as well as repentance, and the rest? yea the main and
principal work of the Law of Christ, i. e. the Gospel John 6. 28. 29.

Secondly, is it not as difficult a work for infants to believe in Christ, as
to obey Christ's voice in other things, and are they not still as incapable a
subject to do that, as to do any more things that are required? why then not
exempted from that for the sake of their incapacity, as well as from other
things?

Thirdly, if the spirit does go extraordinary ways to work at all about the
salvation of infants (as you must confess he must) and brings them to it
without, and besides the ordinary means, he brings men by, why will you tie,
and limit him him more to the ordinary way, and means of faith, then of
obedience in other matters, as repentance, self denial etc, as to their
salvation, seeing he must go out of the road, and tract, in the saving of them,
wherein he saves men, may he not as well save infants without faith, without
which he will save no man, as without self denial, and suffering, and
confessing of Christ, etc. without which he will save no man?

Fourthly, specially since infants are not mentioned as meant a jot more in the
places that speak of salvation by faith, then in the places that speak of
salvation by obedience in all things; for as it is said, He that believes and
is baptized shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned, (infants
no where expressed or meant there) so it is said as universally he is the Author
of all them that obey him, and he shall take vengeance on all them that obey
him not, and cut them off that hearken not to his voice (infants no way
expressly excepted as not meant there.)

The Scriptures therefore are still to be understood de subjecto capaci, when
they promise or threaten things on conditions, and terms of faith, unbelief,
and other good and evil works, as confessing and denying Christ, and
exclusively of infants, where infants cannot possibly perform them; for as when
its said he that works not let him not eat, infants are no where excepted, yet
are not by the spirits appointment to starve, though they work not, neither are
they meant there because they cannot work, and as under law, when it was said,
Cursed is he that continues not in every thing written therein, and do this and
live, the way wherein men were to live or die was set forth by those words, and
not the way wherein infants should be cursed or blessed, accordingly as they
were or were not found therein in infancy; so Analogically when it is said under
the Gospel the just must live by faith and he that believes not shall be
damned, and Christ in flaming fire shall render vengeance to him that obeys not
the Lord, etc. it is to be understood as spoken of the ways, wherein men
walking shall live or die, and not at all of the way wherein he saves or damnes
dying infants, for that stands still by good reason from Scripture that they
being incapable to do, what on man's part is required to life, i. e. to act
belief (unless weel hold they are all damned dying in nonage, as you pitiful
merciless men hold that 20 to one are, but we bloody Baptists that none at all
are) we must hold them to be excused from the terms of believing, and presented
righteous before the Father, by the righteousness of Christ without faith, and
therefore though I see I shall meet with this argument again in your Review,
where I Will talk with it a little more, yet i will conclude here just contrarily to
what you conclude with, viz. that the tenet of no justification nor salvation
for dying infants by the righteousness of Christ without faith in their own
persons, is a mere ^igment of the Arch-Anti-baptists, i. e. the Priests,
without ground and reason from Scripture, whereby (as by some show of reason)
to flatter men on to a continuance in that false way of bringing infants to be
sprinkled, that so their Kingdom and priesthood many continue to spread its
black wings over whole provinces and parishes at once, and to submit them to
their arbitrary jurisdiction, as well a ware that it can stand no longer then
the other, for once give over christening the whole parish infancy, and then
farewell that parish posture, which the Pope set up in all Christendom some
600 years ago, yea then down falls the parochial-Church-steeple-house,
Priesthood, pay and all.

Amen so be it.
THE SECOND PART OF ANTI-BABISME. OR A REVIEW OF THEIR REVIEW.
I Come now to take notice of the second piece of your Pamphlet a thing made up
of several sorts of matter, and ^rickt together into one slender Tractate, and
entitled A Review of the Arguments used in the Disputation, my Animadversion
of which I answerably style a Re-Review or Review of your Review. In which
Review of yours I find some things said, and disputed over again, which are
before disputed in the Disputation; some things (as it were) un^aid, and
undisputed ore again, which are disputed before in the Disputation; and
somthings, viz. here a little, and there a little disputed, which the
Disputation disputes not before at all. So that the business (if you view it
one way) stands ternal, i. e. brancht out into 3 heads, barking all like those
of Cerberus against the light: but if you review and behold it another way it
seems to stand Quaternall or quartered out into four heads, acting all in their
several turns against the truth, viz.

First, A Praeamble or March toward the battle, p. 11, 12.

Secondly, An Onset, or charge given by a Forlorn hope of three worthies, or
choice Arguments, whereof the first is a freshman, that was not in the last
dispute, the two last old Soldiers that are bold to face about and fight us
again, though wounded well-nigh to death in the last battle, p. 12. 13. 14. 16.

Thirdly, A very hot dispute or Reply against Reason, and its forces storming
your strong hold of infant baptism, or an earnest encounter with such
objections, as Reason (say you) makes against it, all which you make a puff
at, and attempt to vanquish in seven or eight several repulses p. 16. 17. 18.
19.

Fourthly, A Bugbear bringing up the Rear of the battle, horribly dressed, and
horned with seven horns, all pushing and poking against the truth, on purpose
to to fright men from being baptized, and make such as are ready to turn to the
truth to tremble, and forsake its tents; alias a warning, or Morter-piece
charged with a number of small shot, viz. the horrid sins this wretched error
of the Anabaptists, alias that od^ous error of owning the truth involves men
in) that more hits then hurts them that have the spiritual armor on, presented
and discharged to scare the Christian Soldier, i. e. the Christian Reader (if
possible) out of his Christian wits and senses.

Thus does this Squadron of military matter made and raised in defense of
Infant Baptism divide it self, and play its part: against which notwithstanding
we shall (God willing) adventure forth in the strength of Christ, give battle
to it, and to each part of it successively as it lies in order.

Review.
There might innumerable Arguments be brought both from Scripture and Reason
for the confirming of the practice of the Church of God from the beginning,
whose authority alone, if it were of any esteem with the adversaries thereof,
were enough to have silenced these disputes, at least to have laid the itch,
and quenched the heat of them, in baptizing the children of believing parents,
but as the have of the Disputation did forbid the Ministers then to be so
thoroughly provided with them, modesty does now to insert them here; Therefore
the Christian Reader is desired to peruse Calvin's Institutions, Ursins
Catechism, and Dr. Featley 's Book upon this subject, where he shall be
thoroughly furnished. Besides that opinion of Ovid, Etsi non prosint singula,
multa juvant, What ever it may carry of eredit in other causses, ought to have
but little in this, where we trust not in multitude nor measure by number; but
substance and weight of Arguments are the foundation of our faith, the other
are for pomp and victory, these only for satisfaction and verity. Whosoever
thou art that desire to be grounded in the Truth, examine diligently and
understand these three arguments following, which are but the same reviewed
that were used in the disputation, and thou shall be able, being confirmed thy
self thorough the grace of God, to strengthen thy brethren, whose faith is
every where assaulted in these miserable dates, by the watchfulness and cunning
insinuation of the adversary: nor are these three commended unto thee, as if
among David's Worthies they were the first three, the composer of them
arrogates no such thing to them, thou shall find many both better appointed,
and more strongly armed, and which go forth i^ strength of those that fight the
battles of the Lord among the Worthies of Israel, these were never intended but
as a forlorn-hope, yet till the adversary shall have worsted them, thou shall
not need to desire fresh supplies.

Re-Review.
This first part or Praeambulary approach to the battle gives big words, but no
blows, it only vapors, and vaunts, carries the colors, and flourishes them,
advancing with a company of broad bragges of what Innumer^e forces your cause
has at command from Scriptures, and from Reason, and from Churches practice,
and authority, and from Authors of Renown Calvin, Vrsin, Dr. Featley, whereby,
fearing least they should forgo it upon sight of your own apparent slenderness,
and that unthorough provision your Disputation presented in proof thereof, to
flatter your followers.

First, into a false faith of more full and thorough furniture, c^mming in from
all quarters toward its defense, and so to a secure continuance in your crazy
cause and to keep close still to the Clergy and their colors, in order
thereunto also, highly inhauncing the price of three following forlorn-hope
highway Hacksters and Hachny Arguments as not the last, nor least, though not
the first three among the worthies that are engaged in it.

Whereas that poor, blind, Implicit-opinion'd people, and Clergy-claw'd
christened creatures may no longer, to their utter erring from the way of
Christ's truth, and their own peace, trust in the lying words of their Prophets,
that profit themselves more then them by their traditionary doctrine,

I do here in the name of the great King Jesus, who gave commission Mat. 28. 18
to make persons disciples, and to teach them first, and then to baptize them,
proclaim it aloud to the whole earth, that all these are either clearly against
you, or (all things considered) nothing for you.

First, the whole region of Scripture in every coast and quarter thereof is up
in arms against you, neither is there any one part or place throughout it,
wherein you ever find that way of infant baptism (much less your way of
infant-rantism) so much as probably to have been practiced: or the war you wage
for it promoted by so much as one piece of a precept, that such a thing should
be done, or inch of instance that ere it was done at all: yea in all places
where ever baptism was dispensed you find it done only and downrightly in that
despised way, wherein we do at this day i. e. of dipping persons immediately
after, but never before converted and discipled; all they of Jerusalem, and
Iudaea, and Galil^e that were baptized by John in Jordan, and by Christ's
disciples in his presence, and by his appointment, confessed their sins 3. Mat.
were first taught and instructed, or made disciples Mat. 28. 18. John 3. 22.
John 4. 1. 2. 3. all they who were baptized by Peter and others after his
serm^n at Jerusalem, to the number of 3000. did first gladly receive the word
Act. 2. 41. all they that were baptized by Phillip at Samaria, and between
Jerusalem and Gaza were men and women that believed the things spoken by
Phillip concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Acts 8. 12. 36.
37. all they that were commanded to be baptized by Peter in the name of the
Lord at Cesarea were such as were converted at the hearing of the word Act. 10.
44. 48. all that were baptized at Corinth by Paul, Silas, Timotheus, were such
as believed Act. 18. 8. all they that were baptized by Apollos, or any other at
Ephesus before Paul came thither, which were about 12. were every one of them
adult believers, Act. 19. 1. 2. etc. All that ever we find A^anias baptized at
Damascus, though there were other disciples there besides himself, with whom
Paul walked a while, was Paul that was baptized calling on the name of the Lord.
All they of the Church of Rome (to every one of whom Paul writes his Epistle
Rom 1. 6.) that were baptized into Jesus Christ, and buried with him by baptism
into his death, were such as had formerly lived in sin, and actually obeyed it
in the lusts thereof, and yielded themselves up as servants to it, and had now
visibly obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered unto
them Romans 6. 3. 4. 12. 16. 17. 19. 21. which things I take him to be little
better then an infant in understanding, that judges they were performed by any
infants. All they at Galatia, who were baptized into Christ, were such as had
received and embraced the Gospel, and had put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
such who through ignorance of God had done service to such as by nature were no
gods, but now had attained to know God, by the preaching of the Gospel to them,
which things that are spoken to all the Churches of Galatia, cannot be said of
any infants Gal. 1. 9. 3. 27. 4. 8. 9. 13. verses, among all which this is most
notable in that he says, As many of you as have bin baptized into Christ have
put one Christ, we see all along throughout the whole body of the new
testament, It was not the rule of Christ, nor the practice of the primitive
times to baptize persons, till they had had first preached the Gospel to them,
and according to the commission converted them, or made them disciples, indeed
so soon as ever they were thus discipled or made disciples (that no infants can
be so in infancy is showed above, as simply as Mr. Bazter seems to suppose
believers infants are so from the very womb) I agree with Mr. Baxter, that
their baptism was not to be delayed, and forasmuch as he abundantly proves the
period of time, wherein persons we^ ever baptized in the primitive times by the
will of Christ to be immediately after they were converted and made disciples,
he consequen^ly agrees as much with me as I desire him, insomuch that in
confirmation of this that I say, I mean to declare this truth viz. that persons
are not to be baptized till they are first made disciples, in the same words
wherein he himself declares it to us by the space of well nigh a whole page
together, in order to the making of his matter to serve our turn against
himself, and all you that baptize infants, but especially against his fellow
soldier Mr. Marshal, and his critical observations, out of which he tells us
that infants are not disciples before, but are made disciples by baptizing, I
shall frame this argument viz.

If Christ's Rule be that persons should be baptized when they are first made
disciples without delay, or immediately after they are converted and discipled,
then persons are not to be baptized before they are converted and discipled.

But Christ's Rule is that persons should be baptized when they are first made
disciples, or immediately after they are converted and discipled.

Ergo, they are not to be baptized before they are converted or discipled.

The Ma^or is most clear, and consequent, for if it be Christ's will that
baptizing should immediately follow our discipling persons, or converting them
to the faith, then consequently it is his will that baptizing should not go
before our discipling, and converting them: if baptism must be immediately
subsequent to teaching, or making disciples by Christ's commission, then
teaching persons, or making them disciples must be Antecedent to baptism,
unless both these be the mind of Christ in his commission whom and when to
baptize, viz. that they should not baptize persons till they are taught and
discipled, and yet (to go round again) that they should not teach them till
they have baptized them i. e. in Mr. Marshals sense initiated them first to be
disciples by baptism, and thereby admitted them to be taught, as for the Minor,
which is this viz. That it is Christ's rule that persons shall be baptized
without delay, when they are first made disciples, or immediately after they
are converted, as I have fully proved it already above, both from the
commission for baptizing, and from Scripture example explaining that
commission, and from the end and use of baptism, so I shall further prove it in
Mr. Baxters own words, then which I think there need no other (if they be well
weighed) to convince a wise man that by Scripture rule no infants in infancy
are to be baptized.

To which purpose he writteth thus p. 126. 127. at large viz.

First, in the commission Mat. 28. 19. 20. Christ adjoineth baptizing
immediately to discipling, go disciple all nations baptizing them.

Secondly if any person be so impudent as to say, It is not the meaning of
Christ that baptizing should immediately without delay follow discipling, they
are confuted by the constant example of Scripture; for there is no men^ion that
I can find of any one person that was baptized long after their discipling or
that ever the Apostles of Christ did delay the baptizing of disciples, John 4.
1. 2. Jesus made and baptized more disciples then John. See how making and
baptizing disciples are conjoined, Act. 2. 38. 41. the 3000 were presently
baptized the same day that they were made disciples without staying till the
morrow, though one would think the number of 3000 might have excused the delay,
if they had taken longer time to do it in; And some would think that their
conversion being so sudden the Apostles would have waited for a trial of their
sincerity, but this is not the wisdom of God, though it seem to aim at the
purity of the Church: Scripture tells us of another way Acts 8. 1. 2. the
people of Samiaria when they believed were baptized without delay. And v. 13.
14. Simon Magus was presently baptized, though yet not brought out of the gall
of bitterness o^ bond of iniquity, and had no part or fellowship in that
business: yea the Samarita^s were generally baptized by Philip, before they had
received the holy Ghost: for he was yet fallen upon none of them, only they
were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus verse 16. So Acts 8. 36. 37. 38.
the Eunuch was baptized in his journey as they went, without delaying one day
or hour after he professed himself to be a disciple. So was Paul baptized as
soon as he rose from his blindness upon the words of Ananias, Acts 9. 18. So
was Cornelius with his friends baptized immediately without delay, the same day
Lydia and her household were baptized without delay Acts 16. 15. and the Iaylor
the same hour of the night that he was discipled Acts 16. 38. So the
Corinthians Acts 18. 8. and Ananias language to Paul repeated Acts 22. 16. is
plain, and now why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized etc. and of the
household of Stephanus that Paul baptized, it is implied too; and it is most
observable which is said in John 3. 26. of Jesus himself that he baptized (by
his disciples) and all men came unto him; where it is undeniable that Jesus
baptized without delay, even as fast as they came to him and pr^fessed
themselves disciples, and can we have a better example then the Lord Jesus
himself? -- And thus you see (says he) that according to all the examples of
baptism in the Scripture (not to speak of John's baptism) there was no delaying,
no not a day usually but they were all baptized as soon as they were discipled.

Thus far are the very words of Mr. Baxter, brought by him in proof of infant
baptism, and here brought again by me in proof of the clear contrary viz. that
according to all the examples of baptism in the Scripture, c^ one infant was
ever baptized in the primitive times, but that all that ever were then
baptized, did first believe and were converted, were first made disciples by
the preaching of the Gospel to them, and did first come and profess themselves
disciples, and thereupon were immediately admitted: which things I dare say,
twill be out of doubt with all rational considerate impartial Christians, that
they were never performed by any infants, and if not, then whether all these
examples do not clearly show rather that no infants were then baptized, then
that any were or now ought to be, a child of 7. years old at least may easily
decide it: notwithstanding so childish is Mr. Baxter, as to set down this at
large, that he may thence make himself a clearer way (as by the constant
example and practice of the primitive time) to prove your present practice of
baptizing of infants: which premises and conclusion viz. that men and women of
old were baptized without delay, so soon as ever they were converted to the
faith, and were discipled and professed themselves disciples, therefore we must
baptize the children of Christians in infancy, or else our practice is utterly
inconsistent with the rule of Christ, and contrary to the practice of the
primitive times, and consequently a sinful practice, are as suitable, as Humano
capiti cervicem pictor equinam
Iungere Si velit,
or as when -- Mu^er formosa superne
desinat in turpem piscem.


And howbeit Mr. Baxter in defense hereof tells us p. 128. they who baptize the
children of Christians at age (as the Anabaptists do) cannot possibly do it
when they are first discipled, I am so amazed at that expression, that I can
hardly believe he minded what he said when he pend it, nor do I think the man
had his wits well about him when he wrote all the rest that follows in proof
thereof through out that whole chapter of his, where the further he proceeds,
the more he abounds and sinks ore head and ears in absurdities, contradicting
himself and his own principles, and overthrowing the very thing he there
prosecutes the proof of, for

First, so far is it from being impossible to baptize believers children
immediately after they are discipled, if we forbear them till they come to
years, that indeed it is impossible that they should be discipled at all till
then, in such a way as all those were discipled in, whom he has produced as
examples in this case, for whatever conversion there seems to him to be of all,
or at least the most of the children of believers so timely, that neither
themselves nor others be can discipled when by the preaching of the Gospel they
are brought over both to believe, and to be willing to obey the Lord Jesus, and
do freely, seriously and (as may seem to us) sincerely profess their faith in
him, and their readiness to obey him, and their repentance from those dead
works, and ways of the flesh they have formerly lived in (unless he suppose it
possible that these should live in sin) and their desires to be baptized in the
name of Christ for remission of their sins: then (I say) they appear first to
be discipled in foro hominum, ubi vides ibi fides. where we see it is there we
say it is.
and Ecclosiae (for whatever they were before in foro Dei is nothing to us) and
then and not before to be baptized.

As for us therefore we have a steady rule to go by in the baptizing of
persons, according to which we still baptize them as of old they did, when
first discipled, yea though they are persons whose parents were Church Members,
or in other mere relative only, or real discipleship, yet they are first made
Disciples when they first appear to be converted, witness the three thousand
Jews, whom Mr. Baxter himself does instance in; who though they, and their
parents were all relatively holy by birth, and Church Members of the visible
Church of old, and as Mr. Baxter is pleased to say most simply p. 20. both
disciples and Servants of God by very nature, yet in the Gospel sense they were
first made disciples, or discipled so as thereby to be in right to baptism,
when they were by Peter converted only, and not before: so that if the children
of Christians had now either such a Relative discipleship (as he calls it, and
as he says the Jews children had once by birth) and such a real discipleship,
or invisible conversion to God in very infancy, as he deeply do^es all such to
have so soon as ever they they are born, neither of which yet they have indeed,
yet nevertheless that they may be, and also must be first discipled when they
are at years in that sense wherein discipling was in the Commission enjoined in
order to baptism, it is evident by Mr. Baxters own alleged Instance of the
Jews Acts 2. who though they were (according to Mr. Baxter himself as nigh, and
in truth more nigh to God by birth, than the fleshly seed of believing Gentiles
are, yet were not for all that their old Church Membership and discipleship
(for indeed they were (not in infancy) but when grown up discipled unto Moses)
admitted to baptism thereupon, till they were first discipled unto Christ, and
had both heard, and gladly received the word of the Gospel: neither were ever
any (as appears by all the Examples forecited) of what parents soever
descended, though of Abraham himself admitted to baptism in the primitive
times, till discipled, i. e. till visibly appearing, and verbally at least
professing to repent, believe and embrace the Gospel: nor is it possible for
men, to whom Christ gives order to make disciples to him, to do it any other
way than by instructing persons till such time as they learn, and receive the
things that are taught them.

Moreover to let pass that round he runs p, 127. where after he had showed so
abundantly, that to be Christ's disciples gave persons admission immediately to
baptism (to go round again) he expresses himself thus lin. 32. that baptism
admits them to be his disciples; whereas Mr. Baxter asserts, that we cannot
possibly baptize children of Christians at age, immediately after they are first
discipled, because we cannot possibly know when such children are first
discipled, except it be in their first infancy, as I have showed him already
what a steady rule, and direct period of time we keep to in baptizing as they
did in the primitive times, viz. as soon as they are first discipled, i. e.
when first they appear to us truly to be converted, and profess seriously and
sincerely (as far as we can judge) to repent from their sins, and believe in
Christ, and desire, and profer to be baptized in his name for the remission of
sins, so I must return his own proposition upon him' that they who baptize the
children of Christians in infancy (as the Anti-baptists do) cannot possibly do
it when they are first discipled, and that because they cannot possibly know
when such persons are first made disciples, and except they account them to be
first discipled as we do, viz. when professing verbally, and when first
appearing visibly and (for ought we can discern) truly to believe and repent
from their sins, and desire baptism, which things no infants ever do.

Babist.
But Mr. Baxter supposes infants of Christian parents to have a Relative
infant-discipleship from the womb, and so has a sure way of baptizing them,
when they are first discipled if he baptize them in their first infancy.

Baptist.
That Relative infant-discipleship (if by that he mean the same
birth-priviledge (as I am sure he does) which the Jews infants once had) is a
real piece of nonsense, and such a phrase as the spirit never expressed the
Jews birth privilege by, as not by any other so much as tantamount thereunto
in sense or signification in either the old Testament or new: neither can any
such denomination as that of disciple (which is of disco) properly be given to
any person, upon a mere account of such a relative holiness, as the Jews
infants once had, without respect to their being actually under some tuition or
other, any more than it might be given to the Temple it self, which had then
also the same relative holiness.

Secondly, if it could, I have sufficiently showed that birth privilege and
holiness, which the Jew had by nature to be abolished in Christ, and not
derived to the fleshly seed of believing Gentiles.

Thirdly, if it were now both in force, and of force to denominate a person to
be relatively a disciple of Christ by birth, what is that to the purpose of Mat.
28. 19. and the tenor of all those presidents Mr. Baxter brings out of the New
Testament, whereby to direct us in baptizing, in all which it is both enjoined,
and exemplified, that in order to baptism persons should be first made
disciples, or discipled really by us, i. e. taught and brought to the faith,
and obedience to the Gospel, and not baptized upon account of a mere Relative
birth-discipleship, for the 3000 Jews (but that is nonsense to call their
birth-holiness by such a name as that of Infant discipleship) had as much of
that Infant discipleship, as Mr. Baxter says falsely Christians children now
have, yet till better discipled then, so i. e. till visibly embracing the
Gospel, could not be baptized, though pleading we have Abraham to our Father,
besides to be born disciples, if there were any such thing at all (as Mr.
Baxter dreams there is) is one thing, and to be made disciples by the
teachings of either God or men availing to conversion, which is that only we
are according to all that precept, and president Mr. Baxter himself produces
above to baptize persons upon immediately, is another; to be disciples born,
and to be made disciples by men, are as different as those that are born
Eunuchs and those that are made Eunuchs of men: now if they * nati Discipuli
sacti
were (as there is no such thing in Rerum nature a as disciples of Christ by
nature, nor ever was, but by a birth from above) such a way of becoming
Christ's disciples relatively from the womb, yet every one of those that were
baptized in nati Eunuchi c^rati
the primitive times, whom Mr. Baxter brings in for our example, were discipled
by men's teaching, according as in the commission Matthew. 28. they were enjoined
to be before they were baptized: yea even those three thousand Jews themselves,
who (secundum sacerdotem) had the relative infant discipleship, could not be
baptized merely thereupon, till they had attained to a better discipleship by
Peter's Ministry.

Babist.
You see Mr. Baxter does take discipleship in Mr. Tombe's own sense and yours
viz. as it signifies one that does seriously and understandingly etc. profess
Christianity, laying by at present the consideration of mere Relative infant
discipleship, for I speak but his own words p. 128. and yet makes it good, that
your rule of baptizing children of Christians at years, is utterly inconsistent
with the rule of Christ, and that constant example of Scripture, wherein
baptizing did immediately follow making disciples, forasmuch as the true
beginning of the discipleship, or conversion, or sincere profession of faith in
men, who are born, and brought up of Christian parents, cannot possibly be
discerned, it is wrought on by such insensible degrees, and consequently they
cannot be baptized, when first made disciples, unless they be baptized in their
first infancy.

Baptist.
Unless they be baptized in their infancy? why are you so sure of hitting upon
the day, and hour of their first discipleship, or conversion to the faith, if
you baptize them in the first of their infancy? what are all the children of
Christians (I hope he does not take Christians in so large a sense as Mr. Blake
does, for Papists and formal Protestants, as well as zealous professors, and
yet by some passages in his book me thinks he makes the pale of the visible
church as wide to the full as the other) are all these I trow disciples with
him, not only relatively, but really also i. e. converted truly from their
mothers womb? or if he mean not this of nominall Christians, or the seed of
Christians at large (which with Mr. Blake at least are born Christians) but of
the children of true converts, sincere believers, such as are Christians
indeed, what is it evident that all, or at least the most (as Mr. Baxter says)
of the children of real disciples are as real disciples as their parents so
soon as they are born? are the seed of true believers true converts mostly by
birth? how then do so many of them as well of the seed of mere nominal
Christians, prove wretches, and ungracious a great while, till God works on
them, and many of them, to the grief of their parents, even to their dying day?
and yet thus it should seem they are in Mr. Baxters opinion, so that if they be
baptized in their first infancy, under the notion of such, they are in all
likelihood baptized when they are first made disciples even immediately upon
the point, and period of their conversion: and besides if they may so safely be
supposed all, or most of them to be truly converted, and upon that account
baptized in their first iefancy, as he says, then how does this square a
squint, with what he says also (to go round again) in the same chapter p. 128?
viz.

That men are usually who are born and brought up of Christian parents, wrought
to this, meaning to conversion and true discipleship by such insensible
degrees, that the true beginning cannot be discerned.

1. by others. 2. no not themselves.
And p. 139. Now if it be the sincerity that is looked after, who knows what
day or year the child began tobe sincere in his profession? for my own part I
aver from my heart that I neither know the day nor year when I begun to be
sincere, nor the time when I first began to be a Christian: how then should
others know it? and when Mr. Tombs would have baptized me I cannot tell, and
as large experience as I have had in my Ministry of the State of Souls, and the
way of conversion, I dare say I have met not with one of very many that would
say they knew the time of their Conversion, and of those that would say so by
reason that they then felt some more remarkable change, yet they discovered
such stirrings and workings before, that many I had cause to think were
themselves mistaken; and that I may not tell men only of mine own experience
and those of my acquaintance, I was once at a meeting of very many Christians,
most eminent for zeal and holiness of most in the land, of whom diverse were
Ministers, and some at this day as famous and as much followed as any I know in
England, and it was there desired, that every one should give in the manner of
their conversion, that it might be observed what is Gods ordinary way: and
there was but one that I remember of them all, that could conjecture at the
time of their conversion, but all gave in that it was by degrees, and in long
time, now when would Mr. Tombs have baptized any of these?

All this Mr. Baxter says in proof out that the time of the first conversion
of children of christian parents, or when they are first discipled cannot be
known for the most part, by either themselves or others, whereupon he concludes
that if we baptize them at age, though never so punctually at the time of their
profession of faith, repentance, and desire of baptism* we cannot possibly
baptize them when first discipled, or immediately after conversion, as we ought
to do by the example of the primitive times (wherein yet they did thus, and no
otherwise, witness all the instances of his own alleging) but those that
baptize them without delay so soon as ever they are born, they cannot do
otherwise then jump just with the very time wherein they are first discipled
(according to the primitive pattern he himself produces, wherein of all that
were baptized, whether Jews or Gentiles, immediately upon their being
discipled, we read not of one infant) And good reason why they must needs hit
right upon their first being discipled or converted, that baptize them in the
first infancy, for though the time of the first conversion or discipling of the
children of Christian parents be not scarce possible to be conjectured at
either by themselves or others, yet (to go round again) it may so safely and
surely be supposed and conjectured to be in the first of their infancy, that
they may warrantably be baptized then (as then newly made disciples) without
any danger of aberration from either Christ's commission or the primitive custom
of baptizing persons when first discipled, and professing themselves disciples:
O the wisdom! he that being in the fire would not come out to hear how bravely
Mr. Baxter brings about, and about again his business in that 8 chapter of the
second part of his book, it is pity but he should be burnt.

And lastly whereas Mr. Baxter queries so often when Mr. Tombs would have such
baptized, the set time of whose conversion? is not distinctly known leaving Mr.
Tombs to tell him his mind as he sees good himself, I tell him (if he ask me
the same question) that in my mind such whose conversion is not known when it
is (as by his own confession the conversion ofChristians children some times is
not, witness that one in which he instances, and (as few as he knows of that
sort) yet how many hundreds of the children of Religious parents (among whom I
my self make one) do know when they were first truly converted? such I say
should be baptized as near as may be, upon the time of their conversion and
becoming disciples, and if it have been then fore^owd, it must be after as soon
as it can, but in no wise so many years before it, as the priests unviversally
do it: and such of whom it is not known nec per se, nec per alios, when they
first were discipled, and converted) but oh how do I fear, that as he that
never doubted never believed, so many of those implicit converts Mr. Baxter
talks on, that never knew when they were discipled and converted, were never
yet truly discipled ^or converted at all to the truth as it is in Jesus, but as
they had it more by tradition from their fathers, then unfeigned search of
Scriptures) such I say of whom it is not known when they first were converted and
discipled, shall by my consent be baptized, when ever it is first known that
they are converted and discipled unto Christ, by their own profession of their
conversion and discipleship, and desire of baptism, and this not by my consent
alone, but by the joint consent of all these very Scriptures, which Mr. Baxter
himself has coted for our example and warrant, all which if (as far as Christ's
own precept and practice, and the primitive Churches example can do it) they do
not warrant the baptism of all, and only such persons as were first taught, or
made disciples by preaching, or instructed till they both learnt, believed and
embraced the Gospel, and professed themselves disciples and offered themselves
to baptism, and consequently of no infants, then for my part I Will lay aside all
sense and reason, as no more to be heeded as a help to understand the
Scriptures, and turn a very Tom-fool, and he that can Altobe logic these
Scripture institutions and instances into plain Scripture proofs of infant
Church membership and baptism, Erit mihi magus Apollo: for there is no mention of
infants either expressly or implicitly in any one of them: Oh (therefore to
Echo back to Mr. Baxter a little in much what his own words to us concerning
those Scriptures p. 127) that those who are so inclinable to separation from
the primitive practice, would consider the unfitness of infants to be admitted
by baptism to be Church members under the Gospel! Oh that they that inchurch
whole parishes, as if they, because the Pope will have it so, were all
Churches, and will have no trial at all, and discoveries of the work of persons
conversion, before they admit them, but take them all at hap hazard as they
fall from the belly within the bounds of that parish where they are placed, and
popified, would but lay to heart all these Scripture examples, and make more
conscience of observing their rule, and not presume to be wiser and holier then
God, when it was man's first overthrow to desire to be but as God, though he did
not attempt to go beyond him, as the priests do in adding other Subjects to his
ordinances, then himself appointed: which changing of his law will be man's last
overthrow Isa. 24. doubtless those that Christ baptized by his disciples, were
Church Members; but those were not infants, but such as were first made
disciples by preaching only John 4. and he that will go beyond Jesus Christ in
strictness shall go without me, I do not think he will be offended with me for
doing as he did i. e. for baptizing none but such as believe and profess
themselves disciples, and as repent of their sins, and desire to be baptized in
the name of Christ for the remission of t^m: and so I have done with Mr. Baxter
till we meet again, only since

Mr. Marshal is pleased ponere obicem to object, and bolt in here, that we
cannot say none in these places were baptized, but such as did thus, i. e.
believe and profess themselves disciples p. 217. to Mr. Tombs because the word
only is not here, I may well call it obicem, or objectionem obularem, a hint
not worth a half penny; and if he appeal to his own conscience, it will tell
him no less; nevertheless what ere he thinks, I say again, all that were
baptized in the forenamed places, were such as are there specified to be
professed converts and believers, and if there were any more let him assign and
show us whom, and weel believe him: as for the households himself is in the
sands, whether there were any infants in them or no, and I have showed above,
that they that were baptized in them, are expressed all by some clause or other
exclusive of infants, and conclusive only of adult disciples: besides Mr.
Cotton confesses that the infants were not baptized with their parents, and
that the infants that were brought to Christ were not baptized at* all (for
ought he knows) not their parents neither, and here are all the Scriptures that
declare how baptism was done then, and to whom, most of which are cited by Mr.
Baxter himself, from which you cannot possibly scrape so much as any old odd
end of an example for such a business as your baptism. As for us, besides that
plain precept we have in Mat. 28. even every whit of this is plain president
for our baptism, and comes into our assistance against all your cavils (O ye
Priests) for thus I argue viz.

The baptism of men and women professing faith in the Lord Jesus, confessing
sins, calling on the name of the Lord etc. is a baptism, yea all the baptism
that the Scripture speaks of, either in way of command or example.

But the baptism which we dispense, is a baptism of men and women professing
faith in our Lord Jesus, confessing sins, calling on the name of the Lord,
gladly receiving the word etc.

Ergo that baptism which we dispense is a baptism, yea all the baptism the
Scripture speaks of in way of either command or example.

Therefore Sirs, how has Satan bewitched you that you cannot believe and obey
the truth? what will you only think things, and thrust your thoughts of them
as oracles upon all others? will you imagine and suppose, and dream, and dote,
and fancy, and fain a baptism, that the Scriptures and first Churches never
knew, and then father your figments upon the Scriptures, and fasten them as the
fashion which, the whole world must be forct to follow and conform to?

Moreover I do not at present remember any one part of Scripture, which your
selves summon into your help in this case of infant baptism, that does not
yield ammunition, and much matter against you more then for you, unless it be
one or two used by your selves, which one may as well with Skoggin untile the
house to look for an hare as urge either pro or con about infants baptism, so
far shall he be from finding in them any proof for that, or the true baptism
either: as namely 2 Cor. 13. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. There are but two places that I
know of, besides those I have already turned upon you above, that are held out
by any of you out of the armory of Scripture in defense of infant baptism, and
those are Col. 2. 12. 1 Cor. 10. 1. 2. both which not only knock sprinkling
oth'head, but may also very easily be sheathed in the bowels of baby-baprism:
As for the first it speaks (as well nigh all scripture does, not much meddling
with infants) not only to, but of adult disciples only, of whom as well as to
whom (and not of infants) in way of satisfaction to them, and answer to those
that would have brought in the old circumcision made with hands among them,
Paul says ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, which
circumcision without hands there spoken of, is not baptism neither (as some
d^eam, who thence also draw in circumcision and baptism to be of so near kin
that as they have both one name, so they must both have one subject also) for
baptism is no more done without* hands then the other, but the sanctification
or inward circumcision of the heart, cutting off the foreskin i. e. the filth
of the heart, which things infants do not, in token of which he tells them they
are (not sprinkled) but buried i. e. overwhelmed in water with Christ in the
outward baptism, wherein also they are risen with him through faith etc. All
which things he that imagins they more include then exclude the sucking infants
of such, to whom he speaks, is no man in discretion with me.

As for the other place its most evident the Apostle speaks not of baptism
literally but Me^aphoically only there, they were baptized unto Moses i. e.
by the visible tokens of Gods presence amongst them viz. the cloud and Sea
assisting and siding with them, and overthrowing their adversaries, they were
confirmed in the belief of God, and his servant Moses, as we by baptism are in
the faith of Gods goodness to us, and of his Son Jesus Christ: in further
confirmation of which mere figurative sense of the word [baptized] you may do
well to consider that though they were said to be baptized in the cloud, and in
the sea, which phrases however* sound forth such a total immersion as is not in
two or three drops of water fingered on the face, yet they were not so much as
wetted with either the cloud or the sea, for its said Exodus 14. 21. 22. the sea
was made dry land under them, and they went through it dry shod, or on dry
ground, which they could not be well said to do had it so much as rained upon
them, such a figurative sense of the word [baptize] there Mr. Baxter himself
denies not p. 90. yet Dr. Channel urged that place in a public dispute at
Petworth Ian. 1651. as one of his arguments for infant baptism, besides
Secondly, if you will needs have it properly taken that they were baptized
really, and not quasi baptized, as Mr. Baxter yields they were, and if you will
needs make that baptism such an emblem of ours, that ours must have an adequate
subject to that, which say you, was infants as well as parents, then twill put
you to your trumps to excuse your selves handsomely in your now denying to
infants the same spiritual meat and drink in the supper, which they then eat
and drank of in a figure also viz. the Manna and the Rock, which both were no
other (Antitypically) then the bread and wine are mistically in the supper i.
e. the Lord Jesus Christ.

For all your vain boasting therefore of what innumerable arguments you have
from Scriptures, I say the Scriptures are sure enough on our side, nevertheless
taking the word in a suitable sense you do well to call your Scripture arms or
arguments innumerable, for indeed they are not to be numbered (for even unit as,
much more nonit as non est numerus) being no more than just none at all.

Secondly, whereas you boast of the innumerable Arguments which may be brought
for your infant rantism from reason, the full force of reason is utterly
against you, and so wholly assistant to our cause, that the unreasonablest man
amongst you will once see it, when sound reason comes to reign, and sway the
scepter indeed. Yea not to stand reasoning on it now how reasonless a thing it
is to ask a company of men and women, as the priests were wont to do at the
font, thus viz. do you believe in God the Father, and Christ etc. and will you
be baptized in this faith? and when they answered yes, that is all our desire,
then instead of them who profess their faith and desires to be baptized, to
take a small sucking babe out of their arms, and dat him with a drop or two on
the face, and send away all the other unbaptized.

Babist.
The sureties or parents in so saying do but represent the child, that could
not speak for it self, and express his good resolutions to forsake the devil
etc. and his desires to be baptized.

Baptist
How reasonless is it to put questions to infants through their parents ears,
and then very gravely suppose them answering again through their parents
mouths? yea as reasonless as to suppose that all people should see through
none but the blind priests eyes; nor yet to stand reasoning how reasonless a
thing it is to signify things to sucklings while they understand them not, and
that too by such a vanishing visible sign, that when they can understand, they
neither see, nor never shall, and such like Trumpioall transactions, to which
there are as few grains of reason concurring, as there are inches in an Apes
tail, even your selves, however it happens that you so contradict your selves
(yet that is no news with you) as to sound it out here how Reason fights on
your sides for infant baptism, are even in this very cause found falling out
with, and fighting down right against reason hand smooth but some four or five
pages below this, why else is there such a reasonles reply made to seven or
eight several objections, which byyour own confession p. 16. reason makes
against infant baptism, but i will spare you till I come thither.

3ly That the practice and authority of the Church of God you so much boast of
from the beginning and the Fathers thereof, which you complain and grumble much
p. 1. 11. 12. that it was set aside, and might not be admitted into your
assistance at the Disputation, is so utterly against your infant baptism, that
even this alone were it of any esteem with you, had bin enough to have silenced
all your disputes for it, and laid the itch, and quenched the heat of your
hearts after that mere novelty, is most manifest, if by the Church of God, and
the Fathers thereof you mean what I do, viz. the Church of God in the primitive,
which were the best and purest times of the Gospel, whose practice in this
particular is set out in the word, but specially in the Acts of the Apostles,
the fathers of which Church and of the Church in after ages too were the
Apostles themselves, viz. Father Peter, Father Paul, Father Barnabas, Father
James, Father John, and the ^est whose authority from Christ was great indeed,
and adequate with the Scriptures then written, and the foundation for all the
Churches to build on, and such was not the authority of the Churches then, much
less since which are to be subjected to their word in Scripture, this Church,
and these fathers never knew such a baptism as yours, nor is there the least
tittle of talk concerning any such matter to be found among them.

Or if by the Church and Fathers of it, whose authority and practice you build
on, you mean those of the ages next to the Apostles.

Then first I marvel, why you should put your selves upon the trial by
succeeding ages, and decline the first and purest age of the Gospel of all,
specially since there is as clear history, and more infallible testimony given in
the word, of what was done by the Church, and the first fathers the Apostles,
then ever was in any age inferior to it whatsoever, and more specially yet
since its being in after ages is no palpable argument of its being in the first
age, for the mystery of iniquity was at work from the very Apostles, it is now,
Ergo it was then is not so good a wherefore to our why as we look for, besides
it is ingenuously confessed by your own writers viz. Mr. Blake in answer to Mr.
Blackwood p. 58. that faith can hang on the humane testimony of the succeeding
fathers, in whose days infant baptism was, no further then de facto viz. that
it was only, and not de jure that it ought to be, and Mr. Marshal p. 5. of his
sermon, that the practice of the thing in their days proves not the truth of
it at all.

Secondly, neither does the second Century help you so much as to a proof de
facto. For

First, as much as you would seem to be verst among the fathers (in which many
Priests are better read then in the Scriptures, and some to seem to be better
read there then they are, will quote the fathers when they have not read them,
but by snaches, and picked a few fine phrases out of them, to make their sermons
the more sententious, yea and sometimes for those very sentences, for which
they might more truly quote the Apostles, that primitively pend them, witness
one of your tribe whom I heard with my own ears say of Heb. 2. 16. he took not
on him the nature of Angels, thus viz. for as Saint Barnard says, when as he
might as well have said, as the spirit, or as the Scripture says, He took not
on him etc. if yet he knew that it was in the Scripture) as much I say as you are
versed in the fathers, you are desired by Mr. Blackwood (a man better read in
those fathers then either you or I) yea you and Mr. Marshall also, who quotes
Justin Martyr, are defired by him in his storming of Antichrist p. 25. 26. 27.
to prove if you can out of any place of Iustins genuine works, who is the
antientest father extant next the Apostles, whose works are accounted on, that
there is so much as the name of infant baptism, much more the thing; yea he
tells you ye may as soon find a Dolphin in the woods, as any such thing: save
only that it is once mentioned in a spurious book falsely called his, out of
which book Mr. Marshalls quotation is, neither does Mr. Blake gainsay this, nor
yet Mr. Marshall in their replies, nay they rather seem to grant that its to be
doubted it was so, which makes me as well as Mr. Blackwood, not a little wonder
that Mr. Marshall should quote it with so much confidence, I mean so as to
assert it thereupon as a matter manifest, that the Church (counting from the
time of Justin Martyr viz. 150) has bin possessed of the privilege of infant
baptism for the space of 1500 years and upwards, for had he not doubted but
that the words the cites were without question the words of Justin himself, he
had not had sin, but now he has no cloak, since he demonstrates to all men
Dubitatum per magis dubium, and tells the world to make them believe that
Justin disputes the condition of children that dye baptized and unbaptized,
when yet its not believed, but much doubted by himself, whether Justin did any
such thing yea or no: as to the words Mr. Marshal p. 4. of his sermon cites out
of Irenaeus who lived toward the end of the second Century, which Englisht are
thus viz. Christ came by himself to save all, all I say, who are born again
unto God, infants and little ones etc. its not likely that in this sentence
that father by the word [born again] meant baptism (as Mr. Blake and Mr.
Marshal contend) for by that sense they father such absurdity upon that their
father, as children that pretend to honor their father, may be ashamed of,
whilst they make him say, Christ came to save all infants that are baptized,
when as neither all infants, that are baptized are actually saved, qua
baptized, nor are any unbaptized infants damned, qua not baptized, but both
alike saved as both alike they either dye before they have bard themselves by
actual sin, and derserved exemption, or living to years believe and obey
Christ, and both alike damned as living to years they both alike obey not his
Gospel, but however let Mr. Blake and Mr. Marshal squeeze what they can from
the quotation, it must yet remain as doubtful whether the speech of Irenaeus
(if it were his own) were at all of infants baptism, as it does whether the
speech fathered on Justin (though it be of infants baptism) were at all his
own* and so what dubious evidence the second century affords, so much as de
facto, that infant baptism was then in being, all men may see, whilst you can
say no more then perhaps it was so, and a fool may say as much as perhaps it
was not, which is a proportionable answer to that argument, for it is commonly
said in the Schools (says Mr. Marshal) that forte it a, solvitur per forte
non.

Secondly, but what if your testimony de facto concerning the practice of
infant baptism in the second century were as clear, as it is cloudy, yet what
green headed anuquity is this in comparison of that we plead from viz. the
Apostles themselves? when you are stormed out of all your strong holds then you
send us still to ages above us, and cry out your practice is of 1500 years
standing, but since you cannot say as we can of ours, it is above 1600 years old
(nor is yours now likely to live to it) as good you had said but 15 for our way
only being found in the first century, and yours not at all before the second,
we are a people so much elder then you upstarts, that your antiquity is but
novelty with us, whoregardlesse of what by man's wisdom was foisted in in after
ages, can aver with as much confidence as you can that now it is that from the
beginning it was not so, nor yet in end shall be: I much marvel why Mr.
Marshall contents himself to preach positively no otherwise then thus, p. 3.
viz. this privilege of baptizing infants the Christian Church has bin in
possession of for the space of 1500 years and upwards: he might as easily have
said 1600, had his ground been as good for that as for the other, and yet his
ground for the other is so infirm, and sinking under him, that I believe he
must fall down as low as the third century, before he find sure footing for his
proof of no more then the bare practice of infant baptism.

As for the Ius of it its nere the nearer, if he could prove the matter of fact
to be in the second, though that still is the main question between us, since it is
confessed by Mr. Marshall that he uses not the Testimony and judgments of the
Ancients to witness to the truth of it, but only to prove a then practice of
infant baptism, and the question de jure whether infants ought to be baptized,
no one of the fathers, nor yet the joint consent of many (says Mr. Blake p.
58. of his to Mr. Blackwood) is a competent Judge, therefore if any of you, who
stand so much upon that young antiquity of it, and plead the authority of the
Church and fathers shall argue thus, it is 1500 years old, therefore it is 1600
you live below that candor ingenuity, and discretion that I find in Mr. Marshal
and Mr Blake, who both deny your consequence, and in this case close with us in
the very truth.

Thirdly, as for the third century, it is somewhat more then probable that such a
superstition as infant baptism was coming in at least, or else it is like there
would not have been such pro and con as was about it, for, true, Origin (if the
Testimonies fathered on him be his own (which he who well weighs what evidence
is put in to the contrary by Mr. Blakwood p. 34 of his Rioynder to Mr. Blake,
where he says, that the original of Origin is lost, that the Translator
confesses he added many things of his own, that Erasmus says one cannot be
sure whether one read Ruffinus or Origin, that the learned put his commentary
on the Romans among his counterfeit works, as much sophisticated by Russinus,
and also what is said by Mr. Tombs too (notwithstanding all that Mr. Marshall
brings p. 15. 16. 17. 18. of his to Mr. Tombs, whereby to salve it, will find
small ground to believe) Origin I say, a man of many errors, styles it a
tradition received from the Apostles, which if you will believe implicitly you
may, but else you need not, for it is no more then a bare scripturelesse
assertion, Cyrian also, and a Council of 66 bishops, almost contemporary to
Origin, are supposed to be of some such mind, but upon such silly grounds, as
you that now plead infants baptism, are ashamed of, witness Mr. Blake p. 40
who denies them not to be erroneous as Mr. Blakwood calls them, and therefore
you may as well be ashamed of their opinion and expression of* it also, it
being (for all their reasons) as scriptureless as that of Origin, who brings
nothing to prove what he said.

Babist.
But Mr. Marshal p. 18. tells you that it was because none opposed the
lawfulness of infant baptism, which if they had, Origin would no doubt have
maintained by Scripture, as well as affirmed it to come from the Apostles.

Baptist.
This is strange, when it is most evident, and Mr. Marshall himself denies it
not, that famous Tertullian, the first of that Century, that might in respect
of his Seniority to Origin, and Cyprian be styled a father to them both,
persuades by many reasons to defer the baptism of children, as most
profitable, Saying,

Let them become Christians when they know Christ.

And in another place, It behooves them that are about to enter into baptism to
pray with frequent prayers, fastings, kneelings, watchings, and with the
confession of all their sins past, which things infants (we know) cannot do.

First, then I appeal to your own consciences, and Mr. Marshalls also, whether
this be not a plea against it as unlawful, for to decline what is most profitable
is unlawful.

Secondly, whether here be not pro and con among the Fathers about it, and so
though their testimony serves to prove what Mr. Marshal brings it for, viz.
that it was practiced in their times, yet it serves not to your purpose, who
upon the Fathers and their churches authority, would gather and ground the
right of that practice, for who but children will go about to prove the verity
of a practice by the Authority of those Fathers, whose witness agrees not
together, and who are contradictory to one another in their testimonies of it,
and some of whose testimonies in that thing are quite and clean contradicted by
the testimonies of such as concur with them almost in every thing else? for
so I may truly say the testimonies of Father Austin are, who in one place viz.
ad Volusianum Ep. 3. (according to Mr. Blakes quotation of him p. 51.) writes
thus viz.

The Custom of the Church in the baptizing of infants is by no means to be
despised, nor to be accounted superfluous, nor yet were it at all to be
credited, were it not a tradition of the Apestles.

Thus this Father who though inferior to the other in time, yet is not
inferior to the chiefest of them in your Account; but he brings no Scripture
neither any more then Origin for the same, yet it is like some slighted it as
superfluous in his days: but Ludovicus vives, a man so observant of Austin,
that he wrote Annotations upon him, in those very Annotations of his upon the
27th chapter of the first book De civit. Dei (according to Mr. Denns quotation
of him p. 51. against Dr. Featley) is so far from crediting that he corrects
Austin rather as to that piece of faith saying,

That of old it was the custom to baptize none unless they were of full ago,
and did desire baptism in their own persons; and did undeestand what it was to
be baptized.

Now who can safely build so much as you do (unless he mean to be both blindly
guided with you, and a blind guide to the blind) on the authority of such
Fathers, as (saving their honesty in what they knew, and eminency in some
things, were yet so silly in some others, that they did the Church no such good
office as they wot of, who ere they were that canonized them into such
fatherhood over the faith, that their opinions must be as Oracles for all to
act by: witness good Saint Bernard, the last in that Catalogue, who (saving
that he knew some truth, as other honest men did in those dismal days wherein
he lived) was wrapped up into a mist of so many other errors, besides that of
infants baptism, that we may boldly use the proverb, viz. Bernardus non videt
omnia, for (as Mr. Blackwood quotes out of his 65 ser. in p. 31. of his storm)
speaking of some Christians that opposed the popish stream he says thus.

They laugh at us, because we baptize infants, because we pray for the dead,
because we require the prayers of Saints.

All which doctrine, though falling from a father, is yet indeed too ridiculous
to be received for truth, in these days of its return from captivity, by any
but mere children in the Gospel.

Thirdly, I appeal to your consciences (not to Mr. Marshalls and Mr. Blakes
here, for they from the Fathers assert no more than matter of fact, that
infant baptism was then, whilst you matter of faith that it ought to be)
whether that foretold testimony of Tertullian may not balance with those of
Origin, Cyprian, etc. who were not so ^ear the pure times of the Apostles as
he, and whether he were not as likely as Origin and Austin to know if it had
been so that infant baptism was a Tradition from the Apostles, and in case he
did know it, to what end he should deny it to be now dispensed; or do you
imagine him a man of so mean a conceit of the Apostles wisdom, and so highly
conceited of his own, that he would forbid that as unprofitable, which the
Apostles prescribed, and prescribe a more convenient way himself? sure he must
know as well as they if it were Apostolical, and they possibly might not know
so well as he that it was not, being all Iuniors to him and one of them, viz.
Cyprian, so much beholding to him for much of what he had, that he dignified
him with the name of his Master, such a diligent disciple, i. e. reader and
learner of Tertullian was he, that Da mihi Magistrum was his common speech of
him; so that his rational diswasion from infant baptism, cannot but be a more
cogent ground of faith on one hand, then Origens Scriptureless position, and
Cyprians Antapostolick, and reasonless reasons, and persuasion to it are one
the other, unless you will needs so father it over the Fathers themselves, as
to authorize which of them and which of their sentences you please, disowning
the rest, as not Orthodox, or Authentic, further then they serve your own
turns, and then by my consent they shall be no longer fathers to you, but you
fathers over them, and us too in their stead.

But Mr. Marshall, who has a longer arm then every body, reaches us a rap yet
by a certain quaere, which he propounds to Mr. Tombs p. 35. 36. 37. to which
till he h^h some answer he will conceive we are so sick of Tertullian that
we will say no more of him. his quaere is this.

Babist.
Why may not the diswasion cited out of Tertullian de baptismo infantium
reasonably be interpreted of the infants of infidells only, whose baptism he
would have deferred, till they come to years, and to profess faith themselves,
and not of the infants of Christians? I am inclined to believe that to be the
true meaning of the place for such considerations.

First, because Tertullian alleges this double reason why he would have the
baptism of little ones delaied, viz. least their Sponsors, or Sureties be in
hazard of not fulfilling the promises they make on their behalf, by either
their own mortality, or the childrens proving untoward, or inclineable to
iniquity, for whom they undertake.

Secondly, Because it is clear and evident by the 39th. Chapter of Tertullian
book, the 18th. Chapter whereof has this disswasion to baptize little ones,
that Tertullian did acknowledge that the children of believers are by birth
designati sanctitatis and salutis, counted holy from 1 Cor. 7. 14. not sancti
till they be born of water, and the spirit, and have a kind of privilege, and
prerogative by nature, yea such a sanctity, and the very same as is called
faderall, or covenant holiness, that gives right to baptism.

Baptist,
And so says Dr. Holmes also p. 122. upon the same text of Tertullian Mr.
Marshal quotes, and out of which he raked his 2 reasons, to which second reason
of Mr. Marshal I answer.

First, and that thus confessing that that good old Father, who is no more
infallible than your selves, so that his Sentence without reason proves any
thing at all to be de jure, does seem to me to err together with you, though
not so grossly as you, as touching the genuine sense of the Agostle in that 1
Cor. 7. 14. When he says to parents of two religions in one civil relation,
that their children are holy, and to own a certain mere reputative holiness as
there meant, which is not to other children, yet denying altogether that he
held any such thing, as that thereupon these children should be baptized, for
that is a fictitious conclusion of your own, which follows not, if such a
reputative holiness as you wot of were there meant, nor does Tertullian so much
as hint it in that place, which Mr. Marshal is so brag off, that he supposes he
wounds us shrewdly by setting it down in words at length, and not in figures, p
37. to Mr. Tombs.
which place will for all that never scare in any wise any wise man of our way,
though it be set down by Dr. Holmes p. 1^0, 121. of his Animadv. on M. To.
Exercit.
in words at more length and not in figures, i. e. in plain English, and not as
Mr. Marshal does in unerg^hed Latin, for what if some men think, as for
reasons above rendered I surely never shall from that place, that the Apostle is
willing to give way to faithful parents to hope well of their children, and to
count upon them, till they see either that or the contrary, as more hopefully
then others, holy and happy ones, tam ex seminis praroga^v a quam ex
institutionis disciplina, as having some prerogative above others in being the
seed of such who have prayed for them, before they were born, as well as in
being more likely to be dis cipled into the way of holiness and life, by their
godly education of them, is there an necessity of their thinking consequently
they must baptize them out of hand, unless tbere were more command from Christ
for so sudden administration of that ordinance to them then there is? I trow
not: for a man may look upon his child as some way privileged by being his
seed viz. as a child of more prayers and hopes, and future happiness and
advantages, and present holiness too then many others, being ignorantly
conceited (as you are) that some infants in very infancy are eith^r really o^
reputatively more holy then some from that place, viz. 1 Cor. 7. 14. and not
think them fit as yet to be baptized; or else (if he do) yet not find good
ground in Scripture for that thought, by beating the best brains his head piece
holds, either about that place, or any other: yea verily I my self, who hold
not that high birth privilege of some infants above others, as you do, who by
your mouth (I mean Mr. Blake) declare some by nature now as of old to be
Children of God, and Saints, and some dogs and swine, some holy i. e. in your
sense in Covenant as the Jew of old, and some un^ean i. e. in your sense out of
Covenant with God, and sinners of the Gentiles, which distinction is ^ow
destroyed, much less that such prerogative of seed is intended by the Apostle
in that text, even I my self I say do look on all infants as holy in some sense
(as I have showed before) i. e. neg^ve, as far as mere innocence, and freedom
from iniquity may denominate holy, not cou^ing them to be in Adam, and so
impure, but recounting them in Christ, till by actual sin, and a wicked life
they take me off from that account, and on some children also viz. those of
Christian parents, as having in some sense a prerogative of seed, so far as
they may be a seed of prayers, more then othess, and in some sense too (not
yours) a holiness above others i. e. as they may be sanctified to their
parents, as blessings, as every thing else may be by their prayers, whether
good or evil in it self (if yet what is blessed to us may be properly
denominated holy, as every creature is said to be sanctified to the Saint 1 Timothy 4.) and yet for my life dare I not baptize any at all: and as for
Tertullian, though he mistaking Paul's meaning, holds such are holy by a kind of
prerogative of seed (as Mr. Marshall speaks) yet it is very questionable to me,
whether it be that so transcendent kind of birth holiness, and prerogative you
expound him of, and howbeit Dr. Holmes and Mr. Marshall would fain fetch that
father in by force of forged construction to witness as a Godfather to their
federal holiness; yet I cannot easily believe by his words, that he has
respect to any more then a bare recounting, and reputing these to be holy, in a
sense abstract from any reallity of their being holy by natural birth, and in
their childhood as the Doctor vainly descants on Tertullians phrase wherein he
mentions them to be holy, or till such time as they are holy indeed by that new
birth from above; and Mr. Marshal takes my part against the Doctor in this too
saying they are in Tertullians sense designati sanctitatis i. e. as these words
are expounded by the following, witness the Doctor himself, counted holy; but
not Sancti i. e. not holy, till they be born of water, and the spirit p. 36.
much less can I ever believe that he counted them holy and privileged above
others so far, as thereupon to assert them, or so much as to allow them to be
baptized, for that's an utter in consequence of your own from Paul's text 1 Cor.
7. 14. and from Tertullians text to, who though he take Paul's speech of such
childrens holiness a little the wrong way, yet wrests them not so far out of
the way to the proof of such a popish practice as you do, yea there is not a
little in Tertullians testimony you so talk of, that tends at all to testify
the truth of infant baptism; indeed had the Epithet given by Tertullian
sidelium filiis been so as that instead of that phrase, wherein he says they
ought to be designati sanctitatis et salutis i. e. reputatively holy and happy
ones, he had said they should be signati sanctitatis, and salutis i. e. signed,
in your own phrase, sealed ones of holiness and happiness, there had been
some hint toward baptism, but as it is there is none at all of such a matter.

The Dr. draws neck and heels together to make Tertullian speak to his mind,
but twill appear he was of another mind then he, as to the baptism of any
infants when all is done. for says he

Babist.
Tertullian shows childrens capacity of grace and salvation.

Baptist.
And what then? yea what if we grant you that they are capable of salvation,
yea the Scripture asserts it, and we do not deny it, therefore you need not
trouble Tertullian for this testimony, but what follows upon it? what then?

Babist.
What then? why consequently they are capable of the seal, for the deeds, and
their seals follow the right of the inheritance.

Baptist.
This is your inference Mr. Dr. from which inference of yours, now we talk of
inferring, I Will infer two things by way of quaere, and so let it pass viz.

First, if the seals in plural, mark your words therefore both at least, yet
both are but signs neither in true locution, must both follow the right of the
inheritance of which children are in capacity as well as men, then to fill you
with your own phrase, why is not one seal of the same inheritance, of the same
salvation given to infants by you, as well as the other? i. e. the supper as
well as baptism?

Secondly, if these in plurali, or if no more then baptism be to be given to
children consequently upon no more then capacity of salvation, the capacities
of infants being equal, and they quoad nos all alike capable to enjoy it, if
God, who is neither bound nor barred, please to bestow salvation, why are not
both these, or at least that one sign of baptism, which you give to some
infants, given by you to all infants as well as some? i. e. to ungodly men's
children as well as to those of godly parents? the Dr. strives with all his
strength and strains one point more yet to strain Tertullians testimony to his
turn, yet will it not do in any wise.

Babist.
Tertullian in that text mentions not only childrens being holy, but he
mentions also that place John 3. 4. in relation to children, except a man be
born again of water and of the spirit etc. from which we may perceive that
Tertullian grounds infants baptism upon Scripture.

Baptist.
To which first supposing that by that birth of water, and the spirit is meant
nothing but baptism in that place of Tertullian, we are yet upon, I reply.

Secondly, thus viz. appealing to the Drs own conscience, and Mr. Marshals
also, whether he speak that very clause of Scripture in that very place of his
we are now upon to that very intent, as to ground infant baptism upon it, or
whether if it be read with a right and true Emphasis, and reference, it does
not of the two rather suppose it was not to be in infancy? for having (as Mr.
Marshal understands) confessed so far of infants of the faithful, that they are
designati sanctitatis, et salutis i. e. to be held in the mean time (to wit) in
childhood, and before baptism, as holy and happy reputatively only, yet he
says that none of all them are sancti i. e. holy indeed (for that we see is
Tertullians sense of the word enter into the kingdom) unless they be born of
water and the spirit, that is (as I conceive) till they be converted and
baptized, which thing that it is at all to the infants of the faithful in their
minority he says not at all here, nor any thinglike it, but elsewhere,
mentioning the same Scripture John 3. 5. as he puts the water and the spirit
together, so both before and behind it, he puts teaching and dipping, faith and
baptism as things that by the law of dipping are imposed as of necessity to go
together, saying he has bound faith to the necessity of baptism, therefore all
believers (speaking of none else) were baptized, and then Paul when he believed
was baptized, in his book de baptismo advers. Quintil. Editio de la. cerda.
vol. 2. p. 153. ibid. c. 13. as Mr. Blackwood quotes him in his storm of
Antichrist p. 28. 29. so that in the quotation were are yet upon the Antithesis
lies thus in my conscience as I read him viz. infants of the faithful in their
infancy may be reputatively holy, but not really holy, none being really holy
till such time as they be born of water and the spirit, which was not in
infancy in Tertullians apprehension, as it seems to me in that very place which
the Dr. and Mr. Marshall make so much of, as the words designati sanctitatis,
non sancti do show, whereupon I persuade my self it was that in that other
place of his, that I must return to, he uses disswasion from dispensing, and
persuasion to deferring baptism to all, but specially to infants, not of
infidels only, but believers also, as I shall show clearly to Mr. Marshal now,
who scruples it, and that by such reasons as shall take that rub and stumbling
block of his out of the way (I mean this last text of Tertullian of his own and
Dr. Holmes his alleading) by which they were both gravelled from believing
Tertullian to be ours, for indeed whereas that place he last alleged did give
him supposed ground to scruple whether Tertullians disswasion from baptizing of
infants were from any, but the infants of infidels, I hope to show him such a
necessity of understanding his disswasion to be from the baptism of any infants
whatsoever, as shall give him contrarily sure ground of belief, that howbeit
Tertullian would have some infants higher accounted on then some, yet he would
not from thence have any baptized: to which end I shall set down Tertullians
disswasions of infant baptism in English, as I find them quoted by Mr, Marshall
in latin, who (I observe) seldom Englishes what may make against him p. 34. of
Mr. Marshall against Mr. Tombs, and in p. 122. of Dr. Holmes in English, and
more largely then by either of them by Mr. Blackwood in his storm p. 29.
together with the grounds why he would not have little ones baptized, and leave
it to be judged what little ones he means. Tertullians words are these viz.

According to every ones condition, and disposition, and age, the delay of
baptism is more profitable, but especially concerning little children, for what
necessity is there (if it be not so much a necessity) as to have the sureties
also brought into danger? who may both by their own mortallity fail of
fulfilling their promises, and by the increase of an ill disposition be
deceived. The Lord says indeed forbid them not to come unto me, let them come
therefore when they grow up to youth, etc. thus far Mr. Marshal and the Dr. Mr.
Blackwood writes further thus.

Let them come whilst they are young, whilst wherein they come they are taught,
let them become Christians when they know Christ: -- a little further he says,
shall it be done more warily insecular things, that to whom earthly substance
is not committed Divine should be committed? they shall know to beg salvation,
that thou may seem to give it to him that asks it, al so in the 20 chapter
of the same book he says, it behooves them that are about to enter into
baptism, to pray with frequent prayers, fastings, kneeling, and watchings, and
with the confession of their sins past, in all these words, is he recorded by
the three authors above named, dissuading from baptizing infants: now whereas
Mr. Marshall professes he stands much inclined to believe that these little
ones to whom Tertullian would have baptism delayed are to be interpreted of the
infants of infidels only; and Dr. Holmes helps him what he can in this, by
quoting the words of learned Iunim upon the place, who is just of the same
opinion with Mr. Marshall, yet lends him as little reason toward it as one can
likely look for from so rational a man, I shall immind them first, that Vossius
on the place quoted by Dr. Holmes, in one and the same page with Iunius, found
no good ground to evade the bang Tertullian gives to infant baptism in such a
fashion, as to say he denies only the baptism of infidels infants; how far you
will heed him I know not, but he thinks his think thus, viz. not that infants
of the faithful are here denied by Tertullian, but that nothing is denied by
him but only the necessity of these infants baptism, when there is no danger of
death, because it is said what necessity? (if there be no necessity) defend you
your selves if you will, against that consenr (by silence) of Vossius to us in
this, that it is all infants to whom Tertullian would have baptism delaied (for
that affronts your poor put off) and I Will look to Vossius his own put off as
well as I can, that he shall not go clear away with it, for my own part then
allowing Vossius his own thought, I take the like liberty to think otherwise,
and the boldness to assert the contrary viz. That Tertullian denies more then
a necessity of infant baptism, yea he denies any convenience or lawfullnesse of
the thing also, especially in the testimony cited by Mr. Blackwood, which the
Dr. and Mr. Marshal durst not mention, and clearly enough in those cited by
themselves, for if it behooves them that are baptized to pray, confess sin etc.
which no infant can do, then it behooves us not to baptize them, and if it bring
sureties into danger then it is not convenient nor expedient, as well as not
necessary, and if it be more profitable to delay it to infants, then we are so
by duty bound to do what is most profitable, and edifying, that to do otherwise
is to do that which is unlawful: moreover it being granted, by Vossius that
Tertullian denies but so much as the necessity of baptizing any infants, I Will
prove thence a necessity not to baptize any, for if there be not more or less
a necessity of one kind or other viz. vel praecepti vel medii, there is a
necessity at least of letting it alone, for Christ commands no ordinance of his
without need, and with such indifferency as destroys all necessity of obeying
it, and what way or point of worship was not ordained by himself, is by command
from him of such necessity to be declined, that as he who preaches it (though
an Angel from heaven) is to be held accursed, so he that does thereafter shall
have no thank for his labor, for in vain do they worship him, that either
teach, or take for doctrines the traditions of men.

Secondly, and further to prove it, least Mr. Marshal and the Dr. should not
grant Vossius that Tertullians denial is of the baptism of all infants, even of
believers as well as infidels, I argue that more plainly.

First from the universallity of the expression of himself in his disswasion,
which extends to all manner of persons without exception; for it may be thought
he was somewhat soiled with that superstition, which was rife in after ages
viz. that baptism was best dispensed toward the end of a man's life, that he
might have a sign of the forgivness of all his sins at once, whereupon
Tertullian would not have unmarried persons baptized until temptation was over,
so far was as he from desiring such early dispensation of baptism as that to
infants, I say his persuasion to delay it extends to all manner of persons, and
therefore to the infants of believers as well as to other little ones.

Secondly, his indefinit and indifferent expression of these little ones
concerning which he speaks, for (says he) specially about little ones,
promiscuously including all, excepting none, as it had bin necessary for him to
do if he would be understood to speak but of some, and not of others: for if
Mr. Marshall should preach or write his opinion against the baptism of
unbelievers children only. retaining to himself his present earnestness for
the baptism of other little ones, and deliver himself downrightly and
indifinitely thus only, in way of dissawsion viz. I would not by any means
have little one baptized, I find no ground baptizare parvulos to baptize
infants etc. so running on and never distinguishing, so as to say in that
sermon or speech, I mean only infants of infidels, I should not take him for
so judicious a man as I yet hold him to be, saving his holding so stiffly still
for infant baptism.

Thirdly, by the reason he gives why he would not have little ones baptized
viz. least their sureties should be in hazard of nonperformance of their
words, by reason of their own death, or their God childrens untowardnesse,
which danger may come as well by baptism of believers infants as of others: As
whose Sponsors, whether fathers or mothers, or Godfathers and Godmothers may
die before they grow up, or if they live, be frustrated of their ends by the
wickedness of these children, or god-children also.

Fourthly, in that he speaks of such children of whom the Lord said forbid them
not to come unto me, which in the Priesthoods own sense at least are believers
children, yea and them only, by which clause according to you he may seem to
speak of them only, rather then of infidels childrens only, whom you your
selves forbid to be brought to Christ at all.

Fifthly, in that he says let them become Christians when they know Christ,
belike then, if your sense be true, some Infants may be warrantably enough made
Christians before they know Christ, but some infants again may not at any hand
be made Christians till they know Christ, which if it were Tertulliaus meaning,
as it is yours, he might mean honestly in it (as you do) but it is too mean an
opinion to keep touch with the word, which never knew any way but one, wherein
disciples and Christians were made, i. e. of professed faith, repentance and
baptism, after they knew Christ by the preaching of the Gospel.

Sixthly, in that he says we should be more wary then to commit Divine
substance to them, to whom earthly substance is not committed, now we know that
earthly substance can be no more wisely committed to infants of believers in
their non age then to infants of infidels.

Seventhly, by one end why he would have them be capable to beg salvation
first, viz. that God may seem to give it to them that ask it, which end is
destroyed, if baptism be dispensed to believers infants in infancy, for they
can no more ask it then the infants of unbelievers.

Eighthly, because he says it behooves them, indifinitely (meaning all them)
that enter into baptism to pray and confess sin, etc. which conditions are as
exclusive of all infants as of some, those of believers being no more capable
to do that then infants of infidels are.

Ninethly, what ever children he dissuaded from the baptizing of here (and so
says Mr. Marshall and Mr. Blake) its most evident de facto that they were wont
to be baptized then, or else there had been no object of his diswasion,
therefore if his advice to delay to them, were concerning infants of infidels,
then its evident that in Tertullians time it was the custom to baptize infidels
infants as well as Christians, and so if antiquity of infant baptism were an
argument of its goodness, its as good an argument of the goodness of baptizing
infidels infants also, which with you is well-nigh as bad as the other is good.

Babist.
True de facto we have evidence that the baptism of infidels infants then was,
but that fathers dissuading from it is an argument that it was naught and though
crept in yet a thing that was not so from the beginning.

Baptist.
Then I hope, if ever you come to be persuaded, and it is a wonder that none of
the reasons above be cogent, that it was indeed from baptizing of any children at
all that Tertullian diswaded, we have an argument of your own for it that the
baptism of any men's infants is naught also, and a thing that was not so from
the beginning, and so if Mr. Marshall himself be not by this time sick of
Tertullian I assure both him and you all that I am, and of all the Fathers
also, with whom in this controversy I would not have meddled, but that your
Pamphlet flutters so so with naming the Fathers; and takes it ill that
testimonies from the Fathers were not taken on the day of the Ashford
disputation: I say again I am sick of them, not so much with fear at the sight
of any thing in any of them, that makes against us, for I find nothing that
has the strength of a straw against our way throughout them all, even these
few Junior, inferior ones themselves, that are most against us, for the Seniors
are more fully on our sides, and some of the Junior ones also, as Basil, and
Chrysostom, both in the fourth Century, whose words, as Mr Blakwood cites them
p. 28, 29. of his storm, are thus viz.

First he ought to believe, and after to be sealed with baptism, and if any one
have not corrected the transgression of his manners, and has not made virtue
easy to himself, let him not be baptized.

Which words are exclusive of infants, it is not therefore any disadvantage that
comes by them to our cause, which I am sick of, But

First, with spending so much time, and searching so much into their
testimonies (as you have compelled me to do) that me thinks I am out of my
element, where I desire to be, i. e. the Scriptures, whet^er I Will return by and
by (God willing) especially this last testimony of Tertullian, which yet I
could not help unless I would for want of help betray the truth, when I saw how
Mr. Marshal, Dr. Holmes, and others had almost stolen away corrupted and by
fair words enticed our old friend Tertullian, to serve on their side, for we
would not willingly be cousi^ed of what is our due: yet least any man should
think of me above that he sees me to be, and take me to be a man of much
reading, because I talk so much of the Fathers, I testify that I am of little
further acquaintance with these Fathers, for my converse is mostly with
Matthew, Mark, Luke, Peter, Paul, Jude Ianies, and John, then this controversy
has brought me to, which now is so much that though I honor them, as honest
and good men in their times, as finding many things of much worth, and
excellency in them, yet for all that I am sick,

Secondly, with seeing what abundance of absurdities, silly reasons, senseless
anti-scriptural sentences, odd conceits, vanities, varieties of error, as well
as verities, uncertainties whether some of their books be their own or no,
mistranslations, foisting of what of their own other men please into their
works as Ruffinus into Origin, falsities, flat contradictions amongst
themselves, and such like are to be found among them, sufficient enough to
cause all men to trust no more to their testimonies, then with their own eyes
they see the same testified in the Scriptures.

Thirdly, I am sick more yet to find the whole Clergy after whom the whole
world wonders, and walks in error, wondering so much after these Fathers, and
walking after them, where they walk in error, and yet neglecting to give heed
to them where they speak the truth, and which is worst of all, sleighting the
short pure, and plain ways of God, the Father of all, of Christ our Father,
and the first Fathers next and immediately under God and Christ, Supreme
Governors of the Church, and givers out of the Gospel to the world, I mean the
Apostles, who in my mind write the way of the Gospel, if men were not willing
to go astray from it, because it is narrow, self denying, and thorny, though
more briefly yet more clearly to any common capacity, then the most voluminous
of all the other fathers do, for we use all plainess of speech says Paul 2
Cor. 3. Wherefore

Fourthly, and Lastly I am sick most of all to consider, what a stir ministers
make in their quotations of the Fathers, marching on, and giving such a broad
side, as they think, with two or three sentences on of the fathers, as if they
would bear all men down before them, that come near them, no higher read then
in the Scriptures, no better armed then with the sword of the spirit, the word
of God; For this only is despised as much as David's sling and stone before
Goliath, and this too, though in cool blood the Scripture is confessed by
themselves to be so instar omnium, that nothing is of any force, but what
slowes from it: for though some Clergy men dote so far that they believe the
Fathers, no otherwise then they would have the world to believe themselves, i.
e. because ipse dixit, yet some are so wise as to confess, that how far forth
soever the Fathers may serve to prove to us things de facto to be done in their
several ages, yet their testimonies de facto cannot prove any thing to us to be
de jure at all, whereas if it be so, and ye so it is, I am me thinks become a
fool at this time in falling, before I was aware, so up to the ears in contest
about a few testimonies of the fathers, as well as I and others heretofore, in
counting so extraordinarily on them: wherefore I do henceforth humbly conceive,
and confess my self to the people, together with all my fellow father-fool'd
friends, viz. the Clergy of all Christendom, to have been no better then
childish and semi-simple so far as such high and holy heed, and such heedlesse
submission has been given by us to these fathers, Schoolmen, and other
authors, as has occasioned extreme seduction from the Scriptures: hear
therefore O thou most miserably be wildred Priesthood of the Nations, and
understand, for so thou shall if thou return from out of that thick wood of
Authors, Polemical Tracts, Schoolmen, Casuists, Tomes, Volumes of Fathers,
Councels, Commentators, Treatises, Systemes of Theology, framed forms of old
and New Creeds, long and short Catechismes, confessions of Churches, etc. in
which thou have wandered and lost thy self from the truth, to the unfeigned
study of that little book of Scriptures, which alone, if thou will be
admonished by it, is able to make thee, and them that hear thee wise enough
unto salvation: Thou speak what thou have seen of thy fathers we speak what
we have seen of our Fathers: what thine teach in their books, we regard not qua
ipsi dixerint, unless qua dictum prius by our Fathers, if they teach no other
then what our Fathers teach in theirs, it is no more then what thou, having the
same Scripture, the same liberty, to search, the same promise of the same
spirit to guide, the same access to God in prayer for it, may learn, not at
second hand from them, but at first hand from thence, as easily as themselves,
but when they go aside, from that, and thou with them, and thine with thee a
venture, this seems no other to me then Ignis fatuus with a false flash going
before, and Ignoramus fatuus with his false faith, and a number of ignorants
following after.

Thou tellest us of thy novel antiquity of Counsels, National, Oecumenicall, of
Churches Greek and Latin, of Fathes, Austin, Gregory, etc. and yet confessest
thy self that particular Churches have erred, and may err, and if all
particulars, then why the universal, which consists of all particulars cannot,
thou can not prove, and that general councels, which the Schoolmen term the
representative Church, are subject to error. and have sometimes decreed heresy
and falsehood for truth, thou confessest by Dr. Featley p. 17. of his figment;
And that none of the fathers, nor yet the joint consent of many is a competent
judge for faith to hang upon, concerning the right of things, is confessed by Mr.
Blake p. 58. of his to Mr. Blackwood, and yet (to go round again) thou ventest
thy self out of the mouths of others, as if their verdict were enough to
warrant, and canonize all that for verity that is vented by them.

Tell us therefore no more (as Dr. Featley does) of Gregory nor yet of Gregory
the great, whose testimonies if they were for thee (but now I think ont they
are not, for in the place cited by Dr. Featley himself, in the very forehead of
his book in the next page of all before the first, it is evident that Greg.
Nazianzen was for infants baptism but in case of danger only i. e. if they
were likely to die in infancy, otherwise says he (for so Mr. Den cites
Gregory's words more fully) in the place which the Doctor docks. and custs off
in the midst p. 49. of his answer to Dr. Featley, otherwise let them stay still
they be capable to hear and to answer, and no more to your purpose speaks Pope
Gregory the great, whose words are cited out of Mr. Fox by Mr. Cornwell, and
out of Mr. Cornwell by Dr. Featley p. 63. 64. in way of resolution to Austin
the monk are no other then the same viz. that in case of necessity infants
might be baptized as soon as they were born) yet were their testimonies any
more for thee, then they are against thee they could make nothing for thee, as
to evince the equity of thy cause.

As for our way of baptism, if it were our way only, we trust we should be
against it our selves, but since it is the only way of that word, by which all
works must be tried, and all persons judged, whose authority alone being
absolutely divine, if it were of any esteem with the adversaries thereof, were
enough to silence their disputes against it, it will stand though never so many
Councels and things which thou call Churches, and a 1000 Gregory's were
against it.

By this time you may see O ye Ashford Synodians! how little ground you would
have gotten by it if the Authorities of the Church of God from the beginning,
and the fathers of both that and after ages had been used by you, to the
advantage of your disputation, when as not only the primitive fathers of all
i. e. the Apostles, and the Church in their days, whose authorities you rebel
against, are wholly against you, but also the prime of those postern fathers,
and the Church in their days, whose authority you so stand upon, are nothing
for you.

But if by fathers and Church you should chance to mean either the universal C
C Clergy, and their C C Christendom, or the Christened Emperors, Kings, and
civil govern^rs, that have thrown down their crowns to the Clergy, and
according to the C C Clergies cruel sense and wicked will, have been hitherto
nursing fathers, to the Christen Nations, which they have reigned over, both of
which the Clergy has reigned ore and nursed, alias nusled in ignorance to this
day Rev. 17. then indeed (as Caiaphas did in an another case) you speak truer
then you are aware of, for their authority alone (I mean so far forth as it
has acted it self in a way of mere might besides right^ if it were of any
esteem with such as choose to obey God rather then man, were enough to silence
all disputes against infant baptism indeed, at least to lay the itch, and
quench the heat of them, when not only the Popes paternal precepts, and
decretals in the latin Church, (witness that of Innocentius the third, who
Decret. Greg. l. 3. (as cited by Mr. Cornwel) enacted that the baptism of
infants should succeed circumcision) but also the imperial laws and
constitutions. as well as Synodicall cannons, required infant baptism in the
Greek Church, and that so strictly too (as Mr. Marshall himself alleges out of
Photius p. 33. 34. to Mr. Tombs) that whatsoever baptized persons would not
bring their children and wives too (that's more whereby you may note the
goodness of those rimes and Churches when a baptizd husband was forct to bring
his wife as well as his seed to baptism) should be punished, and who ever
denied baptism to a new born infant should be Anathematized, or curs^d with a
most bitter curse: when also (as Dr. Featley boasts out of Gastius p. 68. of
his book) At Zurick after many disputations between Zwinglius, and the
gainsayers of infant baptism, the Senate made an act that if any presumed to
rebaptiz^ (^lias baptized such as were falsely supposed to be baptized before)
should be drowned; and at Vienna many, merely for baptizing such, were so tied
together in chains, that one drew the other after him into the river, wherein
they were all suffocated: and at Ropolstein, the Lords of that place decreed,
that such should be burnt with an hot Iron, and bear the base brands of those
Lords in whose lands they had sinned, and p. 182. out of Pontan. Catolog.
Through Germany, Alsatia and Swedland many 1000s of this sect, who defiled
their first baptism (i. e. their no baptism) by a second, (a true one) were
baptized the third time with their ow^ blood, i. e. miserably tortured (as some
have bin in England also both old and new) yea massacred, and murdered by fire
and faggot for this, and other resistance of the Romish stream, by racking,
headings, hangings, pinching with hot pincers, stabbings, and such like ways
whereby the self-preserving commonwealth of Clergy men, that they might
testify their cause by the Neronean cruelty of it, to be of Christ, who in the
9th chapter of just no where, charges all his ministers to empower all
Christian magistrates to imprison, spoil, torment, hang, banish, burn, drown,
whip, fine, flea and destroy all such, as in foro hominum Synodicantium, non
Dei, deny his name, have restored those that have to their offense been
overtaken with the fault of unfeigned faith, and true obedience in the spirit
of meekness, in all ages of their reign.

So that if either fear, or fire, or blood, or water were sufficient, there
has hitherto wanted none of all these to suffocate the disputers, to lay the
itch and quench the heat of disputes against infant baptism: but as the have of
these times wherein God begins to find the magistrates othor work viz. to curb
the Christian cruelty of that whore, that has thus rid them into rigor against
the Saints, does forbid the the ministers to be so thoroughly provided with them
as heretofore, so modesty does to use those knocking arguments now in these
times of Orthodozism, where in both the Clergy, and their bloody tenet of
persecution for cause of conscience, are discovered daily in their colors.

How little then the Authorities of fathers and Churches, in case we grant them
to come in thereunto, can contribute to your assistance is apparent, and now
that those modern authors you promise your Reader such through furniture from
viz. Calvin, Ursin, and Featley upon this subject, and also such others, as
(though you name them not here yet) have improved themselves more singularly on
that single subject, then any of these have done, as little help you, if they
be well heeded, I come now in the fourth place to discover.

And first, as for your worthy Dr. Featley, he is so worthily defeated and
disarmed of all his Artillery by Mr. Denn, that it were but to attempt the
stripping of a naked, and encountering of a wounded man, to meddle much more
with his arguments, which are all sufficiently secured, and disabled from doing
much mischief to the true baptism; only for his high charges of the
Anabaptists (as he calls them) as a bloody, illiterate, lascivious, lying,
sacrilegious s^ct, whether they may not more easily be made good against the
Clergy in general, then against the generallity of them he calls so, may
possibly be examined hereafter.

And as for Calvin and Ursin, it is true they are both against us in the maine,
but in some things so slatly against you in the mean, that you have as little
cause to brag of their assistance of you, as the Kirk of Scotland had to bless
themselves in the help of their King and his party, who though they were all
against England yet were so eager against each other, that they rather weakened
each others forces, for thus do you Ashford arguers for infanr-baptism, and
those two Champions you seem to crack of, as propugnators with you of the same,
who are such strenuous impugnators of their opinions, asseverations and
principles about the point, as to debillit^te and raze them down as impious,
and impedimental imbecillities: for they cry out (as I have showed more at
large above) Christus non ad^mit salutem ^is quibus adimitur baptismus: quantum
damni invexerit dogma illud etc. Christ does not deny salvation to them to whom
baptism is denied, what mischi^f that opinion brings that baptism is necessary
to salvation few consider, and the opinion that they are damned who are not
baptized, makes as if the grace of God were less to us then to the Jews etc.
and there seems no small injury to be done to the covenant of God not to rest
in this principle, that infants are not excluded from the kingdom of heaven,
who depart out of this life without baptism, and more of this sort; so that
instead of being strengthened in your last arguments at least, wherein you
assert that denying baptism to little infants destroys the very hope of their
salvation, which is as much as to say, Baptismum esse de necessitate salutis,
and perditos ^sse omnes quibus aqua tingi non contingit etc. that baptism of
infants is so necessary to their salvation, that parents can have no hope of
their salvation if it be denied them, and that in^ury is done to the Covenant
of God, and that the Go^pel is worse then the law if infants be not bap^ized,
instead I say of being strengthened by these m^ns testimonies you turn us off
to, contrary wise you are rather spoiled, and stark (...) of a moity of that
argumentative furniture, whereby you strive to stiffen your selves, and others
against the truth, even of no less then one or two of those three principal
pillars, wherewith you under pin your false practice, and fortify it from
falling flat unto the ground.

As for the other men, that together with your selves are up in arms in this
age for infant baptism, so odiously are some of them at odds with you, and
among themselves, as also some of you are with them, and among your selves,
that its well ^igh enough to render a wise man mad, at least a doubting man
more distracted then resolved, to hear, read, and see the wonderful jars, that
are among modern Divines, as touching the various opinions, ends, grounds and
principles, upon which they plead and practice in this point of infant baptism.

For not to sp^ak here of the jarrs, which the baptism of persons in infancy,
occasions necessarily between the preachers assertions of baptisms nature, use,
offices, ends, and the peoples practicals, and infants capacities, not one of
which in infancy appears to the preachers to have any of those things, which
they say baptism signs, seals, and is used for viz. regeneration, real union
with Christ by faith, and incorporation into him, (...) of his spirit, and
confirmation of their faith by it etc. nor one of many, when they grow up to
years neither, the most of them whom they so incorporate into Christ, and
signify to the world (by baptism) that they are without doubt so accep^ed, and
eternally beloved of Christ, proving wicked, and rejected of him as much as
those, who remain unbaptized till they are at age, of which jars Mr. Blackwood
speaks plainly p. 17. 18. 19. of his storm. to which as little or nothing to
the purpose as Mr. Blake replies, p. 41, 42. yet he is answe^ed again in Mr.
Blackwood^ rejoinder p. 30.

Nor yet to speak of the jarrs that are between the grounds upon which our
modern Dieines plead infant baptism, and those of the ancient fathers, as
Cyprian and such others viz. his 66. Bishops, which are so filly and
ridiculously superstitious, that I am persuaded our Divines who live in these
days wherein truth is coming from under those clouds, which then it was
coming under, are ashamed of them, and therefore invent what new ones they
can, and let them alone, thus mangling the Fathers, and qua^rtering to their
own use what they please out of them, and even deifying some, whilst they defy
others of their sayings, receiving their words, and witness in the (...) that
infant baptism ought to be, as right and rare, rejecting their (...), or
reasons why it should be, as unsound, too rank, stark naught, refuse, and
rotten; but not to meddle (I say) with these disco^ds here, my intent is rather
(have patience with m^ whilst I do it; but do it I must, whether you take it
patiently or no) to discover the deep discord that is between you modern
Divines among your selves, which till you are better agreed will make you
incapable of ever subjecting others again unto your dictates in infants baptism.

Babist.
Is it not a marvel that so many eminent Divines, industrious in the study of
this Argument, should so unanimously jar with their own principles, and not be
able to discern it, but all those many must leave it to you to discover it?

Baptist.
So says Mr. Blake indeed p. 41. of his repulse in a lu^ory way to Mr.
Blackwood, to whom I seriously reply, yea it is a mighty marvel indeed, to see
such an heap of witnesses concur so well together by the years (as all your
famous Oxthodoxists do, in their doctrine about infant bap^ism, some teaching
one thing, others clean contradictory ^o that, and yet all remaining orthodox
still for all this.

Really Sirs such a shameful conjunglement is to be found in your positions
about the grounds you profess to go upon in this point, as will in time though
now you will not see it, make you all amazed one at another, that ever such a
mavelous work and wonder, should fa^l out among you, as in the just judgment
of God for your teaching his fear after men's precepts, there does at this day,
viz: such a hiding of understanding from the prudent that even the princes of
Zoan should be befooled, confounded, contradicted by none more then themselves,
and yet not take notice of it.

Sirs you had need to Synodize one year more, and to Catechize one another into
a little more Concord^nce about your principles before you Catechetically
impose that practice upon whole nations, unless your grounds were more
agreeable then they are with both the word and each other; for some of you
preach up that your practice, and plead it with all your might from 1 Cor. 7.
14. taking the word ho^y there as it stands in Deuteronomy. 7. 6-14. 2-26. 19. and
other places, where it is most evident that it signifies a people consecrated
to God in the same way, as the Priests Temple, Altar, Sacrifices, and all
things then under the law were, and now nothing at all is, and y^ I have known
some of you again, that have acknowledged the words sanctified and holy in 1
Cor. 7. 14. cannot be taken in any such sense, but in that very sense wherein
we take them, yet supposing infants baptism to follow from other places;

Some of you preach it up and plead it with all your might from Mark 10. ^3.
etc. as if you did believe, and would make folks believe, that the children
that were then brought to Christ were baptized either by him or his disciples,
and truly if you believe it not, what is that Scripture then to your purpose?
nay it makes more strongly against you for if these very infants that were
brought to, and blessed by Christ himself, to whom you say he declared the
Kingdom to belong, were not baptized, your presumption is very high, who dare
baptize other infants, of whom you have no such testimony: yea some of you say
that their bringing to Christ for imposition of hands does suppose them to have
been baptized before they came (I wonder by whom) witness Dr. Holmes p. 61.
63. yet some of you again confess the contrary, viz. Mr. ^otton p. 9 of his
grounds and ends, whom Dr. Holmes so justifies, and magnifies, who in
confutation of him says thus.

That it does not appear that the Fathers that brought these infants were
baptized themselves, and therefore neither might their children be baptized
according to rule.

And yet both Mr. Cotton and his neighbor Mr. Cobbet also, and eve^ every one
else almost that writes, or speaks as well as you Ashford Disputants, make
mighty ado (but nihil ad rhombum) from that place also.

Some of you plead the sprinkling of believers infants (for none else must be
sprinkled by the Popes confession, only he takes believers not in so strict a
sense as some do) from A^t. 2. 39. suppo^ing that those to whom Peter said the
promise is to you and to your children, were believers and already in the
faith, even then when he thus bespake them, which if they were twere nothing to
your matter, witness Mr. Vahan of Smarden at the Dispute at A^hford, whose
Arguments being it seems none of the most material, are excluded from your
Account, whose supposition was supported with a position as false and silly as
it self, yet is it a maxim with the Clergy that was then blerted out from
among you, viz that the desire of grace is grace; in refutation of which your
doctrine, appeal was made by your Respondent to the people, whether the desire
of Drink was Drink? and whether because they all desired to go to heaven,
therefore they were at heaven? others again acknowledge the truth in this, viz.
that the men were yet in unbelief while Peter spoke that to them, as Mr. Cotton
p. 35. of his grounds, who says thus, when he calls man to believe, or to
repent he comes to them not as having faith, and repentance, but as wanting
both, and Mr. Prigg also, who hasti^g into the help of Mr. Vahan at the Ashford
disputation, happily more then heartily help the Respondent against Mr. Vahan,
and himself too by his plain contradiction of the other, and conjunction with
the Respondent in that, viz. that the men to whom Peter then spoke in presenti,
the promise is to you and your children etc. were not yet in the faith, but the
promise was made to them, as they who yet did not, should believe, i. e. in
futuro: for (by your favor Gentlemen) if it be thus, then it should seem, and
so it was told you then, but you would not hear it, that the promise of remission
of sins, (though it be made good to believers, and none else, no not to their
fleshly seed (qua tales) unless they also believe, when they come to years, for
if they be taken away in infancy, both they and all other infants, of whom I
find not where God requires faith, so dying may be saved without it, and are
too though it cross your cruel conceit of heathen infancy) this promise I say
was made by Peter to unbelievers, and their children, yea and is in very deed
to all men in the world, and their children, Jews or Gentiles, near or far
off, whether, in time or place; yea to every Creature that then was, has been
since, now is, or ever shall be to the worlds end is the promise made Mark 16.
15, 16. by Christ himself, who is the purchaser of eternal salvation for all
men, though actually the eternal savior of none of those, to whom his Gospel
is preached, save only such as obey him Heb. 5. 9. yet none of all this
warrants your sprinkling believers infants only in their infancy, any more
then it warrants your sprinkling of so many hundreds of unbelievers infants, as
you do still, as s^riet as you lace up baptism to believers infants only in
the state of your question; for to say no more then the truth that's another of
your H^us pocus's, which when your customers come to find out, they will be
ashamd of you and you of your selves if you be not past it, you I say, yea
specially you of the strict Pres^ytery, who cry out upon your parish people as
for the most part profane, and ignorant, impenitent, and unbelieving, and in
such a wretched condition that except they b^ converted they will perish, nor
dare you admit them to the Supper least they eat and drink their own damnation,
and yet their children are the seed of believers with you still, to whom belong
the promises, and right to the seals for their sakes.

Yea (O ye several parishes where these men preach, not in the city only, but
in the Countries of Kent, Sussox, and other places) let me Apostrophize a
little to you, least your Clergy should not heed it, if I speak only to them,
have you not heard your teachers thundering you as Malignants, for the most
part, t^reatthreatning you to come in and to be reconciled to God, as those
that are yet enemies to him, and his people, (meaning those few that are better
friends to them then the major part o^ you are) calling to you as crucifiers of
Christ, and preaching Peter's doctrine Act. 2. by the halves, saying repent,
repent? for how beit they should say somewhat more to such sinners as you seem
to be in their eyes, viz. repent and be baptized every one of you in the name
of Christ for remission of sins; yet they put themselves out of all capacity of
preaching, and you of practicing thus, whilst they make you believe you are
aforehand in the business of baptism, because of something like, or rather very
unlike it, which was dispensed to you in infancy called sprinkling, which they
have sprinkled into the name of baptism: yea have not some of them, kept the
Lords Supper wholly from you all, for as many years together as they have lived
among you, and the rest kept back many hundreds of you as wicked, and unworthy
from that ordinance, communicating in it with two or three score, upon such
like pretense of Scripture, viz. what communion, what part has light with
darknsss, Christ with Belial, the Temple of God and Idolators, believers and
infidells? for what else can they pretend? for if you were all believers, and
all walking in the light as God is in the light, ye might have fellowship one
with another therein, the blood of Christ his son cleansing you from all sin; as
to the Supper therefore you are unbelievers, yet are you not all, or at least
the most of you believers when you have children to be sprinkled? you are
unbelievers when your Minister is in the Pulpit and at the ^able, but owned all
as believers, while he stands at the Font or Basin, whose persons for want of
faith, repentance, and better behavior they will not admit to the Supper: do
you not see how you are nosed, and gulled and Priest-ridden? whilst with them
you are ungodly persons, and yet godly parents; Church Members and belivers at
one time, and yet neither this nor that at another; one while sheep (specially
at washing and sharing time) whose little ones are lambs, that must be bosomed,
and brought to Christ, and baptized as those to whom the Kingdom of heaven,
and privileges of it are intailed, and belong by right of generation, and
birth of Christian professors, and many such good morrowes: another while, viz.
at next Communion, that entail is cut off again, you being unbelievers, and
perhaps (to go round again) at next child you have to christen its tack on
again: so that when they are pleased, or rather profitted by that title, you
are the flock of God, purchased with his own blood, over which the holy Ghost
has made them overseers both to feed, and feed on; and when they please to
improve the power and turn the key of the kingdom upon you, they shut in with
an hand full of their own leaven, as the true Turtle, choice Church, spiritual
Spouse, Synagogue of Saints, and lock twenty to one of you out from feasting
with them, as a company of Carrion Crows, of Carnal Christians, hateful
ha^gbyes, Servants of Satan, as a heard of Wolves, and Goats, and Dogs and
Swine.

Again, some of you say Paedobaptism is a tradition of the Church as Dr. Gouge,
who used such an assertion to Mr. Barber, as an Argument to him to take the
oath ex officio, and therefore belike, being like to offend his fellows if he
did, he would not at any hand deliver his opinion pro or con in answer to Dr.
Chamberlain, whether the sprinkling of infants were of God or man? also Mr.
Daniel Rogers who says it is as reverend a Tradition of the Church as any, but
confesses himself unconvinced by any demonstration of Scripture for it; others
say it is an Apostolical Tradition, and institution of Christ, and among these
some say there is neither express nor positive command or example for it in
the New Testament, as Mr. Hunton, yet good consequence for all that from the
Old to prove it Christ's Ordinance; yea and as good from the New as there is for
women to eat the Supper, as Mr. Marshall, though the best consequence that I
find the wisest of you make is to me as far fetched as Peter had the keys given
to him, therefore the Pope may sell pardons for money, and save as many souls
as he pleases, and that's a ground or conseqence as far short as an
improbabillity, yea as an impossibility is to a certainty, in respect of that
which is for women's fellowship in the supper, for there is as much president and
precept too for that, as there is for men's, if either women may be disciples,
believers, and Church members as it is sure they may, and were Act. 1. 14. 2 41.
42. 17. 12. (though infants, neither were nor can be, till they have learned)
or if (...) be of the common gender 1 Cor. 11. 28. expressing both sexes, and
as well the woman as the man, as those gentlemen know very well it is, that
shroud themselves under so thin a shrub, from the storm that is now lighting on
their garrisons, as Mr. Calvin once did, and Mr. Marshal, and others still do:
others not venturing the cause wherein the whole Clergy is so nearly concerned
upon such a ticklish term, as that of a tradition of the Church stand to it
that there is both precept and president for it in the Scriptures seeming to
yield, that if at least there be not one of them, we have not warrant to meddle
with it; and of this sort I have met with many a one, I am sure with more then
one, who when they have in public disputes bin but put to assign and produce
those places where that plain precept and president is contained, they send us
to such Scriptures where unbiassed men may sooner find the way of a serpent
upon a rock then either institution or instance of infant sprinkling viz. for
precept to the second commandment Exodus 20. so Dr. Channel at Petworth Ian. 1.
1651. saying that the second commandment enjoines us to observe all the
institutions of God and Christ from time to time, but not seeing that he was by
right to have brought some other scripture first, whereby to prove infants
baptism to be one of those institutions which was the thing denied, and not the
other, for we grant that all Christ's institutions are to be obeyed. without
putting any man to carry us so far back to the second commandment to convince
us of it, but we deny still that its one of Christ's institutions that infants
should be baptized: also to Mat. ^8. 19. 20 which was assigned to me both by
Mr. Reading at Fowlston 1650. and also by Dr. Channel at Petworth, out of which
I making it appear by argument, and by comparison of this with the same passage
(as recorded in other words Mark. 16. 15. 16.) that those, who are bid to be
baptized there, are such as are also commanded first to be taught, preached to
etc. therefore not infants, these two men, that might both be worthily renowned
(for ought I know) in respect of their worth otherwise, were their parts
improved as much for, as they are against the truth in this point, and were it
not their hap to be yet besch^old beside the Gospel, as it is in truth, replied
both to one and the same purpose, but nothing to their own viz. that when
Christ says go teach and baptize, and he that believes and is baptized, in
these expressions he speaks of persons at years, not of infants, for such must
be taught first, but that hinders not but that infants may be baptized before
teaching: and this is the very common wind away of you all, to all whom (as to
them then) so I say now again, if the Scriptures, and commands of your own
assigning do speak of persons at age only, and there is no mention at all of
children in either of them (for in those words Dr. Featley expresses all your
minds concerning Mat. 28. Mark. 16. when brought by us against infant baptism)
where are the Scriptures that do mention infants, so as to institute their
baptism? if I should assert this that Christ commanded that infants should eat
at his table, and being put to assign what Scripture its commanded in, should
name 1 Cor. 11. 28. and when its argued against me to the contrary, saying that
place permits them only to come, that can ex^mine themselves, as infants
cannot, therefore it is no command for infants to come, should answer thus viz.
there is no mention at all of children in that text, much less any prohibition
of infants to come, when Paul says, let a man examine himself, he speaks of
persons at years only, but that hinders not why infants may not come without
self-examination, would you not say I were half out of my wits? yet thus do you
all almost (as well concerning places of your own assigning, as those we bring
viz. Mat. 28. Mark. 16. 16. Act. 2. Repent and be baptized Act. 8. if thou
believe thou may) return thus viz. those phrases speak of adult ones, and
not of infants; and so say I of these and every Scripture else that speaks of
baptism, and I trow where is that place that makes mention of any such thing as
the baptism of infants?

Secondly, in president of which you send us to the households, wherein your
selves cannot tell that there was any infant therein at all: which is as much
as to say and urge (ab exemplo) thus viz. it is not certain by any one instance
thereof, that any one infant was baptized in those households, which are said to
be baptized in the primitive times.

Ergo no doubt but by the same example infants ought to be baptized now.

Again, some of you urge Mat. 28. as the institution of Christ for baptizing
men of ripe years at least, yea and in^ants also (as Mr. Marshall) some of you
again deny this, saying that Mat. 28. is not an exact platform of Christ's
commission concerning the matter of subject of the administration of baptism
(as Dr. Holms p. 7.) both which men direct their different doctrines to Mr.
Tombs in order to his direction: but how shall that man be resolved? which
shall he cleave to? whose words shall he take, the Doctors or the Divines?

Again, some of you say, that semen carnis a fleshly seed is entitled to the
promise, (for even this seed with you is emen sidei) some of you say semen
sidei the spiritual seed only: i. e. as many as are of the faith (and so says
the Scripture) are blessed with faithful Abraham, but then semen sidei with
you is no other but semen carnis the fleshly seed, and that of such too, as are
Abraham's seed, not after the flesh, nor after the faith neither: thus you
wander in a wood, and trace too and fro in a thicket, moap up and down in a
mist, are rapt up in a cloud of confusion, contradiction and unanswerablenesse
about the proof of a popish practice, dancing round, and crossing the way one
of another ever and anon, and yet ken it not, nor consider how all men's eyes,
that are but half open, are half amazed at your shufles.

Again, some of you pin your practice upon the score of the infants faith, and
of these aga in there are several subdivisions, for some ground it on seminall
faith only i. e. the habit, or on infants having faith, denying utterly their
capacity to act it i. e. to believe (as Mr. Willcock and many more.)

Some again deny that they do build it upon seminall faith, but say they go
upon more certain grounds as Mr. Blake p. 24. to Mr. Blackwood, who faith of
faith in the root, or of this semniall faith, this faith is not our ground for
infants baptism, being undiscernable.

Some again upon their acting faith, which they assert infants capable to do
(though against their wills) as well as to have it, as (to the clear
contradiction of themselves) Mr. Willcock, and many more do, whilst they with
him, and he with them speak of children in this phrase viz. that they do
believe, and thus they speak whilst they interpret that clause Mat. 18. 6. i.
e. these little ones which believe in me, of little ones littterally taken, for
(...) cr^dere i. e. to believe expresses not the habit only, but the act of
faith, as to know, to read, to teach, to love, to learn do sound out non munus,
non actum primum only, but actum secundum also.

Some of you again put that practice upon score of the parents faith, not the
child's, and of these, which are also subdivided, some the faith of the next
parents only, as Dr Holmes, who in his to Mr. Tombs p. 216. 217. says thus,
the children are not to be baptized whilst the next parents are unbelievers i.
e. though the grand parents be believers, and Mr. Cotton also, who p. 87. of
his book styled the way of the Churches of New England says thus, God never
allowed his Church any warrant to receive into Covenant the children of godly
parents, who lived a thousand years ago, nay rather the text is plain that the
holiness of the childrend pendeth upon the faith of the next immediate
parents, or one of them at least, as if the seed of parents were not their seed
at two or three generations off; others the faith of the remote parents, as Mr.
Rutherford Pres. p. 164 where he says, all infants born in the visible Church,
what ere the wickedness of the nearest parents is, are to be received into the
Church by baptism: yea p. 173 Joshua had commandment of God to give the seal
of the Covenant to their children, who were as openly wicked against the Lord,
as murderers, drunkerds, swearers etc. also Mr. Marshall and Mr. Baily who
commends Mr. Cottons learned maintenance of infants sprinkling in p. 132, and
yet contradicts him in this thing, no further off then p. 134. saying, although
the parents are wicked, (meaning the immediate parents) yet the Lords interest
is in the children i. e, not of the 3d and 4th but of the 1000th generation;
and by this shift the Ishmaelus, the Edomites, the Turks are of Abraham, though
not of Isaac, and so Gods by birth; yea we and the whole world are of Noah,
though not of Abraham, and so belike must be baptized, and Mr. Blake in p. 24.
of his birth-priviledge, who says, If the ground of a child's admission to
baptism be ^ot the faith of his immediate parents, but the promise made to
Ancestors in the faith, whose seed is though at a greater distance, then the
loose life of an im mediate parent can be no bar to his baptism: this is plain
if Josia have no right from his father Ammon, yet he is not shut out in case he
have right from his father David, or his father Abraham, yea even all the
national Clergy (I think) excepting your new English, and congregationall men,
and lastly they themselves too, witness Dr. Holmes, who p. 11, makes the
remote father Abraham he, upon whose belief those 3000 Jews in Acts 2. were to
be baptized, and Mr. Cotton himself (Aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus) who p.
79. of his grounds etc. affi^ms all the seed (and then surely the seed to many
generations as well as the nearest) to be holy by adoption, and wearies
himself, and his reader in about 20 pages, to prove remote Abraham to be the
parent, upon whose faith the ^ew shall be taken in at last viz. from p. 79. to
p. 100.

Some again put the practice of infant baptism upon the score of neither the
child's not the fathers faith necessarily, but on the faith of Christian
Sponsors, and of these there is two sorts too, considering Sponsors as either
witnesses, or sureties, alias Gossips or Guardians: first, some sprinkle them
upon the witnesses or gossips faith, thus all that still retain the old English
deformation, after which yet the New English Christians that were born here,
were Christened by the Priests, saying I baptize thee when they did but Rantize,
which practice though the directory allow as the ordinary way, yet the common
prayer book did not, save in case of necessity, which Priests, when they should
by right baptize the sponsors professing their faith and repentance from dead
works, and desires to be baptized in that faith in those words, we forsake them
all, all this we steadfastly believe, that is our desire, instead thereof take a
child, of what parents it matters not, out of the midwifes arms, putting two or
three drops of water upon the face of it, and so there is an end of the business:
this is that which Mr. Cotton the great Gamaliel of New England, though after
that fashion possibly himself was sprinkled, is now utterly and bitterly
against, professing for himself and those Churches p. 88. of his way of the
Church of new England, that they know not any ground at all to allow a faithful
man liberty to entitle another man's child to baptism, upon the pretense of his
own promise to have an e^ to his education, unless the child be either born in
his house, or resigned to him to be brought up as his own, and then he is
confident, but from no other law then that of circumcision, from which I may be
as confident that males only, and that on the eighth day, must be baptized, it
may be done. Some upon the faith of the sureties or guardians, as Mr. Cotton,
who from Genesis 17 12. 13. grants, but very doubtfully, and therefore whether
damnably or no let him look to it) so much liberty to a Christian Sponsor, i.
e. Surety, that if a stranger, or a very wicked man should give him his child
from his infancy, to be brought up as his own, it may be baptized as his own,
in confutation of which i will quote no Author but Mr. Cotton, who in that same
88. page, where he speaks this; but two or three lines above it says thus, The
Covenant is not intailed to Sureties, i. e. to such for whom they undertake,
but this is the utmost bounds of liberty Mr. Cotton says he can give, and I
wonder who gave him power to give so much in this case, he allows a little bit
and no more, because he is not sure he may allow that, but (by his leave) from
that inch i will take an ell, for if a wicked man's child may be baptized, then it
may, and then why not a 100 as well as one, in the like case? and so at least
the promise is not entailed to faithful parents only, and their sced, yea his
grant p. 88. intailes baptism to the children that have believing Guardians, as
well as to such as have believing parents, and so he gives the question, as
stated concerning believers children only.

Some again put it on the score of neither the child's, nor the parents, nor the
sponsors faith, but at least either the fathers, or the Mothers membership in a
gathered Church, so as if this be not the parents, though otherwise never so
faithful may not have their children baptized: thus the Churches in New
England, yea and I think all of this indifferent semi-demi-Independent way,
both in Old England, and New, and elsewhere, witness Mr. Best Churches plea p.
60, 61. who says thus,

A man must not only be a Christian, and by profession, within the covenant
only, but also a member of some visible Church, and particular congregation ere
his child be baptized.

For which Mr. Rutherford rounds him a bout again, and takes him to do, p. 174.
175. of his Presb. and flatly contradicts him thus, saying,

Baptism is a privilege of the Church, not of such a particular Independent
Church, and the distinction between Christian communion, and Church communion
in this point is needless, and fruitless, for none are to be refused baptism
whose parents profess the faith, etc. howbeit not members of a settled Church.

Which also contradicts Mr. Cobbets Castle of come down, whose whole structure
is settled upon that same dainty distinction of Church choice, and true choice;
of this mind also was my beloved friend Mr. Charles Nicolls, of whom I have
more hopes yet then I have of every one of his own form, that he will fully own
the truth in time, forasmuch as he does more fully appear for it, against that
Truth-destroying thing called Tithes, then those of his way do in other parts
of Kent, who either per se, or at least per alios take them, not to say rake
and rack both Christ's flocks. and the parish flocks also for them still: which
Mr. Nicolls preaching publicly at Dover in my hearing Ian. 1650. (whether he
fetch his doctrine out of Mr. Cobbets book yea or no I cannot tell, in page 17.
whereof the same is found) declared himself to be of Mr. Cobbets mind by the
delivery of this doctrine, viz. That an enchurcht believers natural seed is
faederally holy from 1 Cor. 7. 14. which position I have also since seen under
his hands, so narrow a corner is the case crowded into now, that it is not the
believing, but the enchurcht believing parent, i, e. who, leaving the
perochiall posture, betakes himself to membership in some separated society,
who sanctifies the unbelieving parent and the seed, else were the children
unclean, but now are they holy, i. e. from the time of one or both parents
entering the borders of a separated society: and so by this means if an old man
or woman that has ten or twenty children, the youngest whereof is no less then
twenty years old, they all though never so morally wicked, yet from thenceforth
are faederally holy, but not before, no though their parents believed before.

Upon this Account the Churches in New England deny their Nullity sprinkling to
infants of such parents, as are either not yet joined to them, or (for which
they are very oddly also at odds among themselves) excommunicate from them: in
justification of which Gambole, Mr. Cotton lapps himself up in such a
manglement of discourse p. 81. to the 88. as betokens, that wisdom is
perishing from the wise for man's tradition sake, which they hold up against
Christ's institutions: yea he sticks not to assert p. 81.

That the Apostles and Evangelists gathered men whom they baptized, into a
visible church estate before they baptized them, unless they were
church members before they preached to them.

Which is as if he should say they brought them first into the visible Church,
that they might be baptized, and then (to go round again) baptized them that
they might be brought into the visible Church, for unless he contradict all
those thousands of Old England (now becoming New, whilst New England grows
old) who after sprinkling still used this phrase, viz. We receive this child
into the congregation of Christ's flock, as in the English refined Masse-book
the Priests universally did, preaching baptism to be the entrance into the
visible Church, not in word only but in deed also, by placing their Fonts at
the Church doors, unless I say he be contrary to all Paedobaptists, who hold
baptism to be the way into the Church, and not the visible Church the way into
baptism (and then what another cross whet does he wipe them with) we must needs
take Mr. Cotton in that manner, and yet to say the truth the Clergy is cross
enough to themselves in this case, for this is but like that of them that say,
believers infants are born in the bosom or within the pale of the Church, and
so must be baptized, and must be baptized, and so enter within the pale of the
visible Church, or else they are out, and in no better condition than the
children of Turks and Pagans.

What pretty Gim-cracks are here? yet surely not much above the tyth of those
round abouts, and contradictions to themselves, and one another that are to be
found among the Paedorantists, should I stand upon a full discovery of them,
but verily I am weary to see Old England, New England, and Scotland all
together by the ears about their infants sprinkling, and had rather if it were
possible gain them all to be at peace in that point by laying down their
dispensing it any more to infants; and pitching all upon the undoubted subject
of true baptism i. e. a professed believer, without which it is impossible to
reconcile them till they have routed each other, and stormed themselves out of
their strongest garrisons with their own hands.

Among whom (and so to make an end) what hold, and keep is there likewise about
the sprinkling of bastards, may be seen by Mr. Cotton page 88. of his way, ande.

Some and those the best Divines holding the baptism of Bastards, but not sine
sponsoribus, i. e. not without witnesses or sureties.

Others holding it without witnesses (for ought I find) of which sort is Mr.
^obbet, who brings in Bastards to baptism by a certain fetch beyond his
fellows, viz. the faederal interest of those bastard infants that are born in
the Church, saying, Though the parents faith do not sanctify such, yet the
force of Abraham's covenant fetches them in; which I much marvel at since the
law, or covenant of Circumcision admits not such into the Congregation unto
the tenth generation.

Others again denying that the Scripture warrants any such thing at all; as the
admitting of Bastards to come by baptism into the Congregation, as his
neighbor Mr. Cotton, who gives liberty to Christian Sponsors to entitle wicked
men's children to baptism by their undertaking for them, yet can scarce find in
his heart (for ought I find) to allow them the like to entitle a bastard,
alleging out of Deuteronomy. 23. 2. that in the old Testament a Bastard was not to
enter into the congregation of the Lord unto the 10th generation (and so indeed
he was not upon any terms for ought I see, whether the parents repentance or
the child's good behavior when at years, after once that particular statute was
delivered) yet takes upon him to deviate from his old Testament Rule so far
himself, as to admit such a one into the congregation, and to baptism, either
when the parents repent, notwithstanding his bastardy, or when the child
professes better in his own person, p. 87. 88.

By which kind of often interfearing of so able a man as Mr. Cotton, I perceive
and therefore believe, believe and therefore speak it, that the nearer men come
from Rome toward reformation, if they come not to the perfection of it
according to the word, the more miserably a great deal are they bewildred with
any human tradition, that is remaining among them unremoved, in so much that
the Papacy is less troubled with contradictions, quarrels, quirks and foolish
quiddities about their infants sprinkling, then Praelacy, Praelacy then
Presbytery, Presbytery then Independency: for though they hold none but
believers, and that all those are to be baptized, yet the Pope carries it
clearly to all infants born in his Christendom without streining, these being
all believers with him, as in opposition to Turks.

The Prelate to the infants of Protestants only, that are his believers, in
opposition to Papists.

But the High-Presbyter to the infants of protestants universally, though with
him not 10 of 100 in his parish are believers, when they administer the supper.

The Independent to none but the infants of those that are inchurcht with him,
though himself believes there are 1000s of believers that are not of his way:
those I say that are most reformed in other things, are more muddled, and less
capable to maintain that popish practice of infant-sprinkling, then those that
are deformed in all other parts of outward order besides it, and as they stand
in the narrowest streit to hold it up, so are they for the most part at the
nearest step to lay it down, not a few discovering daily more and more the
absurdity, and unsuitablenesse of it to so pure a posture as they pretend to,
and [quod fieri non debuit factum valet] availing more to the keeping off many
from the true way of baptism, then any arguments they have, whereby to satisfy
themselves in the sufficiency of that way of sprinkling.

Thus we see what a laborinth you Clergymen would lead poor creatures into, if
they should follow you, yea I know not how a man can follow you, unless he go
nine ways at once, such Noniformity there is among you, some saying this, and
some that, and some you wot not well what your selves.

What pretty Checker work is there in your judgments about one and the same
thing? wherein you would be unanimous and uniform if you would return all unto
the truth.

O how does Babell come tumbling down by this Division of tongues, even as when
thieves fall out, true men come to their goods, even so surely will the true
Church come at last to the understanding of this truth, even that no infants at
all are to be sprinkled, when they shall see what a do there is about it among
divines, and how they would hold it if they could tell how, and say something
for it if they could tell what; the disputers and scribes will scuffle one with
another till their poor people, not knowing which to follow, will at last
betake themselves to leave them all, and follow Christ.

What Sirs is the Gospel, the plain simple gospel, such a maeander as this? is
Christ thus divided? were Paul, Peter, and Barnabas, and John, and the rest of
the Apostles and ministers, whose Successors you all say you are, but are not
in very deed, so intricately entangled in vain janglements about one and the
same question, as you are both among and within your selves, so that your
answers and Accounts for your practice hang together more conjangletim, then
conjunctim? but no marvel if the Cat winckt, when both her eyes were out? you
draw nigh to God (O ye Priests) with your mouth, and honor him with your
lips, but have for the most part of you removed your hearts far from him; and
your fear toward him is taught after the precepts of men, therefore are ye
drunken, but not with wine, you stagger, but not with strong drink, for the
Lord has powered upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes,
you Prophets, you Rulers, you Seers has he covered; you have disserted the
truth, and are degenerated into a counterfeit kind of Baptism, that never
descended from above, that has stood now of a long time jure Ecclesiastico,
but not jure Christico, and so the best of you know not how to hold it, now the
truth returns from the land of her captivity, without fidling, and faining, and
patching, and shifting, and such shameful ridiculous thwarting of your selves,
and one another with yea and nay in your joint prosecution of one and the same
cause as will, if you reform not in time, object as much to the Ha-Ha-He of
that part of the Christian world, that yet wonders after you of the protestant
Clergy, as other popish toies have done the Papacy to the Pape of such as once
wondered after them; give over therefore your dabling of infants faces, and
baptize believers by profession, cast away all your wood, hay; and stubble,
which cannot endure the trial by the light of that day, that is now
approaching, and begin the Gospel again as it was in the beginning, is now, and
ever shall be (in this world) world without end, Amen.

Thus Sirs (saving your vain boasting what innumerable Arguments, and such
through furniture from Scripture, from reason, from the Churches, and Fathers
Authority, from more modern Authors, amongst whom you mention Calvin, Ursin,
Dr. Featley) I have showed that Scriptures are against you, that Reason is
against you, that the Primitive Church and Fathers are against you, that the
immediately sub-primitive Church and Fathers are against you, that the
praepostern-Church and Fathers are (though some against you, some for you) so
little to be regarded in their testimonies, in respect of the Superstition of
their times, that if they were all wholly for you they prove nothing de jure
(as neither do the testimonies of the more ancient Fathers by Mr. Marshalls and
Mr. Blakes confession) that though the Clergy, and all Christendom, Pope,
Civil powers, and people have been so fully for you for ages together, as that
they have persecuted all that have been against you, yet this shows the
badness of your cause by the bloudiness of it, and so makes more against then
for you; that two of those three Authors of your own alleging are as much for
you, as men can be that are opposite to you, for they (as ignorantly as your
selves) own your practice, though they disown, and overturn one or two of the
prime pillars, and grounds you practice from: that the third, viz. Dr. Featley,
is killed as dead as a door-nayle by Mr. Den, and that your selves, and the
other sticklers that still stand up in your cause, are so miserably imbroiled
in civil wars, divisions, diversities of design to bring about the same thing,
contradictions, clashings, Ayes, and Noes among your selves, that you can never
make an handsome head against the truth, till your matters hang more
harmoniously together: so that naught remains in which you can hope, (unless
your self excusing, quarter crying Epistle to the Reader, which is also
answered, can stead you) but your forlorn hope of these three following
Arguments, which are more then half laid sprawling already, and that tottered
troop, and ragged Regiment of Scufflers against Reason, and that Scarecrow
that comes up in the Rear of the Review, and that Patheticall summons of all
the Pastors to come in, and succor you, and oppose the growth of Anabaptism,
by preaching what they can against those Heretics the Anabaptists, but
disputing no more with them, because the effects of disputing with them are
dangerous.

All which by then I have dispatch a little more dispute with, whether I shall
be more weary of writing or you of reading this, as I know not well, so it
matters not much, I shall its l^ke give over then however. First then to the
first of your three Arguments that ensue.

Review.
The First is taken from the universal practice of the Church of God, which
the Adversaries would not hear of at the Disputation. The grounds of it are
express texts of Scripture, Mat. 28. 20. Lo I am with you always to the end of
the world. John 14. 16. The Comforter shall abide with you for ever. ver. 17.
The spirit of truth. ver. 26. Who shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your remembrance which I have told you. John. 16. 13. He will lead
you into all truth: The Argument is this. To hold that Christ's promise is not
true, is damnable blasphemy: But to hold that the universal Church has erred
in so necessary a matter as baptism, and that for so many hundred years, is to
hold that Christ's promise is not true, his promise of being with his Church, of
guiding it by the spirit into all truth.

Ergo, To hold the Universal Church has so erred is damnable blasphemy.

If the Anabaptists object, That the Church of Rome uses this Argument for her
traditions; The Answer is, That those traditions which she pleads for were
neither universal nor doctrinal, as this of baptism, and therefore the
exception against her was just, and those errors which she defends by that,
were denied to be of the universal Church: But the Anabaptists can never
prove, that this practice has not been universal, or dare not say, that this
matter is not doctrinal.

Re-Review.
This Argument is so far from having any substance, and weight in it toward the
demonstration of the truth of infant baptism, that it is not so much as a
Topicall syllo gism, but merely Sophistical, so that any that are never so
little learned in Logic may discern it to be the fallacy called (...), or
Ignoratio Elenchi, in which is proved aliud a quaesito, i. e. quite another
thing then that which is by us denied, in which Illud infertur, ut
contradictorium negato, quod revera non contradicit: it does not at all
conclude the point in question: for that you are to prove is not that it is
damnable blasphemy to hold that the universal Church has erred in baptism, but
that to deny infant baptism is damnable blasphemy, toward the direct and
legitimate illustration of which bold charge, wherewith you assault us, viz.
that our denial of infant baptism is damnable blasphemy, you ought of right to
have made this pro-Syllogism, viz.

To hold the universal Church has erred in so necessary a matter as baptism
is damnable blasphemy.

But to deny the lawfulness of infant baptism is to hold that the universal
Church has erred in that matter of baptism.

Ergo, To deny infant baptism is damnable blasphemy.

The Major of which pro-syllogism we do not put you to the trouble of proving,
neither do we hold any such thing that the universal Church has erred in
baptism, any more then you, for the primitive Church did not err in it, though
you do; yet how do you belabour your selves here to prove what we deny not?

But the Minor of that pro-syllogism, which we do deny, as being indeed i^ it
self most peccant, and apparently false, (for to hold infant baptism to be an
Error is not to conclude the universal Church to have erred, for the universal
Church has not held it) the prove of this you evade, and most serpentinely
slide away from, never meddling with it at all, unto a business you might as
well have spared your pains in, and fall a Syllogizing upon us in the self same
sophistical way as Rome does for her Popes Supremacy, and all other her
traditions, for thus say they indeed when they summon us back again to their
fopperies sub paena damnabilis blasphemiae viz.

To hold Christ promise is not true is damnable blasphemy.

But to hold that the universal Church has erred is to hold Christ's promise
not true.

Ergo, to hold the universal Church has erred is damnable blasphemy.

So for the Popes Supremacy thus.

That which is above all the members has Supreme authority over them all.

But the head of the Church is above all the members.

Ergo the head of the Church has Supreme authority over all.

Which Syllogisms are both fallacious per ignorationem Elenchi, for in this
last the^es concluded what is not questioned, for the question is not whether
the head of the Church have supremacy over all or no? for none denies but that
it has, but whether the Pope be at all that head? that is it which we deny,
and they take perforce for granted from us before we have yielded it, or
themselves proved it, and so proceed to have more mischief by it: so again in
the first the question is not whether the universal Church has erred or no?
but whether Rome be that universal Church or no that cannot err? or whether
those traditions she practices, (among which infant baptism is said to be one
by Cardinal Bellarmine, and is taken by Mr. Rogers to be the most reverent)
have bin universally practiced or no? which we deny that they were, for the
first Gospel Church knew none of them, and so they are not universal: which
Romish Sillygisms the best Logicians among the Protestants are so far from
answering so formally, as you strive to do to the first of them in this place,
that they rather explode them as Silly and Sophistical, and so must I do
yours, which is not only Istius-modi, but in terminis the very same with the
first of theirs.

Therefore good Sirs fall back a litttle, and begin again, and make a
prosyllogism or two if you please, before this Syllogism takes its turn, and do
not beat the air, and let fly such hot bullets, as accusations of damnable
blasphemy, before you have any adversary appearing against you: for verily you
first falsely suppose us your opposites in that, wherein we agree with you, and
bestir your selves to fight us in such a fierce fashion, as if you would fright
us out of our cause before you come near us, and set your selves to prove that,
which whoever does yet, I for my part do not deny; for verily it is the minor,
and not the major in the Prosyllogism, which we quarrel with, and as for this
Syllogism of yours, I honor it not so far as to own it: nevertheless if it
be lawful to make a formal answer to an unlawful argument, and least you take
it ill, and think much on it if I slight it so as to give no other reply then
that above, I Will make bold to answer it now its brought by you for
infant baptism, as you do when the same is brought by Rome for other traditions
viz. that this tradition you plead for is not universally practiced: therefore
taking your words in a true sense, and in their largest latitude, though I dare
not be so damable in my doctrine as you viz. to bring every one under blame of
damable blasphemy who holds a possibility of error to befall the universal
Church i. e. the whole state of Christ's Church, which is but imperfect here on
Earth, yet can I not say, nor do I that in esse actuali the universal Church
has erred in the practice of this point of baptism, so as that she has been
totally diserted by the spirit of God, and that Christ has not made good his
promise to her any more then your selves: yea really if you use the word
[universal Church] in its due and proper extent viz. in respect of both time
and place, and in the like latitude, in which Dr. Featley (from whom you
borrowed this argument and some of the ^est, and might as well have sent us to
him for it, as troubled your selves to hold it out here in a new harness) uses
the word [universal Church] as expressing All the assemblies of Christians in
the world, that ever were from the Apostles days to this present, which he
styles the formal Church, this universal Church cannot be impeached with error
in the point of infant baptism, for it has not universally owned it, neither
was it in use from the beginning, there have bin some ages and places wherein
the Churches practiced baptism so agreeably to Christ's will, that you shall
never be shent by him as failing in that point if you do it no otherwise then
it was done then and there viz. the days and places wherein the primitive
Churches dispenst it, for they were all so wholly strangers to your infant
baptism, that not so much as the sound of such a thing was ever heard among
them: and howbeit Dr. Featle, tells us a tale p. 16. out of Origin on the
Romans (whose original is lost, and into which work of his on the Romans it is
shrewdly suspected by the learned, that Russinus, and the Romans have
Sophisticated such a sentence, that the Church had infant baptism from the
Apostles) and thence very goodly grounds.

A positive argument of very great moment (says he) that may convince the
conscience of any ingenuous Christian, viz. that the Apostles in their days
began to baptize infants, and the whole Catholic Christian Church in all
places and ages, even from the Apostles days, has admitted the children of
Christian parents to holy baptism, therefore it is no error.

Yet I must tell you that Origens bare word, and single say so (if it were his
own) is no warrant, whereupon all men may safely, muchlesse must necessarily
believe it was so: but the word of the New Testament, of which the Apostles
mostly were the Penmen, is warrant enough to us to believe that it was not so,
were the word only silent about it, how much more whilst it has so much
against it, that we may say it is exclusive of it; Howbeit therefore you say that
infant baptism has been universal, it is sufficient proof of its non
universallity in that you can never prove that it has been universal, and we
have proved that in the Apostles days it was not so, that in the first Century
it was not so, nor in the second for ought any man living can possibly show, how
ere it began to creep in about the third, and howbeit it has been never so
universally and erroneously practiced from the fourth or fifth Centuries till
now, yet neither will it follow that the universal Church has practiced it,
nor that the universal Church has erred in it, nor that Christ's promise Mat.
28. 20. Ioh. 16. 13 14. 16. 17. 29. concerning the spirits abode and guidance
is not true, for that's not more made, then made good to those that perform the
condition and terms, on which it was made viz. the observation of what he
commanded, in which case the spirit is ever present, and ever was and shall be
with those few that keep the truth; as for the most, when they began to dote on
men's teachings and traditions, and to fashion themselves more at a venture
after the words of the wise and prudent, then after the word of God it self,
and to Idolize the dictates of Synods, and Ghostly fathers, so as blindly to
subject themselves to their sentences, as their only Oracles, then Terras
Astr^ reliquit, Christ who did engage to lead them by his spirit, who would be
led by it, was dis-ingaged, and true enough in his promises, though he left the
world to lie in darkness, and to be filled with their own ways, and with the
fruits of their own inventions.

Moreover it was not the Church, in the capacity of a Church in respect of
outward form and order, but his disciples to whom that promise was made, to
whom also it was performed, and made good in all ages according, and in such
measure as they kept close to him, for in the time of the treading down of the
Temple and holy City, and the true worship and worshippers, and of all that
visible fabric and Church posture which stood in the primitive times, and even
in the grossest darkness, God gave power to his two witnesses i. e. by his
word, and spirit in the hearts and mouths of his Saints, empowered them to
prophecy and testify to the truth against the traditions of Rome, and against
infant baptism as well as other of her superstitions, and heresies, how else
could Bernard have said (as he does Sermon. 65. super cant:) of some that opposed
the corruptions of his time, They laugh at us because we baptize infant^s,
because we pray for the dead, and require the prayers of Saints: yet even to
those Martyrs that did witness to some truth in times of Ignorance, the l^ght
was (though not so totally and terribly, as to the rest of the world) much
ecclipsed ore now it is, and that promised manifestative presence of Christ not
a little interdicted, and communion with him interrupted by the interposition
of that smoke, which coming out of the bottomless pit clouded the su^, and
thickened the air, and as Christ himself foretold also it should be, John 14.
30. by the intervening, of the Prince of the darkness of this world, who was to
have his time, wherein to darken all things, and had it too, so that by his
delusive wiles the whole world was won to be once an Arrian, and after that an
Antichristian, worshipping the Dragon and the Beast, wondering and erring all
together into one Catholic Church-body called Christendom, and by common
consent bearing the whore, or false Ministry, called Clergy, warring at her
will against the Saints, and though not finally (for so the gates of hell
cannot) yet ^or a long time prevailing against them that dwell in heaven, Rev.
13. 4, 5, 6, 7.

In all which time nevertheless (as I said before) some truths were revealed to
some, and so much to such as then sought to Christ, and not to men, as may well
serve to verify Christ's words, and justify all the promises of his presence
with his people, as to the true purport of them, as yea and Amen.

Babist.
But where was your Church then all this while till these latter times?

Baptist.
Where it was to be according to the word of prophecy, Rev. 11. 1. viz. trodden
underfoot, for 1260 years by the nominall Christians, or Gentiles coming by the
lump into the outer Court, i. e. into a bare name, and feigned form of
Christianity after the time of Constantine, at the compulsive call of the
Clergy; since when though there have been an number of Saints in sackcloth,
that have seen much light from Christ, and suffered for it, yet I am so far
from undertaking to prove there was, that I am rather of the mind there was
not, nor was to be (if the word be true) any truly collected, truly constituted
visible Churches at all in right outward form, and order, standing upon that
true foundation, i.e. the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and the
primitive prophets and Apostles, for many ages upwards; even from the Clergies
carrying the Church captive into Babylon unto these days, wherein the
foundation (Heb. 6. 1. 2. with Ephesians. 2. 20. 21. 22.) which has been razed is
laid again, and the measuring line gone forth upon the Temple, is in the hands
of the true Zerubbabel, Christ Jesus, who shall also finish it, not by Army,
nor by strength, but by my spirit says the Lord of Hosts.

If this answer be not satisfactory that our Churches are true ones, unless I
can prove a lineal succession of them from the Apostles times to these, let me
see what lineal succession is of your Churches from the Apostles days, if I
ask you Praelatick Priests (as the Mass Priests do) where was your Church
before Luther? and you Presbyterians where was your Church before Calvin? in
both whose days you cannot deny, but that of those that denied infant baptism
there were abundance; must you not needs see both your Churches swallowed up in
the Sea of Rome, and for ages and generations together, making one with that?
were not the two little heads of the Roman Eagle spoken of 2 Esdras 11. 12.
which are the two smaller kingdoms of the Clergy, i. e. Prelacy, and
Presbytery, making one head with the great one, i. e. the Popedom, till of
late they separated from him.

First sure I am you may labor till you are weary, and look till your eyes
fail before you find a series of visible protestant Churches before Luther, and
as universal as you Protestant priesthood do proclaim your selves, and your
Church to have been, yet I tell you twill puzzle you to derive your pedigree
from the Apostles, if the Pope put you to prove it by induction, and
ennumeration of Churches, succeeding without interruption, unless you will own
him to be your father, as to your Clericall function you are fain to do.

Whereupon in the book styled Luthers predecessors, or an answer to the
question of the Papists; viz. Where was your Church before Luther? p. 3. 4. I
find it ingenuously acknowledged by the nameless Author thereof, in his
undertaking to answer that question, That if the Papistry the Protestant to
assign any visible constituted Church, which might have been known by the
distinction, and succession of Bishops, Elders, Deacons, etc. the task is
unequal, and that records of such a thing are wanting, insomuch that he puts it
off in replying to the Papists, thus.

That they cannot prove that the Church must always be in such manner visible:
that in Elias time there were 7000 unknown to him, much more to Ahab: that in
Christ's passion some papists say the Church was in Mary, the Church being like
the Moon, allwaies lasting, yet not always in the full.

And then in resolution to the quaere it self alleges not any one protestant
Church at all, but only here and there a Protestant professor, as Wickliff,
and such mostly as were after him enlightened by his Doctrine, and did suffer
for giving testimony thereto: so the ^esuitish question is thus answered.

I find it also thereupon the ^le, that in a conference which was once held
upon the same question by Dr. White, and Dr. Featley against two others, viz.
Fisher, and Sweet, Dr. Featley chose rather to prove a continual succession of
protestants by the truth of their doctrine, then the truth of the Protestant
Churches and doctrine by a perpetuity of succession; and so does that Author
himself who ever it was, that wrote the answer to that papistical question, as
well aware that protestant Churches cannot prove themselves true by succession
p. 1. 2.

What says he if we could not prove that the English Church was before Luther,
Must it needs follow that the doctrine we hold is untrue? or shall the doctrine
of Rome be ever the truer because of Antiquity only? No certainly, And why
not? because the Church must be proved and allowed by the doctrine, and not the
Doctrine authorized by the Church, which the Papists (a people wise in their
generation) well knowing have overturned the course of Nature, and will have
the Scripture, and all doctrine to hang upon the determination of the Church,
hoping that if once they have amazed any one with the name of the Church, and
driven him from title and interest in the Church before Luthers time, they
shall easily call in question the whole frame of the doctrine of the reformed
Churches.

So that we see the Protestants are fallen to fence off the papists arguments
from universality, Antiquity, perpetuity, in which Rome outstrips the reformed
Churches, with pleading only the verity of their doctrine, and its being
persecuted in some few professors of it before Luther.

Yea verily if universality, perpetuity, or antiquity either (I mean that post
primitive Antiquity of the fourth or fifth Century) may pass for president more
current then the primitive, the Pope and his priesthood may prove the
protestant priesthood to be but upstart Novices to them by this way of arguing
from the ancient, perpetual, universal practice of their Church.

I write not this as taking the Papists part against the Protestants, for so
far am I from justifying the Jesuits, that I rather fight with Dr. Featley,
and his Non cum Jesus Itis qui Itis cum Iesuitis.
friend against them in this case, holding with them that no succession of true
visible, and rightly constituted Churches can be shown of either your way, or
ours in all that time of popish unity, and universallity, but I do it to this
end only, ut hos^uo I^gulemus gladio (as Dr. Featley says of us p. 88.) that
I may fight against Featleys followers in the point of infants baptism with
Featleys own Fauchin i. e. sa^isfie them concerning the narrowness, novelty,
and invisibility of our Church in times of popery, when they say, where was our
Church before Nicholas Stock? the very same way and no other then that, wherein
they excuse the nonappearance of their Protestan^s Churches then to the
Jesuits, when vaunting in their own visible universallity they ask, them where
was your Church before Luther? for verily if it must be taken from you by the
Papists, as evidence good enough that your Churches are the true Churches, and
lineally descended from Christ, though none of them ever visibly appeared
before Luther, in all that time of the Popes Peterdome ore his fellows, because
your doctrine is truer then that of theirs, and specially since several
witnesses successively held it out against Romes contradictions, then I hope it
shall be taken from us by you Protestants as good evidence that our Churches
are yet truer then yours, and such as have been as much as yours have been in
visible constitution from the time of the treading down till this modern
resurrection, because our doctrine and practice is that of the primitive and
purest times, specially since we can evince it as clearly, that many witnessed
the truth of it against infant baptism, in times of priestly tyranny, as you
can that any have witnessed yours at all.

For howbeit you say your infants baptism was not so much as questioned, till
of late, if you had your wits so well about you as you should, you could not
but see that it was almost ever opposed: for though it were never heard of in the
first Century, yet that it has been ever withstood since it came up, is most
evident by the conflicts of corrupt times for it, for what made such
controversies among the fathers about it? what m^de Cyprian and his 66 Bishops
convened in council, lay their heads together to find out such superstitious
stuff (as your selves are ashamed of) wherewith to support it? what made
Bernard complain that it was laughed at among other ridiculosities as praying to,
and for the dead? what made Imperial laws, and Synodical cannons enjoin it
under such strict penalties? what made Pope Innocent 3. who together with the
600 Bishops, and all the rest of the Clergy, which in the council of Lateran
determined Transubstantiation, confession, were called fools and block-heads,
seducers of the people, heretics and blaspemers by John Purvey one of
Wickliffs followers p. 17 of Luth. praedec. what (I say) made that Innocent
among other things decree so strictly, as he did, that the baptism of believers
infants should succeed circumcision, if that tradition found no Traitors which
sought the death out, and if the risets up against it were hardly heard of
before Luther

Either then the verity of doctrine in Churches, reformed from Romes downright
dotage, does prove as Dr. Featley says well it does, a perpetual duration of
it, so that it must needs have professors in all ages, or it proves it not: if
not, then the main argument whereby Dr. Featley defends Protestanism, to have
been perpetually before Luther, does not vindicate you in your Religion from
the name of Novellists any more then us, and so the Pope by his plea for the
verity of his Church from perpetual visibility, universality etc. carries the
cause clean from us all; but if it does, then as we deny your infant baptism to
have been perpetual, because its false doctrine, and our Church and way of
baptism we hold in contradistinction to you, being as consonant to the word and
primitive pattern as the truest of those doctrines you hold in
contradistinction to the Pope, is vindicated by Featleys own argument, to have
been as perpetually before Luther, as the purest piece of Protestanism, and
party of Protestants whatsoever.

Again, an ennumeration of a successive number of particular persons barely
professing the truth in the times of all Christendoms erring from it, but not
visibly constituted into any right Church form or order, either does prove
Christ and his spirit to have been with his people always, and in all ages
according to his promise and consequently his promise in that particular to be
true, notwithstanding the worlds so universal erring for a time, or else it
does not prove it: if such an ennumerarion of single professors successively
witnessing to the truth against Romish error does not clear Christ's promise to
be true, then your selves are as justly charged by the Jesuits, who use the
same argument against you, that you use against us, to be guilty of that
damnable blasphemy of denying Christ's promise to be true, as we are charged to
be guilty of it by your selves, for as much as all that you say toward the
salving of Christ's promise of his perpetual presence with your Church, while he
left Rome, from fault of falsehood, is but an induction of certain persons, that
before Luther testified to your doctrine; yea he that answers the Jesuits
question says no more, confessing that a succession of Protestant Churches
cannot be showed; but if it does prove Christ his promise to be true, then I
hope it serves to prove it in our case as well as yours, or else its a hard
case indeed, for as much as though a perpetual succession of such visible
Churches as ours are, is not to be showed through all ages of the Clergies
crushing down the truth, yet we can give as full evidence of a sort of single
S^ints, that testified against infant baptism, even in those times, as you can
of such as testified against any other popish tradition whatsoever.

By this time you may see the foreman in your for-lorn hope, that is sent
before as a subtle scout in a sophistical coat, to entrap us, is not only
discovered in his drift, but divested also of his deceltful dress, disarmed
and disabled from your service, and laid a bleeding: nevertheless since he
opens his mouth, and prates against us ^ll with malicious words, falsely
charg^ng us again, and bespattering us what he can with his tongue, because he
sees he cannot hurt us with his teeth, we shall be constrained to lend him one
or two blows more toward the dispatching of him out of the way, and then we
shall be ready to meet with the force that follows.

Review.
And indeed they do conclude the whole Church of God to have erred most
fearfully, in one of the most necessary points of religion, as if she had been
totally deserted by the spirit of God, and Christ had not made good his
promise.

Re-Review.
First I observe that, when ever it seems best to serve your turn so to do, you
style baptism so necessary a matter, one of the most necessary points of
Religion, about the administration of which to err is most fearfully to err,
little l^sse then downright damnable: otherwhile again, as when you would
modifie men's spirits toward your proceeding in infant baptism from proceeding
so eagerly against that practice, in case it should prove to be the error, and
ours the truth, then you speak as diminutively of it as may be, as if it were a
matter which it matters not so much whether it be done your way or ours, in
childhood or at years, by dipping or sprinkling, so it be done, an error which
is not worth so much ado and striving to r^prove and rectify as the
Anabaptists make, of such indifferency, that it is not fit, since it is now the
custom, that the peace of the Church should be disturbed about it, as if this
truth of the Church, though trodden down, must not have an hand lent it to help
it up again, for fear of displeasing and awaking the Church from her sw^et
sleep of superstitious security till she pleases, not so fundamental a
defection which hand soever it lies, but that it may be left ad libitum,
dispensed ad placitum, so that such as will have their infants sprinkled may,
and such as will not or cannot be satisfied that is the true baptism, may
choose, and be baptized themselves if they please or not at all if they please,
and yet not be disowned so far one by another, but that they may
(notwithstanding different judgments in so fiddling a thing as that is) fall
together (but it will be by the ears sure at last) into one fellowship; and I
know not how much such pretty prate does pass from your party sometimes, to
lull us in as it were to wink at small faults, and to make no noise about such
a petty matter, if infants baptism should be (as many Priests know it is, e. g.
Dr. Gouge, yet know it not) no more then a mere Tradition of men, At Pater ut
gnati sic nos debemus amici,
Si quod sit vitium, non fastidire. --


What a deal of Patheticall, Popisticall persuasion to this purpose as to
pacify peoples spirits toward your errors in small points, passes from you p.
26, 27. of your paper, viz. to avoid a querulous conscience, misliking, finding
fault, complaining, taking offense at every thing where there is no cause,
streining at agnat, giving over the company of the flock [of more goats then
sheep] for every rub [alias refusing to reform [seperating from the
congregation [alias the parish church of the Popes congendring] for a ceremony
[alias some small thing, which to synodical prudence it has seemed good to add
to the ordinances, of Christ, as if his wisdom had not made things full, and
fine enough e. g. the surplice, the forced gesture of kneeling before the
railes and Altar, yoking of sheep and swine together in the Supper, and in
baptism the cross, the form of slatting two or three drops of water with wet
fingers on the face, instead of dipping and orewhelming, and this too but to an
infant instead of a professed believer, by which ceremonious qui^ks, they
brought in not so much alterationem, as a^erum, and ceremonized the whole
substance of what Christ required quite away] to endeavor after a true temper
of a son of the church, humbly to submit to the judgments of others sooner
then our own [alias to see through the Priests eyes, and say we see it not what
ever we see to the contrary] not to dare to contend with any much less
Superiors [alias Popes, Counsels, whole Classes of Clergy men, for they will
bite Mic c. 3. 5.] without strong and evident and convincing reason for our
assertions [which if we have not for our baptism against yours, never men had
in any controversy since truths resurrection from under the paws of the Pope,
and Priesthood to this day] not to see things amiss [alias go on hoodwinkt
with implicit faith] if we cannot but see things amiss, to hide and cover
them, specially the nakedness of our father, and shame of our Mother [alias
the Pope, and Clergy out of whose loins, and the Catholic Christendom, in
whose womb almost all error is engendered, least if their spiritual fornications
should be rendered too discernable, reformation should prove too desirable, and
that too destroyable to their enjoyments] not to let a light matter [alias so
light and vain a thing as the vanity of infant-baptism] work dislike in us,
much less departure and divorce, not to depart by separation save in case of a
great and unsufferable crime [alias some worse and more fearful error, then can
well be about the dispensation of baptism] of which there is despair of redress,
which was the Protestants case with the Church of Rome [and our case also with
the Protestant nations, in which though we reprove them roundly for it, as well
as declare against it, we see little forwardness to forbear their
infant-sprinkling] which by your leave gentlemen, for all your soothing, and
smoothing, and smothering over the thing as no great one, if it be one;
sometimes for your own ends, yet, to take you at your own words in this place,
is little less than an unsufferable crime, and a business in which to err is
most fearfully to err in one of the most necessary points of religion, and
either betokens a total desertion by the spirit of God, or else you show your
selves but ignorant men in speaking so of it, and that is the very truth of it
indeed, for though an error about the subject, and essential from of baptism be
at no hand to be set so light by, as it is by you when you see men resolved to
depart from your societies in case of your refusal to reform that double error,
which in that point remains yet among you, while you Rantize infants, yet
neither is it to be so mightily magnified, and made such a hydeous, such a
fundamental, such a dangerous, such a damnable error, (unless persevered in
wilfully against light or conscience, and then a smaller matter then that may
prove of sad consequence to any soul) is as inconsistent with all possibility
of their salvation, that in times of ignorance did happen to hold it, or puts
all such persons under an absolute impossibility of having any thing of the
spirit of God in them, as, merely by reason of non discovery of it, do go
astray by it, as (to go round again) you who care not which extreme you run out
into, when you suppose your own turn against us to be served by it, do seem to
make and magnify it in this place.

Nevertheless (as I said once above) as much as you slight it other while,
and Mr. Baxter also, who spends a pair of pages viz. 10. 11. to show how little
stress God lates upon this point, making it (as the non-Churchers us^y do, upon
whose principles how near he borders, some see better then himself, though he
yet own the use of ordinances) as it were a low, small matter, a piece of
^remony (...), which God will dispense with, saying circumcision is nothing i.
e. (in su^o sensu) not much material, whether baptized or not a small part of
the ministers work, which Paul left to other; to dispense at belonging not much
to him to administer, who was sent to preach, (and yet I believe if we say (as
indeed we do) that there is no such need that the dispensation it self be done by
the hands of one, that is specially sent to preach, and in holy orders, Mr.
Baxter will either be against us, o^ else against all his brethren of the
(lergy (who will have none to baptize but such as are sent to preach) as much I
say as you and Mr. Baxter slight it, and as little fundamental as you make it,
yet I must tell you in Mr. Baxters words, and your own too, that Christ's
commands are to be obeyed by us, great and small, as far as we know them, and
so necessary a point of Religion is this (as to the outward part of Religion)
that how beit Mr. Baxter p. 11. denies that outward part of baptism, or
external washing to be called one of the foundations Heb. 6. 2. any otherwise
then for its praecedency viz, because its first laid in order of time, not
because it bears up the building) even that outward burying of believers in
that baptism is both to be done necessitate praecepti, by special command from
him Act. 2. 38. 1^. 68. whose voice, whoever will not hear i. e. obey when
heard, in all things whatever he says, little commands as well as greater,
Mat. 5. 19. shall be cut off from among his people Act. 3. 22. 23. and
therefore how far forth necessary, necessitate med^, and ad salutem to life
it self, so far forth as we know his will in that particular let Mr. Baxter
judge.

And also Secondly, is to be done in such wise and manner as he himself has
commanded, and not after man's precept and tradition, there being no less
rejection, plague and cursing denounced against changing the ordinances, and
serving God after such manner as men require, then to neglecting it altogether
Isa. 24. 5. 6. 29. 13. Mat. 15. 9.

And also thirdly, is to be done first after once we do repent and believe, and
that so necessarily first (necessitate both praecepti and medii) in order to
outward membership and fellowship in the visible Church of Christ, and in order
also to the true being of the visible Church in that outward right form and
order, that if it be not first done, and done according to his own mind, and
not man's, and first laid as a foundation among the rest of those principles
Heb. 6. 1, 2. of Christ's doctrine, which altogether are called the foundation
i. e. to the visible Church of Christ, which is said to be built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets i. e. their doctrine, or that form of
doctrine they delivered, whereof baptism in water was a part, and a principle,
though not the principal part Ephesians. 2. 22. Romans 6. 2. 3. 17. I deny that there
can be any visible Church of Christ at all, truly constituted according to his
own will, and such a bearer up of that building it is, tha^ abstract it, and
there is no building fitly framed together, nor people growing together visibly
an holy Temple in the Lord, and he that in these latter days will ever erect
that holy City and Temple which was trodden under foot by the Gentiles,
advancing all into the name of the Church at the door of infant-sprinkling,
must preach and practice again that true baptism of repentance for remission of
sins, in the absence of which there was no true visible Church as to outward
order and form at all, in their opinion as well as mine, who hold (and so does
the whole Clergy) that baptism is the way, by which persons enter, and out of
which there is no entering at all into the visible Church, in which therefore to
err is in truth such an unsufferable crime, and so fearfully to err in one of
the most necessary points of Religion (as pertaining to visible Church order)
that except ye repent of your infant-sprinkling (O ye Priests) and be baptized
truly according to Christ's will in the name of the Lord Jesus for remission of
that, and all other your sins and superstitions, your error is enough to
justify our separation from you, nor find we how we can in Christ's name, and
according to his will, or without violation, and palpable breach of that
outward order, (which he gives no dispensation for to us) abide in one body, or
Church fellowship with you in the supper.

Secondly Sirs, though I told it you before, yet to conclude this, I now tell
you again, though we deny infant baptism, yet, we do not hold at all, nor
conclude thereby that the whole Church of God has universally erred i. e. the
Church of Christ in all ages and places; and howbeit, it is true (as Dr.
Featley says p. 19 and we with him) That particular Churches have erred, and
may err (as the Greek Church, and the Latin Church (the two legs upon which
Mr. Marshal strives to make infant baptism stand still, because it has stood
there so long) and general councels, which the Schools term the representative
Church, are subject to error, and have sometimes (as Dr. Featley says, and so
often say I that that I Will never build my faith upon them) decreed here sie and
falsehood for truth, and howbeit all christendom has erred after the Clergy in
this point, and many more for 1260 years, yet it is true (as Dr. Featloy says)
that the formal Church (as they speak) i. all the assemblies in the world
cannot be impeached with error in this point of infant baptism, forasmuch as
the true^ Churches of the first times never knew it, and many faithful
witnesses that knew it to be a corruption testified against it in the darkest
times, and the best reformed Churches, even no less then scores of Assemblies
do deny it at this day, to the shame of that one general Assembly that would
have settled it.

Review.
And not only so, but if Mr. Fishers doctrine which h^ ^ely delivered, as a
judicious gentleman affir^d, who heard him, that ^ll that did believe and were
dipped should be saved; but all that did believe and were not dip^ should be
damned, be true; they as much as lies in them, damn to the pit of hell all the
Matyrs, Professors, Fathers, believers for many hundreds of years together,
Which only doctrine should make all men to abhor them, and not let their
souls intermeddle with their secret, whose rage is so fierce, whose wrath
(...) so cruel, Christ shuts out only unbelievers from heaven, whosoever
believes not shall be damned. This doctrine shuts out believers if they be not
dipped, i. e. if they be not Anabaptists; it cannot be the ceremony they are so
hot for, without the substance.

Re-Review.
But saving the over apprehensive powers of that judicious Gentleman, who ere
it was that heard me, he most grossly abuses, in it himself and me, in
reporting such a thing to you, as also you abuse both him and me, and the world
too in reporting it as from him to the world (yet you have done him honor so
far I confess as to conceal his name, or else you had done him a greater
spite indeed) himself in showing such shallowness of capacity in hearing, as
scarcely calls for that worthy title of judicious Gentleman and me in not only
mistaking, but mistelling his mistake also to you, who print out his mistake to
all the world: for such doctrine as this, That all that did believe, and were
not dipped should be damned, ^id never yet fall from my mouth, nor did ere take
place, or was ever owned for ^uth in my mind: yea howbeit I summon you, or any
else to show me in the word (not taken by snatches, but in the w^ole intent,
and scope of it) Gods promise of salvation by Christ without obedience to him
both in repentance, faith and baptism too, to those, of whom all these things
are required, I say it again (least you mistake me as speaking of infants, for
they being capable of none of these, of them to salvation none of these are
required) of whom all these are required, since all those that obey not the
Gospel, in what part soever of it it is manifested to them, shall be damned, 2
These. 1. 7, 8, 9 -- 2. 10, 11, 12. Howbeit, I say I wish you to advise how
safely you, that know it to be your duty, may neglect it, and how groundedly
you can assure your selves, that you do believe at all in truth, if you receive
not the love of every tittle of Christ's truth, so as wherein it appears to you
to embrace and obey it, yet I am well assured I never utterd the other, viz.
that all that did believe, and were not dipped should be damned, no^ is it now,
nor ever was it my judgment to this hour; of which for the worlds and your
satisfaction, since I have been very often charged, and that twice or thrice in
public places where I have preached, so to hold, I shall here give this brief
account.

I judge that all persons in the world (meaning not infants, but such as (...)
at years of discretion, to whom the Gospel comes in any measure) are of some
or other of these three sorts, viz.

1. Either such as neither believe at all, nor so much as in words profess so
to do, Or 2. Such as in words say they believe, and indeed do not. Or 3. Such
as both profess to believe, and do indeed believe as they say.
Now I suppose we all hold the first sort, viz. professed profane ones, so
living so dying, will be damned, and unless we will deny the Scriptures, we
must needs hold the second sort, whose professed faith is a dead faith shall
not be saved, for what does it profit if a man say he has faith Jam. 2. 14.
and have (...) works, etc. whereby only faith is proved to be true indeed as
it is professed, can that faith save him? as for the third sort, viz true
believers, I subdivide them in my thoughts into 2 ranks.

First, such as believing in Christ truly for salvation, believe also baptism
in its true way of dispensation, and not rantism, to be Christ's will concerning
them, and these I am certain will submit accordingly and obey him in it, for
such as say they have faith, and live in rebellion to what parts of Christ's
will they know they ought to obey him in, have not faith to salvation what ever
they say. Or

Secondly, such as believing in Christ, neither see nor believe, nor practice
baptism in that only true way wherein we dispense it, and all this merely for
want of means to discover it to them, or by means of the invincible ignorance
of their times, and ages wherein they lived, and wherein, according to the will
of God permitting it so to be, the mind of God in that thing has been hid,
and, as we know it has in many more things for ages and generations together,
remained undiscovered, which times of ignorance I believe God much winked at,
in those who sincerely owned truth, and obeyed it so far as it then appeared,
and as they saw it, though now he commands all men to return from Babylon in
these days of light, wherein men may see, but that they will not, yea many
prophets, and righteous ones in the height of Popery, have desired to see, and
hear what we do, or may do* yet could not, the Scriptures lying locked up as
unlawful well-nigh for any to consult with, therefore look you to it who say
you do not this or that because you see it not, for I testify to you that it is
a time wherein the true light shines so clearly, that men need not err, if
they love not darkness more then light because their deeds are evil. And the
same measure of light and reformation and truth, which might have denominated
you reformists, had you lived 100 years ago, will not serve to denominate you
so now, since the smoke that darkened the sun, and the air, is much more
perfectly dispelled then in that twilight, in this form, I mean of such as
could not see, not because they would not, but because it shone not, do I rank
all the Martyrs, and those honest men, whom you do^e on as Fathers, and all
true professors and believers for many hundreds of years together, who
witnessed to truth, and suffered for it too, so far as it did appear to them in
their times, to this sort of men I am more charitable and tender in my censures
then you can possibly prove your selves to be, and so I am also to infants, for
all your p^ate of pleading for them against our cruelties, neither does any
doctrine that ever I delivered damn any of these to the pit of hell, as your
doctrine of so rigid, harsh, fierce and cruel rejection of all infants from
salvation, save those of believers, does damn an hundred to one of them, that
die in innocent infancy: and where it should be that that Gentleman told you I
preached that doctrine, That all such as believe, and yet are not dipped shall
be damned I know not, but this I know, that I was ever so far from conceiving,
much more expressing any such thing that where I speak in public of that
point of baptism, in prevention of that prejudice, and opinion of our
harshness, which your public balling at us bege^s in your heare^s, I commonly
deliver my self to the contrary.

But now Sirs, as for your selves, who so falsely father this doctrine upon me
as mine, and that with such abhorrency of both it, and me for it, and with such
patheticall expressions of your zeal against it, as that you even set your
teeth an edge as it were, and whet the spirits of all men to abhor us for it,
if they had nothing in all the world against us, in point of doctrine but that,
and not to let their souls intermeddle with our secrets, whose rage is so
fierce, and whose wrath is so cruel, what if I go no further then your own
Account of the Disputation at Ashford, to prove that your selves are the men
that hold this doctrine, that though persons believe, yet if they be not
baprized they must be damned, and not we? are you not then condemned out of
your own mouths to perpetual abhorring? now therefore Quid rides? de te fabula
narratur, thou O Accountant art the man of whom this tale may be told more
truly then of us, who have plotted so well, as to plat a whip here for thy own
back: yea I appeal to the whole world of wise men ^o judge, whether I do not
bring proof out of your own paper, if your true Account be yours, and be as
true an Account of your judgments as it is pretended to be of your disputation,
that it is your own judgment, and not mine, that baptism is so necessary to
salvation, that even such as believe, and yet are denied to be baptized,
notwithstanding that very belief of theirs shall be damned: go bur back with me
therefore to the 7th page of your Pamphlet, and compare it with what you say in
the third and fourth pages concerning childrens believing, and see what an
Account you have there given of your own minds in this matter.

In the fourth you conclude, from the like in the children of the Jews, that
the children of believing parents have faith, in the third page you conclude
from Mat. 18. 6. that little ones do believe, now look but in the seventh page,
and let all the world judge, whether you do not there say of these same
persons, viz. of the infants of believing parents, of whom you asserted before
they were believers, that if they may not be baptized, and that's none of the
childrens fault neither as the neglect of baptism is in men, it destroies the
hope that the parents can have of their salvation, for it leaves them in no
better condition, say you, then Turks and Pagans, and their children: the
salvation of whom is with you as hopeless, for ought I see, as of the Devils:
which things let that or any judicious Gentleman spel, and put together and see
if it be not tantamount to such a testimony as this, viz- that those that
believe, and are not baptized shall be damned, for to be damned, and not saved
are all one, and as for children of Turks and Pagans dying in infancy, you
record it it as a monstrous thing that I should say, that for ought I knew they
might be saved; yea by the reply that was made to that speech of mine by one
who said perhaps I thought the devils might be saved, it appears that your
party thinks it as possible that the devils may be saved, as soon as the dying
infants of Turks and Pagans: and yet of the children of believing parents, who
in your opinion do also believe themselves, you say the opinion of the
Anabaptists, which denies baptism to little children, puts the parents out of
hopes of their salvation, und makes them to be in no better condition then
Turks and Pagans: yea you say believing parents may say of their children, that
die without baptism, what hopes of our child, who is in no better condition,
then the children of infidels? and really they say true if the state of
infidels dying infants be so damnable, as you say it is: is it you or we,
Sirs, whose doctrine damnes believers, if they be not baptized?

I Will conclude this matter with you, much what in your own words, and form of
speech.

Christ shuts out only unbelievers from heaven, whosoever believes not shall
and be damned, this doctrine of yours, that little infants are believers, and
yet out of all hopes of being saved, if not baptized, shuts out believers if
they be not baptized, i e. if they be not rantiz'd (for that is the best
baptism you use) and by consequence if your doctrine, which you delivered in
this Account (^s judi^ious Gentlemen that read i will affirm) be true, that
even believers not baptized shall be damned, you had need baptize your
believing infants indeed, i. e. to do more then cri^rosse two or three drops of
water on their faces, or else (for all your plea for their baptizing on pain of
their damnation) theyl be damn^d, if they be no more then sprinkled, for want
of true baptism when all is done: for that is not so much as the Ceremony it
self in truth, which you are so hot for without the substance, yet would I not
have you be an abhorring for all this, but pittyed and prayed for rather. that
you may in time for this and all other your follies, and false accusations of
others, of things whereof you are more guilty your selves, abhor your selves in
dust and ashes, that you may not be an abhorring (as he is more then half blind
that does not see who will be once) amongst both God and men Rev. 17. 16. Rev.
19. 2. And thus I have done with your first Argument.

Review.
The second is this, little Children under the law received the Seal of the
Gospel covenant; for circumcision was the seal of the righteousness of faith,
which is the Gospel Covenant. The Law says, Do this and live: the Gospel, only
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore God calls it an everlasting
covenant; and the Apostle says the Law that came 430 years could not disannull
it, Gal. 3. 17, and he says expressly the Gospel was preached to Abraham, ibid.
ver. 8. nay more, the carnal seed of Abraham, Ishmael and Esau, men branded
for Reprobates in Scripture, yet because they were born in Abraham's house,
received that seal by Gods appointment. Why then should not children under the
Gospel receive baptism, which the Adversaries confess to be the Seal of the
Gospel Covenant?

Re-Review.
This poor forlorn wretched Argument has been handled, and laid sprawling once
or twice before, where both its consequence is denied, and good reason gien of
the senselessness of such syllogizing, as is here from the Law to the Gospel,
therefore it is but needless to defend our selves any further against it, it
being a demi-dead man, that is disabled from being dreadful to us already;
nevertheless since he has strengthens himself again what he can, and comes up
recruted, and attended with a company of scambling, and for the most part very
unsound sentences at his heels, it will not be amiss to enter the lists a little
with him, and these his Auxiliaries.

First then Sirs, whereas you come in again with that crooked consequence viz.
inf^nts must be baptized under the Gospel, because circumcisied under the law,
we might more pertinently set up a shout at your shameful folly in this
particular, then set upon the showing of it any more, it is so palpable; for
verily (as is proved sufficiently above) these two viz. the Covenant of the law
and the Gospel, from the Identity of which you infer an Identity in the subject
of the ordinances and administrations of both, and by way of analogy, would
evince them both to belong to the same persons, I must tell you these are two
Testaments, or wills of God, concerning men, in those two different times viz.
before Christ and since, and these two so specifically distinct, that they not
only run upon different strains and require different terms (as your selves
here confess) the law saying do this and live, the Gospel only believe, but
also stand upon different promises, whereof the Gospels being of the heavenly
Canaan, are better then the laws, which were but of an earthly one, and these
also pertaining to two different seeds viz. the legal to the natural children
of Abraham i. e. Isaac and his posterity by generation; the Evangelical to the
spiritual seed of Abraham i. e. such as are of Christ by faith and
regeneration; and they had also different dispensations, the one circumcision,
the other another thing viz. dipping, a thing no way like it, and different
subjects also for those different dispensations, so that (if men and their
ministers were not all turned Momes) they could not, but must manifestly
perceive it, the old Testament admitting to circumcision only males, and these
only on the eighth day, in case they were in the house so young, and all the
males in the house, whether sons or servants, whether born in the house, or
bought with money of any stranger, and all this without respect to either faith
or repentance in the persons to whom dispenst, or any prae-preaching to them by
the person dispensing, the new Testament taking in to baptism as no servants
upon the masters faith, so all persons in the world both males and females upon
their own, and that upon any day, and not the eighth only, wherein after they
have been preached to, they profess to repent and believe Mat. 3. Act, 2. Act.
8. Act. 18.

The proof of which real, specifical diversity of these two Covenants is yet
far more evident.

First, because the spirit denominates them so to be in Scripture, calling them
expressly the two Covenants Gal. 4. 24. and also very osten (in plurali) the
Covenants, the covenants of promise.

Secondly by that contradistinction of speech, which the spirit uses, when he
speaks of them, and those oppposite Epithets, by which he diversifies them,
calling one the Law, the other the Gospel, and the law by the name of the first
testament, or will of Cod, the Gospel the second, the law the old testament,
the Gospel the new; the law (which bound to circumcision, and to the
observation of which in all other things circumcision bound its subjects, when
they came to years) not of faith (though faith then was too in a few, and also
from the beginning as to the eternal inheritance) but of flesh rather, and the
time before faith came Gal. 3. 11. 12. 13. also a law of a carnal
commandment, a faulty and a blameable testament of weak and beggarly
rudiments, (in respect of Christ, who is the end of them) standing in imperfect
and only flesh-purifying precepts, and on merely terrene, inferior, and
flesh-pleasing promises, as Canaan and Jerusalem here below also the Letter, in
ink, in (...) of stone, the ministration of death and condemnation, the
Covenant gendering to bondage, the hatred, the hand writing of ordinances that
was against us, yet thus far not against, but subservient to the promises, as
it was the similitude of heavenly things, the figure and shadow of the good
things to come, and a schoolmaster to bring to Christ, Ephesians. 2. 14. Col. 2. 14.

The Gospel contrariwise the time of faith Gal. 3. 25. for after faith came
etc. the power of an endless life Heb. 7. 16. a better Testament, standing in
less painful ordinances, more plain and soul purifying precepts, and on better
and more precious, and foul saving promises, a Canaan, a Jerusalem from above
Heb. 8. 6.

Also the ministration of the spirit in fleshly tables of the heart, of
righteousness, of life, liberty, love, grace, reconciliation, the very Image
and truth it self, of which the law was but the shadow.

Thus you find the Scripture opposing one of these two to the other, so far
is it from signifying them to be one and the self same Covenant, as you
frivolously fain them to be, that you may build your infant baptism thereupon.

Now whether we shall believe the holy spirit, which styles these two
expressly two Covenants, or your selves, who will have them to be but one,
judge ye.

Moreover, how two Covenants or testaments can be plurally pointed out and
called two, and opposed respectively ad se invicem, by the names of the first
and second, the old and new, the type and the truth, a better and a worse etc.
yea and contradictorily predicated too, as the law and the Gospel are, of which
its said the one is of faith, i. e. ever (for so the Gospel ever was, saying,
believe and live, and the ^ust must live by faith) the other not of faith i. e.
never (for the law never was of faith, but the man that does them shall live in
them, was the te^ thereof) and yet all this while be but one and the same
Covenant and Testament, i^ no less then a mystery to me since, it is an
undeniable rule among Logicians, that oppositio semper subinfert pluralitatem,
also that contradictio est oppositionum perfectissima, pugnacissima, et
Eternae^d ^unctionis: opposition, specially contradiction, which is the
greatest of oppositions, does suppose a plurality, so that it is impossible that
one thing should be two contradictory things at once, or that contradictories
should eodem tempore cadere in idem, i. e. be truly spoken both of the same
thing at the same time.

Babist.
The one is called the first, and the old Testament merely because it went
before, and is now vanished away and alienated, the other is called the second,
and the new one merely because it comes after that, and is now in being, not
because it is really another Testament, another Covenant as you contend, but
two parts rather or periods of one and the same Covenant of grace, which was
from the beginning of the world.

Baptist.
I confess that the Gospel Covenant was in the world before the Law, and under
the law also, only in smaller measure of manifestation, as well as now, but
deny still that the Law, which is called the old and first Covenant was the
Covenant of the Gospel, or that it was not a Covenant clearly distinct from it:
for its being opposed as the new and second, to the other as a first and old
one, preaches no less to the meanest capacities, then a plurality:

And as for that reason, which you give of those terms first, second, old and
new, viz. because the law was more ancient and antecedent, the Gospel more of
late, and subsequent, in this sense it is true the Gospel is succedaneous to the
other, as to its last and clearest promulgation under Christ crucified (for
else in some degrees of it the Gospel was before the law, and was preached to
Abraham (as you allege out of Gal. 3. 8. 17.) 430 years before Moses, yea and
to Adam 2000 years before that, yea indeed to say the truth, the Law and the
Gospel, were both even from the beginning, though both more lively illustrated
toward the end: the Gospel in dark promises being both before, and under those
plainer promulgations of the Law, as given by Moses, and the law in some
parcels viz. Sacrifices and some other ceremonies of it, being from Adam and
Abel before the brighter breakings forth of either the one, or yet the other,
in this sense I say it is true, the Law came first by Moses, before the Gospel of
grace and truth came by Christ; whereupon that may be properly called the first
and old one, and this also the second and the new, nevertheless not only
thereupon, for howbeit the bare notions of first second, old and new arise from
the ones being once, and now abolished, the others being since, and still
abiding, yet could they not possibly and properly be called so much as two
Covenants, much less a first and a second, if they were not truly two, or were
only one, for then we may properly call two years one, or one single in tire
year by the name of two years, and those two the first year and the second, the
old year and the New year, because there is two parts, two periods, two halves
in that one year, whereof one is Antecedent to the other, which Py-bald Bull,
Bipartite business, odd concerted one-two, or simple duple is both ridiculous,
improper and impossible.

Babist.
They are called two Covenants in regard of the double outward dispensation,
and different administration thereof, though the Covenant be one and the same,
and so says Mr. Marshall p. 8. 9. 10. of his Sermon, viz.

The Covenant of grace for substance has been always one and the s^e, though
not for the Manner of administration so p. 12. The external administration of
the Covenant is not the same with us (says he) as it was with them, but the
Covenant is the same, they were under the same misery by nature, had the same
Christ, the lamb slain from the beginning of the world, the same conditions of
faith and repentance to be made partakers of the Covenant, the same graces
promised in the Covenant, circumcising the heart to love the Lord etc. Theirs
was dispensed in darker prophecies, and obscurer sacrifices, types, and
sacraments, ours more gloriously and in a more greater measure: the clothes
indeed do differ, but the body is the same, and so p. 13. The very self same
privileges, formerly made peculiar to the Jews, are now (says he) through
Christ communicated to the Gentiles.

Baptist.
That the Covenant of grace is for substance not two but in all ages one and
the same within it self who denies? but what then? is it therefore one and the
same with another, that most manifestly, and downrightly differs from it, and
is as distinct a convenant also as that within it self? for so verily the law,
which is also called the first covenant, or the Covenant of Circumcision, was
varying wonderfully from that Gospel Covenant, whereof yet we confess it to be
the type, in both its Priesthood and People, its Mediator and Atonement,
sacrifices and offerings, precepts and promises, inheritance and heirs,
birth-priviledges and seed, ordinances and their subjects, and all things
thereunto pertaining: I say they were very diverse each from other, saving still
that one was to shadow out the other, viz. Moses the Mediator, Joshua the
Savior, Aaron the High Priest, and his burnt offerings, for that temporal
annual Atonement, Heb. 10. 1, 2. and purgation from fleshly impurities, were
all to point out Christ, who is all this spiritually, viz. the Mediator,
Savior, High Priest, Sacrifice, and author of eternal Atonement between God
and us, and purification of our Consciences in the Gospel; those earthly
promises and inheritance were to represent our heavenly, their fleshly
heirship, birth-priviledges, seed, and admission of new born babes to
ordinances, to shadow out what high born heirs those babes are, who are
begotten to the faith, and their right and title to a standing in the Gospel
Church.

O but says Mr. Marshall, they had the same Gospel Covenant that we have, the
same Christ, the same conditions, i. e. faith and repentance etc.

First, take notice that with him faith and repentance are the conditions on
which persons stood then, and ever before, and do now in the Gospel Covenant
which things he knows infants have not, and therefore are not by right to be
visibly inchurched, and incovenanted under the Gospel. till they visibly appear
to have them, yet under the Law they were in covenant, and inchurched for all
that and why? because faith and repentance were not the conditions of that
Church Covenant andordinances, nor of heirship to that Earthly Canaan, but mere
fleshly descent of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, which whoever had, had title to
circumcision and Canaan (though not to heaven) thereupon, if they never
believed, nor repented whilst they breathed.

Secondly, but what if they had the same Gospel Covenant, that we have, held
forth to them, at least in a darker way, will it follow therefore that they had
not also another Covenant over and above that peculiar to themselves, which we
have not, whereof circumcision was a token, and which believing Gentiles, much
less their seed have naught to do with at all? I trow not, for though we grant
Mr. Marshall, that they had the substance of the Gospel among them, as also
Adam, Noah, and Abraham had, and the same privileges of that Covenant that we
have (excepting some circumstances of it, wherein we are beyond them) that will
not run retro (as Mr. Marshall would fain have it)

That the self same privileges formerly made peculiar to the Jews, are now
through Christ conveyed to the Gentiles: for the old Covenant privileges viz.
the fleshly birth holiness, and heirship to Canaan, and title to be signed as
heirs, upon a mere natural descent are such as the best Gentiles, and best
believers seed in the world can lay no claim to, for that was (as we see Genesis
17.) a distinct proper Covenant to themselves, as the fleshly seed of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, whom the spiritual seed themselves have (as such) no right 'to
partake with in their inheritance or earthly Canaan, as this fleshly seed (as
merely such) have no right to partake with the other in their heavenly Canaan.

Babist.
But Mr. Marshal says p. 11. that all their external promises in case of
obedience, all outward blessings, which were to be enjoyed by them, the land of
Canaan, and all the good things in it, all outward punishments and threatenings,
loss of their Country, going into captivity, and their sacrifices, their
washings, their sprinklings, their holy persons, holy feasts, and holy things,
were all of them but so many administrations of the Covenant of grace; earthly
things were not only promised and threatened more distinctly and fully, then
now they are to them who are in Covenant, but were figures, signs and types,
and sacraments of spiritual things, to be enjoyed both by them and us.

Baptist.
As I grant the Covenant of Grace, which promises eternal life on conditions
(as Mr. Marshall confesses) of only faith and repentance, to be for substance
for ever the same within it self, so I grant that the other covenant viz. all
those external promises of outward blessings, which were to be enjoyed by the
Jews in Canaan, in case of their obedience, was a certain outward
administration, and lively type of that inward and true covenant of grace, yet
still must it be regranted by Mr. Marshall and all men, that even that was a
true, real, and really distinct covenant also of it self, and though that were
a plain picture, and a map of the other, and as it were a different dress
wherewith it was clothed upon, and wherein it was exhibited to the world, yet
was it not only an administration of the Gospel, but also an entire covenant,
so substantially divided from that, as that its most properly denominated
another covenant, and not that, and they both are truly denominated to be two
viz. an old and new one, a first, and a second, which they could not genuinely
be, unless one were more then merely another form and manner of administration
of the other.

Nay seriously if that Gospel covenant, which both you and we say is one and
the same in substance, only admitted variation in its circumstances, does
multiply it self answerably to the number of those different clothings, which
that one body has successively come forth in, and must be as multifariously
expressed, as it has showed it self in various habits to our view, and bear
the names of two, of first and second, old and new from its several and
remarkable periods and administr^ons: then since there has been not two only,
but as you say truly your selves, four remarable periods, and circumstantial
appearances of that covenant viz. the first from Adam to Abraham; the second
from Abraham to Moses; the third from Moses to Christ; the fourth from Christ
to the end; the word would sure have spoken of four covenants, or testaments,
and not two only viz. two old ones, and two new ones, or the first and second,
the third and fourth, and so by that reckoning this is the fourth testament
that we are under, yet truly it is but a second, and a second truly it is, in
respect to that first testament that's now vanished, that once was in force, and
had truly, though more carnally and also typically of this, and as this also
more spiritually has, ordinances of divine service, and a sanctuary, and a
mediator, and Savior, and salvation; and Priesthood, and sacrifices, and
blood of sprinkling, and purifying, an atonement, and an inheritance, and a
promised land and a seed entitled to it, and a circumcision evidencing it, and
given as a token viz. that to the fleshly seed which was circumcision of the
flesh, this tothe spiritual babes, I mean believers i. e. the circision of the
heart.

And howbeit that was a kind of administration of this, that the map, this the
main thing meant by it, that the picture, this the person represented, that the
clothing this the body, at that time set forth gloriously thereby, yet all this
denies not but that that map, that picture, that clothing, that glorious
administration was also (as it is also called a distinct Covenant within it
self, which though it stood truly for a time, yet because also as a type of
what should be under Christ, is now utterly abrogated, u^terly nullified
together with the holiness of all its most glorious holy ordinances, whereof
circumcision was a chief one, and in infancy to be dispensed, and with the
holiness of all their holy things, and their holy persons also i. e. the whole
race of the Jews to all their posterities, which holy persons Mr. Marshal
(welfare his heart for it) in that clause I now answer to, confessing to be a
type, must consequently confess their holiness to be totally taken away now
the truth is come in, and not translated from that holy people to believing
Gentiles and their seed: for these can have none of the holiness of that old
Covenant now, which yet you will needs have to be no more but a bare
administration of the new.

And lastly take it to be but so, you will gain by it no small disadvantage to
your cause: for though you yield it not to be point blank another Covenant, yet
if you yield it to be another administration of the Gospel Covenant, diverse
from this we are now under, you grant us enough as to our present purpose, yea
as much as we need to desire, for our dispute is not now to the Covenant it
self so much, as to its manner of administration; so that let that covenant and
this be as much one as they will, yet if the manner of administrations of the
Gospel Covenant in its outward ordinances, were then (as you say) unlike to
what they are now, you give us no less by your own argument then even all that
we contend for, for the very thing you plead from the consideration of that
Identity, which is dreamed by you to be in the Covenant, is an Identity in the
manner of administration of ordinances under both the law and the Gospel: for
whoever shall say that the manner of administration of baptism under the Gospel
must be as the manner of administration of circumcision was under the law, and
in proof thereof shall say the Covenant of the Law and Gospel is one and the
same, though the manner of administration be different, suo se ingulabit
gladio, will even quite cut the throat of his own cause, yet thus plainly does
Mr. Marshall speak p. 12. of his Ser. viz. Now this external administration of
the covenant is not the same with us, as it was with them but the Covenant is
the same.

But is it so Sirs? so you say it seems as well as we; then you have brought
your hoggs to a fair Market indeed, for if the external administration, which
was then be, as to the manner of it, different from that which is now, then I
wonder what pattern you can pick from that manner of administration, whereby to
steer your cause now, and to direct your selves about the true manner of this:
for will any wise man in any w^rk, action or administration he is about to
perform take his example by another work, action or administration which
himself confesses is quite different from it, and not after the same manner as
that is to be done in, which he has now in hand to do? yet thus do you whilst
contending that the outward administration of the covenant among the Jews was
not in the same manner as the outward administration of it is to be now, you
yet contend to have our baptism as much as may be after the manner of their
circumcision: you must, and you must not it seems (and these both at once) walk
after those customs, and do things now after the manner of Moses.

If any man then ask me this question, viz. since the Gospel covenant is
everlastingly the same for substance, and little children under the law
received circumsion the seal as you call it, of the Gospel covenant, why then
should not little children under the Gospel receive baptism, the seal (so I
hear you say) of the Gospel covenant? and why should not this administration of
the covenant in outward ordinances be after the manner of that of old?

I answer him out of Mr. Marshalls own mouth thus, because though for substance
the Gospel Covenant be ever one and the same, yet the manner of external
administration thereof, is not the same with us as it was with them, and
therefore we are not to take example in our Dispensations, and administrations
by them, nor regard to do after the manner of them, the Priesthood being
changed, of necessity there is a change also of the Law, for the administrators
are not the same with us, as with them, nor the administrations the same in
matter, not the manner of administration to them the same, nor the subjects to
whom these administrations belong the same, for those were to all the holy
Jews, though never so unholy and unbelieving, but these to Jews and Gentiles
as they believe and no otherwise: least of all is the subject of circumcision
and baptism the same, for that above all the rest was limited to all males,
and those only at eight days old, this extending to males and females, and
those only when they profess to be believers.

Babist.
Circumcision was a more Evangelical administration then the rest, as being
given when the Gospel was preached to Abraham 430 years before the Law,
therefore we may give the more heed to that, since it is of the Fathers and more
then to the other ordinances, which by institution were more immediately of
Moses.

Baptist.
Though it were in being so long before Moses, yet was it as directly belonging
to his law as any other administration whatever, for howbeit it was before
him, yet it is said to be of him, as all the Sacrifices also were, which were
of old before circumcision, because he gave them all anew, and plainer
promulgation, and was Mediator of all that old Testament service, which ended
in Christ, and was even from the very beginning.

Moreover, Though the Gospel Covenant was preached in a type to Abraham in Genesis
17. where circumcision was also first appointed, yet that in reference to which
Circumcision of the flesh was there instituted, was immediately that first and
old covenant of the Law, which was in some parcels and pieces of it before
Abraham, and now was propounded a little more fully in the promise of that land
to his fleshly seed, and the express appointment of that one more special
precept thereof, i. e. Circumcision, though the fullness of it came not till
four hundred and thirty years after: yea he that has but half an eye in his
head must needs see that to be the covenant, viz. that which was made in a type
(I grant) of another, yet really with the seed of Abraham's body, whereof that
circumcision was the token, which covenant and circumcision were so near kin,
that Stephen calls that Acts 7. the Covenant of circumcision, which also I have
spoken to so sufficiently above, that howbeit you here give me the occasion de
novo, yet i will trouble you no further with it here.

Review.
1. These are the seed of Abraham, Semen fidei, Gal. 3. 7. so Zacheus by
believing was made a son of Abraham, nay the spiritual seed.

2. The promise is to believers and their seed Act. 2. 39.

3. The Gospel is a better Covenant Heb. 8. 6. and it would be far worse if the
children of believers under the Gospel should not be counted within the
covenant, nor have right to the seal, nor be esteemeed members of the visible
church as well as the Jews children, nay accor^ing to the Anabaptists valued
but as Turks and Pagans.

Re-Review.
Here to enforce this Argument a fresh, least the front should fail, you come
up three a breast, and le^ fly at us thick and threefold with a first, second
and third report.

First, you tell us that these, i. e. believers fleshly seed are the seed of
Abraham, nay the faithful seed, or seed of faith, and that in such manner too
as Zacheus was made the son, or seed of Abraham, and how was that? viz. by
believing: nay the spiritual seed: quid ni? they cannot choose I warrant bu^
ipso facto be believers, i. e. born again by faith (for such only are of faith)
yea and the spiritual seed too, i. e. born of the spirit (for such only are a
spiritual seed) and that so well as Zacheus himself, if once barely born of the
bodies of the flesh, of such spiritual parents as do believe, alias live in
Christendom, at least in reformed Christendom, for if all papists be not a
spiritual body of believers with you (as they are with the Pope) all
protestants are taken by you so to be, I mean to be such, whose fleshly seed
are of faith, and the spiritual seed of Abraham and so to be baptized, O fie!
Sirs O fie! O fie!

Babist.
Our meaning is not that these are, or are to be counted in the spirit, or of
the faith as Abraham was, but only to be accounted under the Gospel, and
reckoned all to Abraham, as his children in an outward sense, so far as to a
being in his family, i. e. the visible Church.

Baptist.
1. Me thinks any man's own motherwit should tell him that God never appointed
things to be accounted by us, otherwise then they are, or at least appear, much
less otherwise then they can be.

2. Appeal and lay close siege Sirs to your own consciences, search and see
whether they will tell you, that the place you quote, viz. Gall. 3. 7. be at
all for you, or be not much rather against you, mean which of these two ways
you will.

For if you mean in as plain English as you speak it, that the infants of
believers are really the seed of Abraham, the seed of faith, the spiritual
seed, so as Zacheus himself was, that is, by believing, does that Scripture so
much as implicitly say any such thing, either that the seed of believers do
believe, or that they are the seed of Abraham, when it says v. 7. they which
are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham, and ver 9. they which be of
faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham? does that phrase (I say) they which
be of faith signify believers infants? or believing infants? (quid ^ides? such
folk as those, though some are ashamed to say they see, yet some are not
ashamed to say are to be seen in the world) or does it signify such as are
true believers indeed? which of the two think you does it express, such
persons at years only, as are in the faith, or only the natural fleshly seed
of such? or if you say both, that that one phrase viz. they which be of faith
should express two kinds of persons, so differently descended of two so
different births viz. believers themselves born of God by faith in Christ, and
also the mere fleshly seed of believers, who are no higher born then of their
bodies, is so far from truth, that it is more then flat folly to conceive it

And if you mean it not of their being Abraham's children really by faith, so as
thereupon to be assured heirs of salvation, but of their being counted of the
faith, so as to outward membership in the Church only, it is plain that Gal. 3.
7. 9. speaks of such only as are truly in the faith i. e. faithful as Abraham
was, so as to be not only outwardly inchurched, but eternally saved also, as
none can say all believers children are, some of them proving wretches when
they come to years, for as many as be of faith (says he) i. e. faithful as
Abraham was, are blessed, and shall be justified and saved with faithful
Abraham, whose faith was imputed to him for righteousness, as faith shall be
imputed to us also Romans 4. 22. 23. if we believe on him that raised up Ies^s
from the dead etc. answerable to that also is Gal. 3. 26. 29. ye are all the
children of God by faith in Jesus Christ, and if ye be Christ's i. e. by faith,
then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise i. e. the promise
not of the law or old covenant, or earthly Canaan (for the Galatians were never
heirs according to that) nor yet of mere membership and participation of
ordinances in the Church, that's more pertaining to the preceptory then the
promissory part of the Gospel, but of the eternal inheritance it self, which
is made not only to believers and their seed, as you lace it up, but to all
men and their seed, on terms of believing and coming in at Gods call, and made
good to as many as are so effectually called, so that they obtain the promise
of that eternal inheritance indeed: compare Heb. 9. 15. with Act. 2. 39.
answerable to that also is Romans 9. 7. 8. where its said in a figure that as the
seed of Abraham himself by Ishmael were not children of God i. e. as to the old
Covenant, so as to be counted heirs of that Canaan and members of that Church,
though they were his true seed, and the children of his flesh as well as Isaac
was, because Isaac only and his seed were the children of that promise Genesis
17. 19. 2^. 21. for in Isaac shall thy seed (says he) be called; the children
of Abraham's flesh, the Ishmaelites, these are not the children of God in the
old legal sense, but the children of the promise are counted for the seed, so
even the seed of Abraham by Isaac himself are not at all children i. e. the
children of God as to the new covenant, so as to be counted heirs of the Gospel
Canaan, and members in the Gospel church, though they were his true seed and
children of his flesh as well as Christ was, because Christ only and his seed
are the children of this promise, for in Christ who was the true Isaac of whom
the other was but the type, must Abraham's seed now be called i. e. they that
are the children of the flesh only, whether of Abraham, or of any other man in
the world, these are not now (as of old the fleshly seed of Abpaham Isaac and
Jacob were) the children of God, but the children of the promise are counted
now for the seed.

It Is true, to Abraham and his seed the Gospel promises were made as well as
those of the law, but mark it, he says not unto seeds in plurali, as of many,
but of one, and to thy seed in singulari, that is Christ Gal. 3. 16. of whom
being born by faith we are his seed, to whom in and with him the promise is
made, for as the believer himself as a believer i. e. as Abraham's spiritual
seed had no share in the old covenant promise i. e. Canaan, if not descended
from him by Isaac after the flesh, because to Abraham and that fleshly seed
only (in a type of something else, and yet truly too) those promises were
made, so a believers fleshly seed, as barely a believers seed, though born of
believing Abraham's own body, as the Jews are at this day (and that's a higher
birth one should think to entitle to the Gospel, if any fleshly birth could do
it, then to be born of our Protestant believers) have no share in this new
Covenant promise, if not born (as I may say) of Abraham by Isaac i. e. Christ
after the faith. or by faith in Christ, and so personally, even every
individual for himself, not Catervatim, or domesticatim, whole families, whole
nations of parents and children at once ingraffed as branches upon the root,
and spirituallized into that stock or family of Abraham i. e. the visible
Church in which his own natural branches, much more any other man's mere
natural branches, can have no place now, any further then as they appear to
believe.

Indeed the natural branches stood of right upon mere fleshly birth of
believing Abraham without faith, so long as that fleshly birth-priviledge
lasted, and could give a standing, and till the time of faith, and standing
there by personal faith only came, and then they were broken off indeed
because of unbelief, yet not nationally as you say, i. e. the whole body for
the unbelief of some viz. the persons of the children through allages, for the
infidelity of the parents, for its evident that as many as believed, and those
were not a few, when the rest were rejected, were then and thereupon admitted
Act. 2.

And as many children of them in any age as believe, the unbelief of their
parents shall not prejudice them, but personally every individual that did not
believe, which the more is the pity, were for the most part both children and
parents too in the primitive times, save some few persons that did then
believe, whose children yet for all that promise to them and their children you
so talk of out of Act. the 2. 39. came all to naught through unbelief, for else
indeed the promise, even after Christ crucified was to them, as also to all
others so sure in case of faith, that that causeless curse of their parents,
wishing the blood of Christ to be on them and their children, should never have
hurt any, but them that wished it.

In further illustration of which yet, I mean that personal faith only, not
(...) gives a standing in the Church now, because I write to a generation of
men, that have more time to read then I to write, I hope I may be bold to
trouble my self and you with the transcription of at least a page out of a
little treatise termed a confutation of infant baptism by Thomas Lamb, very
plain and pregnant to this purpose: and the rather because I fear you will not
search the book it self soundly if I should send you to it, only by telling
you it is worth your reading in this point, though at your request I have
all-to-be-read Dr. Featley, in the 12. and 13 pages of which book of Thomas
Lamb, he writes as follows.

So then when Christ the true promised seed was come the seed in the flesh,
that lead to Christ ceased, for the natural relation ceased at the death of
Christ, and not before, at which time the distinction or different holiness
between Jew and Gentile ceased, Act. 10. 28. Ephesians. 2. 13. 15.

In Romans 11. 20. it is said through unbelief they are broken off, now it is
manifest they were the true Church till the death of Christ, and then broken
off through unbelief: why were not the Jews in the sin of unbelief before? yes
no doubt, why then were they not broken off before? and why then? the reason is
because the time of faith was come, and therefore now they were broken off
through unbelief; the seed was come therefore the natural seed ceased, Christ
was come therefore the law ceased. As long as the law lasted they did remain in
the Church by being circumcised; and observing the rites and ceremonies of the
Law, though they did remain in unbelief, but when the time of faith was come
Gal. 3. 25. then they were no longer in the Covenant, and Church by observing
the rites and Ceremonies of the Law, which they entered into by circumcision,
but now they were broken off through unbelief: which notes out unto us that the
standing in that Church before Christ in time of the Law, and the standing in
this Church since Christ in time of the Gospel is upon different grounds, for
the standing in that Church was by being circumcised, and observing the rites
and ceremonies of the Law; but the standing in this Church is by faith, and
being baptized into the same faith Act. 2. 38. 41. Joh. 4. 1. Gal. 3. 26, 27.
Rom, 11. 20.

And it is to be noted that the Jews, the same people that were circumcised,
and in covenant with Abraham according to the flesh, and thereby members of the
Jewish Church could not be the visible church according to the Gospel, unless
they did manifest faith, and so be in covenant with Abraham according to the
spirit, and baptized into the same faith.

Whereas if the Covenant now under Christ were the same that was before Christ
with Abraham and his posterity in the flesh, then by the same right they
possessed circumcision and the Jewish Church state, they must possess this
since Christ, which they could not do, therefore it is not the same.

It is true therefore that the Covenant of God makes the Church both in time of
the Law, and Gospel too, for the Church is nothing else but a people in
covenant with God, now look how the covenant differs so the Church and people
differs which is made by it, and which enter into it.

Now the Covenant, whereby God took a people outwardly to be his people then,
was that, whereby they did, being circumcised, participate of all those outward
means which led to Christ, which was to come, Psalm. 149. 19. 20.

But the Covenant, whereby he takes a people outwardly to be his people now,
whereby they are admitted to be baptized, is that profession they make of faith
in Christ Acts 8. 12. 37. Mat 3. 6. Whereby they have true and spiritual
conjunction with God and are his people Heb. 3. 6.

Indeed it is true that Christ is and ever was the Mediator and Means of
salvation, and also that all those that were saved, were saved through faith in
him both before and since his coming: But yet because the outward means of
making Christ known does differently depend upon his being yet to come, a^ upon
his being come in the flesh; the one being more dark, the other more plain, the
one more carnal, the other more spiritual, therefore the participation of
these means does make the state of the participants to differ.

Thus far are his words: and then noting certain differences to the number of
seven or eight between the Old Testament and the New, which is

1. Established upon better promises. 2. After the power of an endless life. 3.
In Christ. 4. And liberty of the spirit. 5. A Celestial Jerusalem. 6. A State
of faith.
He very truly concludes that such only as are in the New Covenant, in Christ,
in faith of the promises, born from above, and partakers of the spirit, and the
power of that endless life: or of the world to come a re suitable to be
admitted to Gospel Church privileges.

In the time therefore before Christ (says he) such as would circumcise
themselves, and their males, and observe the Law in the rites, and ceremonies
thereof, together with their children by generation were the seed and in
covenant with that Church, but now since Christ, only such as believe in
Christ, and are thereby children by regeneration, are the seed and in c^nant
with this Church, and this he proves further yet.

First, Because None of the Natural seed of Abraham are in the Covenant by
virtue of any natural relation, though they did remain in the Jewish Church
till the death of Christ, and as that Church then ceased so their being in the
Church by an natural relation ceased also Act. 10. 28. Romans 9. 8. Gal. 5. 28.
31 -- 3. 7, 8, 9. 14. 16. 19. 26. 28, 29.

Secondly, The Gentiles have no natural relation to become Abraham's seed by,
therefore a believers child cannot become the seed of Abraham by being the seed
of a believer, unless such children do believe themselves, and cannot otherwise
in no respect be participants in the covenant made with Abraham p. 14, 15.

And again p. 18. No Gentile (says he) is Abraham's seed at all but by
believing the righteousness of faith, allthough he be the child of believing
parents.

Now therefore because you tell us not only,

First that believers children in infancy are Abraham's children, though they
yet do not the works of Abraham, i. e. believe not on him that justifyes them,
as some of you do^e they do, but also,

Secondly, that the promise of the Gospel is to believers and their seed.

These both are abundantly confuted by that quotation of mine, which quotes
more Scripture then you will ever answer, so that I wonder you blush not to
shoot out so boldly two such blind, and un^ound assertions together, the second
of which I shall say no more to, it being virtually answered by what is more
formally spoken to the first and also because I have showed so undeniably
above, that I know your consciences must yield to it, and that from this Act.
2. 39. whence you would wrest a proof to the contrary, that the promise, if you
take it for the profer of the Gospel Grace, is to all men in the world, every
creature, and so not to believers and their seed only, but to all unbelievers
and their seed also, in case they shall believe, for he conditionats the
promise on calling, for such these were, whom Peter spoke to, whilst he was yet
speaking that very word to them, viz. the promise is to you and your children;
but if you take it for the thing promised, which is not Church Membership and
participation of baptism, as some say whose absurdity therein I have declared,
but the spirit, remission of sins, and salvation, this is made, good also to
the believer himself; and it is mercy enough to him that it is so I think, but
not at all to his seed for his sake, nor his faiths sake, for if it be I
testify his children need no faith of their own: nay more God never made
promise to save any of believing Abraham's natural seed, without faith in
themselves for Abraham's sake, as nearly as he took Abraham to be his friend;
for even he had sin enough of his own to have ^unck him, if the same Mediator
that saves any of his seed, in that way of faith, had not mercifully saved him
the same way, nor yet for Abraham's (...) sake, for that merited not salvation
for them, nor was it instrumental, but faith only in themselves, to any one of
his sons salvation, for every one must bear his own burden, if Christ bear it
not, and the just must live by his faith, and not his fathers, neither did he
ever promise for his faiths sake to give faith to his natural seed as his, for
then they must all have had it (qua sic including d^ omni, and being universale
summum) or God shouldly which he cannot; neither could God blame them (as he
does) for unbelief, but himself, without whom (say you they could not believe
and who had promised to make them believe and did not, though yet he promised
to circumcise i. e. by his spirit to sanctify the hearts of his spiritual seed,
as well as his own i. e. all such as believe, and are in the faith with him,
for the promise being still sure to all the seed, which it is made to they all
must be blessed with faithful Abraham.

Now if God, who made the old Covenant promise of the earthly Canaan to
Abraham, and his fleshly seed, did not make the Gospel promise to him and his
fleshly seed, but only that (...) of his that believes with him, can we think
that he made that promise to the Gentile believer, and his fleshly seed, for
his fathers sake, unless he have faith of his own?

Babist.
No we do not say without respect to his own faith, but as the believers seed
shall believe, so its made to him, as well as to his parents.

Baptist.
So its made to the unbeliever and his seed also viz. as they shall believe, as
well as to either of the other, and by that account you may baptize all the
world.

Again, none of the Jews, though the natural seed of Abraham, and partakers of
all the ordinances of the old testament (as Abraham's children) could be
admittted to be baptized upon that same natural relation, though they pleaded
it never so stisfly Mat. 3 but only on manifestation of amendment, besides that
3000 converts should not baptize their children, when they were baptized
themselves, as Abraham by command took all his males, and cirmumcised them the
self same day with himself, argues plainly that both the covenant and the
promise (as Mr. Marshal says truly) as to the manner of administration was now
changed, and not continued to parents and children both alike, but as they both
alike believed.

And that these were not baptized with their parents, I take Mr. Cotton at his
word, who (as I have showed before) confesses it, and if he should not stand to
his testimony herein, yet these words viz. as many as glady received the word
were baptized, which exclude infants, and were an imperfect relation, if he
meant not only them that received the word, are so cogent that they cannot but
compel him.

So I have escaped two of your bullets, and as for the third viz. that the
Gospel, which is a better Covenant, would be far worse, if believers children
be not counted in it, and have not right to baptism, and membership as well as
the Jews children, and be valued but as Turks and Pagans, this is so sick of
the same disease of absurdity with the rest, that I fear not its doing much
execution: besides, we have lamed it before, having told you before, and proved
it too, and now will again, that the exclusion of the fleshly seed from this
Covenant and administration, which was taken into the first, does not lessen or
straiten the grace of God under it at all, not render this covenant worse then
the first contrary to Heb. 8. 6. the place twice quoted by you, where its
called a better, for the meliority there spoken of of this covenant above that,
lies not so much in the extension of the grace of it to such subjects, as in
the meliority of its promises, for this is a better covenant still then the
other, who ere it belongs or belongs not to, forasmuch as it makes better
promises then the other viz. of a heavenly Canaan, and all spiritual blessings
in and by Jesus through faith, when that promised an earthly Canaan only, and
certain temporal blessings therein, on performance of those tedious services of
the law.

It Is true, theirs in this sense, and thus far was a Covenant of great grace
too, as it was made freely to that people above other nations (for he did not so
to any people else) concerning outward benefits, and such statutes and
judgments, as should on their observation of them, not only continue them
therein, but as a shadow, type and schoolmaster conduct them to this: yet
greater is the glory of the Gospel covenant, which now is, so that the other
had no glory in respect of this glory that excels, therefore the grace of
God under the covenant, to them that are under it, is greater also.

Besides, if you speak not only of the intention, but extension of the grace
of God in this Covenant, and in the administration of it too, it goes beyond
the other, for not only is the Gospel a clearer promulgation of the eternal
covenant, then that typical covenant was, whereby the glory of it may be seen
more plainly, and with open face, then when it was seen only in the type as a
thing to come (for we preach Christum exhibitum Christ crucified, a sacrifice
already offered, and baptize and break bread in token hereof, but they (and
that in much dimnesse too) Christum exhibendum, a Messiah to come, he was
veiled, though seen through the veil in the old, but revealed in this new
dispensation) but also it is of larger extent in respect of the subject to
which it belongs, for the revelation of it by preaching, and real proferring of
the grate of it in the name of God (who is not willing that any should perish,
and fail of his grace unless they will) is to all people in the world: the old
administration of circumcision, and other pertinances of that covenant, which
was the type of this, was limited and narrowed into a little corner, the land
of Israel, the people of the Jews, yea more the very new covenant
administration that we are now under, as preaching, baptizing etc. while the
old covenant did continue (as it did for two or three year after the beginning
of this by John, till Christ crucified) was streitned exceedingly above what it
is among us, for says Christ then, go not into any way of the Gentiles, but
now since Christ crucified its extended freely to every nation, and every
person in it of capacity, of years to receive it (and till then (dying before)
they shall never be damned for rejecting it) without any exception, as they
believe, for go (says he) into all the world etc. Mark. 16 Mat. 28. then
circumcision was limited to males among the Jews, but Christ and baptism is to
Jew and Gentile, male and female without difference as they believe, so that
the grace israther lengthned in the administration of baptism by taking in the
females, that were not circumcised, then straightened by the denial of it to
infants in their infancy only, for even those also may be baptized too if they
will, when they come to years: the grace of the new covenant therefore is even
thus as well as otherwise better then the old, in respect of the extent of it,
and its administration also to more subjects, for the Jews only were the
subjects of that grace, and heirs by promise of the earth ly Canaan, but all
the world are heirs of heaven by promise according as they repent and believe
the Gospel,

Besides, if you think that ever God took the whole body of that nation Israel,
that belonged all to the typical salvation of the old covenant, into the
covenant of everlasting salvation by Christ in relation to their fathers faith
without their own, and thence conclude that the whole body of believers seed
must be by faith of their parents admitted into that same Covenant of the
Gospel, this is a mere Chimaera of your own brain, for no such grace of God as
this (though some priests of the Jews dreamed of it as well as you, for which
they were pretty well curried by Christ, and John Mat. 3. John 8.) ever was,
now is, or ever shall be.

As for our valuing believers infants as Turks and Pagans, I tell you we ra^e
them higher then your selves, for we set them not so low as Turks and Pagans
that are at years, and wicked, for they though not without many possibilities
of life by Christ, yet dying impaenitents will be demned, as well as many of
you that abuse more light, nor yet so low as the infants of Turks and Pagans,
for though they (dying in infancy) are by your own doctrine all alike i. e.
none deserving exemption by actual sin from salvation, yet living these have in
likelihoood more advantages for life then those of Pagans, but you though you
set by a few more then the rest in your account (and yet in some parts of your
Account too you make them equal (yet no less then 20 to one are valued little
higher then the Devils, for your speech p. 7. supposes that the devils may be
saved as soon as the dying infants of Turks and Pagans.

Review.
If they object children cannot be taught nor made to understand the
sacraments; no more could they at circumcision: If further that they shed tears
at their baptism, as unwilling to receive it: so they did at circumcision; If
they say they were semen carnis, and had right by the promise: so these are
semen fidei, and the promise is unto them: If they say the seal is often voided
by their infidelity afterward, because many baptized so young become
reprobates: so it was among the Jews witness Ishmael and Esau and those of
whom the Apostle says that they entered not in through unbelief.

Re-Review.
Here you drive on four deep, and against a fourfold assault, make a four fold
repulse, pelting us amain, but with pellets of brown paper.

To the first I reply, no more need they be taught at circumcision, but the
baptized are command^d to be taught first, until they believe Mat. 28. 19, 20.
Mark 16. 15. 16. and also immediately after, which is so plain, that though
here you answer by denying all possibility of childrens being taught before
circumcision, yet else where viz. p. 10. and 18. you fence this off with such
pretty contrary quiddy stuff as this, viz. that as to baptism infants have a
teaching, a hearing and a learning, for the spirit say you opens their ears,
quo magi^ro, quam cito discitur quod docet: he does it in them, and in adultis
too, or else for all their hearing theyl not believe: but that we shall have
more to say to when we come to it,

To the second that as unwilling as infants were to receive circumcision, and
as tedious as it was to them, or servants either that received it, yet by
express command if they were Males in Abraham's house, he was to dispense it to
them, whether they were willing or no, but you have no such flat command to
disease your little infants ^o far as to dip them in water (for so you should
if you baptizd them indeed) whether they will or no.

To the third O wonderful! that Abraham's own fleshly seed, even by Isa^c
himself, by bare descent from their bodies; unless they also believed as
Abraham did, could become, and be counted no more then bare semen carnis, the
children of Abraham's flesh, and have right by promise (qua sic) of no more then
the earthly Canaan, For Ishmael though born of Abraham, and circumcised also as
a male of his house, was not heir by promise of so much as that Genesis 17. 19.
20, 21. and yet that the fleshly seed of believing Gentiles should become and
be accounted no less then Abraham's semen fides, the children of his faith, and
such high heirs thereby, as have right to the heavenly Canaan.

Abraham's faith it seems does not privilege his own natural seed, so far as to
be his seed in a spiritual relation, but the faith of every Gentile privileges
his natural seed, so far as to be spiritually the seed of Abraham: but Sirs me
thinks if any fleshly descent in the world could dignify the seed so descended
with the high name of the spiritual seed of Abraham, and heirs with him
according to the heavenly promise, a fleshly descent from Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob should do it, ye teven that me^rly, without more, makes the seed no more
then the na tural seed of Abraham, and heirs with him of only the earthly
promise. Yea, Sirs, that Abraham's seed is shut out from all ^piritual kindred
to their own faithful father Abraham, notwithstanding the faith of that their
Father, unless they believe also themselves, and yet our seed who are but
Gentiles after the flesh are so specially, so spiritually a kin to Abraham by
the faith of us their fathers, without their own, is not only to equallize our
seed with Abraham's, which is the utmost you pretend to, but rather to reckon it
as a higher race then that of Abraham's, a matter which the most capacious brain
pan of you all is no way capable clearly to conjecture.

To the fourth that circumcision was not voided by the Jews after infidelity,
for it was not set on supposition they had faith, neither was it after voided by
their proving Reprobates, for it was not set to signify them to be Gods elect,
they being not so at all (as Jews I mean) as to eternal life, but only to that
earthly life in Canaan, for had it been set to have supposed believers only,
and elect ones, then it must not have been set to Ishmael and Esau, for they
were not at all known to be, but rather foreknown not to be the elected heirs
of either Canaan, viz. the typical or the true, for God who foresaw how in time
they would deserve it, the one by scoffing, the other by ^elling both the
birthright, and the blessing, had to Abraham Genesis 17. 19, 20, 21. and to
Rebecca Genesis 25. 23. either plainly, or figuratively foretold their rejection
from both, yet both these were circumcised, and that neither of them in vain,
since being males in the house Gods command was fulfilled in circumcising them,
as well as othe^s, but baptism which is lawful to be set to none bu^ taugh:
persons Mat. 28. professed believers in token of remission of sins Act. 2. is
ever voided, and abu^ed when dispensed to infants, not only because there is
no command for such a thing, but also because there is no use of such a thing
to such as those, for before they are made guilty of commission of sins, they
neither do, can, nor need believe remission, and when having committed sins
they believe them to be r^mitted, their infant baptism being transient, and not
permanent (as circumcision was) does no way become visibly evident to them it
self; much l^ss can it be a visible evidence to them of the other.

Review.
The reason of these objections against paedobaptism is this, because they
understand not the nature of baptism, it is Gods seal, ^e sets it, they that
receive it are passive, in that he appoints it to be set to whomsoever he has
made the promise, and with whom he has entered into covenant: A seal of an
estate made to infants in their cradles is firm, so is God's: Now here must be
a sealing on the other side, for both parties must seal in a Covenant, we seal
when we believe, John 3. 33. The Covenant is sealed on both sides when faith
comes, God may set to his seal as he did to many of the Jews, and the seed
made void to them through unbelief. The End of Gods setting it to such as he
foresaw would have no benefit of it, is the same with the making of his
promises, and sending of his Son, to let them know how he would have received
them, how sure his mercies should have been unto them, but they would not.

Re-Review.
The reason of all your Objectations against our way of baptism, and pleas for
P^do-Rantism which you practice is this, you understand not the nature of
baptism: it is not Gods seal which he sets (which you sillily suppose) for that
is his spirit only as I showed you plainly enough above, but Gods sign which
man se^s, which they that receive aright, are not altogether passive in, but
voluntary, and very active; i. e. confessing their sins, calling on the name of
the Lord, desiring to be baptized, professing faith in order thereunto, going
down in^o the water with the dispenser, and there setting their senses and
understandings on work upon the sign, and things thereby signified, submitting
their bodies freely to the dispensation.

Neither does God appoint it to be set to whomsoever he has barely made the
promise, for in the word preached he makes it to every Creature Mark 16. 15.
16. but to such as professedly believe in that promise he has made, and
visibly, verily (for ought we can judge) have entered into covenant with him to
become obedient, such only (so far as it is possible for us to know) are those,
with whom he has entered into Covenant, for say you, there must be a sealing on
the other side, and both parties must seal in a Covenant we seal when (and not
before) we believe: neither is the Covenant sealed on both sides, so that it
can be said these two parties are now entertained into covenant each with
other, till faith come and that is not in infancy but after.

And this your manner of speech; viz. when ^aith comes, here implies to be your
own opinion as well as ours, though else where as p. 3. 4. 8. 9. 15. 16. 17.
18. 19. you strenuously contend it, yea and (to say the truth) it is well nigh
the whole businese of your book to assert and assay to prove it, that faith
comes to infants in their infancy, and to make it appear to us (as well as you
can by contradiction) that infants do believe.

Moreover, (if ever men were troubled with the simples, I think you are) is
baptism Gods seal of an estate, i. e. the heavenly inheritance made over to
infants in their cradels? and is that seal of his firm to, i. e, so sure that
it cannot fail? then I wonder how that seal, (for so you still style
circumcision and baptism) is made void and infirm to so many Jews and Christian
people as it is, for not all, yea few of many do obtain that estate at last,
and that most lose it for all that seal, you tell us by their unbelief: but I
had thought you had been of the mind, when you wrote your 4th page, that
children of Jews, and of believing parents did believe all without any
exception; for asserting it there positively that the Jews children did
believe, and consequently that believers children do now, you prove the
Antecedent viz. that the Jews children did believe, because God did witness it
by setting to his seal circumcision, which if it were Gods seal to them of
their eternal salvation by faith, and witness to the world that they had
faith also, that seal must be firm, and that testimony true concerning them
all, being set to all as well as some, so that unless they depart from the
faith, which you say God who cannot ly, witnessed they once had (and that your
principle of not falling from faith will in no wise give way too) they could
not possibly void it by unbelief, and so must necessarily and universally
obtain the inheritance: but since it is most clear you selves also yielding it,
that they do not, therefore assuredly one of these must be true viz. either
that circumcision was not to infants in their cradels Gods seal of their
eternal salvation (as you say it was) or else that that seal of God is not firm
(as you attest it is) or else that God did not witness by it that those to
whom it was set had faith (as you say he did) or else that Gods witness and
testimony was not true which were blasphemy to think) or else that they fell
from that faith, which at first they had in infancy; and at the time of their
circumcision (and that self confutes you in another case) among all which grant
which you will to be true, you must contradict and convict your selves of
falsehood.

And lastly, if the end of Gods setting baptism to persons be no other then the
very same with that of making his promises, and sending his son, merely to let
them know how he would have received them, how sure his mercies should have
been unto them, but they would not, (not to speak of your telling truth here
unawares viz. that man's own will rejecting God first, and not Gods own will
first rejecting them without respect to their foreseen rejection of him in
time, is the true cause of their condemnation) then as God makes his promises
to all, and sends his son in his love a Savior to all, so baptism should be
dispensed to all without exception, belonging as well as Christ himself, tell
they appear finally to reject him, to every one as well as any one in the
world, but that being denied by both you and us, does show that the end of
baptizing a person is somewhat more viz. not to beget him to the faith before
he does, but to improve him in it when he does believe.

To conclude, this whole train of stuff or long tail of that short shower of
shot that went before it, is not of so much force as a scottish mist, nor
scarce enough to wet a naked man to the skin, therefore bear with my folly in
sheelding my self so much against it, i. e. in saying so much in answer to it,
for a wise man would have said no more to it but mumm.

Review.
The third argument is this.

Those that have the holy spirit, that have faith, the Anabaptists will not
deny but are the subjects of baptism, but children have so, as their
justification declares, without which there is no salvation.

Hence it is that the adversaries are put to their shift s to find out a new
way for the salvation of infants, dying in their minority viz. The presentment
of the satisfaction of Christ without faith, otherwise they conclude they could
not be saved; which invention of theirs destroies the Gospel covenant, which is
the righteousness of faith, and either damns innumerable innocents, whose
right to the kingdom of heaven our Savior has declared; or grounds their
salvation upon a figment of their own brains, such as the Scriptures are wholly
silent in, and the Churches of God never dreamed of.

They allege two texts for their proof, Rom 5. 18. As by the offense of one
judgment came upon all to condemnation, so by the righteousness of one the
free-gift came upon all men unto justification of life, Romans 11. 7. Election
has obtained it: of which two texts, the latter is nothing for them, for it
excludes not justification, for the Apoctle says plainly, Romans 8. 30. Those
whom he predestined he justified: and though the elect only shall be saved,
yet justification goes between.

The former is directly against them, for it expressly mentions justification
of life: so that the Anabaptists must either prove that justification is not to
go before salvation, and so pull in pieces the golden chain, by taking out the
link, Romans 8. 38. or else that justification is not by faith, and so destroy
the Covenant of the Gospel; till when, they justly deserve the censure of
damning all infants dying, contrary to evident testimony of Scriptures, and the
sentence of our Savior, that to them belongs the kingdeme of heaven.

And whosoever shall consider the impertinences of their proofs in a cause of
so great consequence, shall have just cause to suspect all their other
doctrines, and take heed how to take any thing upon trust from these new
masters.

Re-Review.
Here is an argument has neither head nor tail in it able to hurt, for both
have bin bruised already, we having had to do with them before, the one in the
front, the other in the rear of the disputation: therefore no need, to fear it,
yet since it turns about again and Reviews us, hisses in our faces, and makes
such a flutter, as if it would both bite and sting us to death, I shall secure
it a little further how ever.

The head of the argument is this syllogism viz.

Such as have the holy spirit, and faith are the subjects of baptism, but
children have so.

The first proposition whereof you say the Anabaptists will not deny, but I
tell you what the Anabaptists will do I know not, because, if there be such a
people in the world, yet I never was so privy to their principles and practices
as Dr. Featley and his fellows pretend to be, who paints them out, and presents
them to the world in his title page as dipping naked, and daily:

But in the name of 100s of them you commonly and abusively call so, I mean the
truest baptists that are in England, i will be so bold as to deny it to be true
without more, for it is not the inward unseen seeds of grace and faith, nor that
invisible having of these, which is the u^most you dare or do affirm concerning
infants, but the visible having thereof, so that we see they have them by the
fruits, effects, acts, opperations, and professions, that quoad nos makes a
subject for baptism: as for what is within it is nothing to us, we are
strangers to it, neither can or may we intermeddle therewith, till it shows it
self without: secret things belong to God only, and things revealed only to
us, and therefore for your blind brazen faced minor, wherein you positively
affirm here again, that children (not specifying what children, nor whose,
whether of believers or unbelievers, nor both, nor if of believers only,
whether all or only some of them) have the spirit, and faith, I shall be as
bold to deny it ever, till they give some better specimen of it then the best
infant that ever you or I saw did, in that nonage wherein you sprinkle them,
specially so long as to the stark spoiling, utter unsaying and clear
contradicting of whatever your own selves would prove it by, you are fain to
confess page 16.

That all have them not, and p. 18. Which have and which have not (the spirit
being no more bound to believers infants, then others, and no more barred from
working in unbelievers infants than believers) cannot be certainly presumed,
and that whatever the spirit may work in children, yet this is not known to us,
so that there can be no conclusion made.

And howbeit this Argument being by your own concession thus crushed in the
head, i. e. this Prosyllogism turns about with his tail, and thrusts at us
therewith, I mean this ensuing Syllogism, viz.

No Justification nor salvation to them that have not faith.

But justification and salvation is to infants.

Ergo infants have faith.

Yet I return thus to your Major, viz. that though there is no justification
nor salvation, without faith, of such as are capable to believe, and of whom to
believe it is required, yet of such as neither are capable, nor called on to
believe in order thereunto, there may be, and is a justification and salvation
without it: and this is the case of all dying infants in the world, the
presentment of the satisfaction of Christ without faith, and without obedience
also in any thing else, both which are in ordine ad vitam injoined to adult
ones, does save dying infants or else innumerable of those infants are damned,
neither is this any new way for the salvation of infants dying in minority, nor
a grounding their salva^ion upon a figment, and invention of our own brains,
nor such as the Scripture is altogether silent in, nor such as destroys the
Gospel Covenant, which is the righteousness of faith: for howbeit it is true
that the Scripture runs on this wise, saying,

The just shall live by faith, he that believes shall be saved, he that
believes not shall be damned, and to him that works not, but believes on him
that justifyeth the ungodly, his faith shall be accounted unto him for
righteousness, and twenty more such like expressions of the Gospel Covenant,
Romans 1. Romans 3. John 3. etc. as that which gives righteousness, and life by
faith only, without the works of the Law, yet I beseech you set your wits on
work, and see whether these Scriptures were written of infants, or to them
either, or whether only of, and to men's at years only, to show unto them on
what terms the Lord will accept, and save them in the Covenant and promise of
the Gospel: Me thinks your own reason should dictate thus much, that all those
places speak no more of infants, then they speak to them in minority, and that
you will assuredly yield that they do not; yea you may as well say these
places, viz.

It Is a people that have no understanding, therefore he that made them will not
save them, and he that formed them will show them no mercy, and the lord Jesus
shall come with flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
obey not his Gospel, and that because they received not the truth in the love
thereof, that they might be saved, for this cause God shall send them strong
delusions to believe lies that they all might be damned, who had pleasure in
unrighteousness etc. who ere transgresses and abides not in the the doctrine
of Christ has not God; every soul that hears not the voice of that Prophet
shall be destroyed, with the mouth confession is made unto salvation, and an
hundred such like as speak of an necessity of good works as well as of faith,
viz. self-denial, taking up the cross and following Christ etc. speak of and
to infants in ^on age, while they know not their right hand from their left.

But Sirs oh that you would once understand (for then all your intricacies,
sottish, and absurd assertions, and disputes about infants would be ended, and
save you a world of perplexity that now you are in by the ignorance of it) that
the word was not written as the way, and will of God concerning infants in
infancy, but concerning men and women, in order to their salvation by Christ,
John 6. 39. 40.

And this Sirs, is no other answer then you use to give us, when we argue
against infants believing thus, viz.

Faith comes by hearing and hearing by the word preached.

But infants cannot hear so as to know Christ by the word preached.

Ergo infants cannot believe.

You tell us true; faith in Adult is can come no other way but by preaching,
but in Infantibus faith is begotten otherwise, so you fancy, but you have no
Scripture for it, as we have that faith comes no way but by hearing.

Babist.
But that Scripture Romans 10. speaks only of the way of faiths coming to adult
ones.

Baptist,
So say I of welnigh the whole body of Scripture, it speaks of the way, wherein
men at years must expect to be justified and saved, and not of infants, for
they may be saved without faith, so when we plead with you against the
baptizing of infants (I mean such of you, and such there be amongst you as are
ashamed, as well as some that are not, to say that infants have faith) we tell
you the Scripture speaks only of baptism of persons confessing sin, professing
faith, that faith and baptism use still to go together, as he that believes
and is baptized; the Corinthians he^ring, believed and were baptized, if thou
believe with all thy heart etc. therefore those that believe not may not be
baptized: you tell us again of these places, and of all that ever we bring out
of Scripture, where baptism is mentioned, that they speak of adult persons, of
whom it is confessed by you that faith and confession, and profession is required
in order to baptism, but not of infants that cannot perform them.

So Pareus in Ursin Cate. p. 384. 385. and also many others, and your answer is
very true, and grants all that we desire, for indeed all the places, where ever
baptism is mentioned throughout the Scripture, do speak of it as in relation to
grown persons, and not to infants, therefore because the Scripture is wholly
silent in such a thing, we dare not meddle to baptize infants, but as we grant
your answer to be true, so I hope you will grant it to be as true in our
present case, for if some of you, when we call for faith to a persons baptism,
or else deny that person to be baptized, say thus, viz. true, no baptism
without faith of such of whom faith is required, and who are capable to act it,
i. e. of men at years, but infan^s being incapable to act faith, and it being
not required of them, therefore they may be baptized without it (which
conclusion you make without book to, for the word warrants you not to make it)
why may not we, when you call so universally for faith to every ones salvation,
or else saying assuredly they are damned, return the like, viz true, no
salvation without faith of persons capable to act it, and of whom its required,
but infants being incapable to act it; and it being not required of them,
therefore they may be saved without it.

Babist.
This conclusion is spoken without book, and as unwarrantable by the Scripture
as you say ours is, since the Scripture speaks as much of salvation by faith, as
of baptism upon faith; and as little of salvation without faith, as it does of
baptism without it, therefore still we have at least as good ground to say
infants may be baptized without faith, as you have to assert they may be saved
without it.

Baptist.
No: I shall leave you behind here, for since the Scripure speaks of the
impossibility of infants believing, and yet with all of their salvation, as
your selves confess in your own interpretation of that clause viz. of such is
the kingdom of heaven, but no where at all of their baptism, it shows that
they may be saved without believing, but shows not that they may be baptized
without it; besides to hold any of them to be damned, before they have by
actual sin debard themselves of salvation is abominable cruelty, and breach of
Christian charity with you, who yet confess that all of them have not faith p.
19. but to hold they need not to be baptized cannot bear the like construction,
since it is acknowledged by them that deny their bap^ism, and by them also who
absurdly assert, to the contradiction of themselves, that the denial of baptism
to them denies all hope of their salvation that they may be saved nevertheless,
though they die unbaptized, so that whether we, who hold that to them all
belongs the kingdom of heaven though they neither believe nor are baptized
before they die, or you that hold no salvation to them without faith, and yet
hold that all of them have not, nay that very few of them (for how few are
believers infants to others?) have faith, whether we or you I say do justly
deserve the censure of damning all, or at least innumerable infants dying,
contrary to that evident testimony of Scripture, and sentence of our Savior,
that to them belongs the kingdom of heaven, and contrary also to the rule of
Christian charity set us by your selves, which is to presume well of every
infant that he is in a good estate, till he appear to be in a bad, and by
actual sin to bar himself, and deserve exemption from the general state of
little children declared in Scripture, which is this that they have right to
the kingdom, let the most simple, but honest Reader judge between us.

As for the two texts you say are brought in proof of justification of infants
without faith viz. Romans 5. 18. Romans 11. 7. who urges the last of them I know
not, for my part I take it to be of no tendency at all either to your purpose
or ours, therefore I shall not trouble my self with it, but the first of them,
which you say is so directly against us, it is because you are blind, if you do
not perceive it to be an express downright declaration of a general
justification of all from Adams sin, as to life, i. e. a resurrection from that
bodily death, which that sin brought upon all mankind, and from which as there
is now a universal return of every individual by Christ, so there had never bin
any returning for any one man in the world, but by Christ to all eternity world
without end, 1 Cor. 15. 21. 22.

Yea as universally as that judgment or condemnation to that first death came
by Adam upon all men, so that it spreads its black wings upon them all, and
brings them all down to the dust from whence they came, so universally is
justification unto life i. e the benefit and resurrection from that death, from
which else no one man should ever have risen, come by Christ upon all men,
really and truly, and not only so, but a capacity also, and possibility of
eternal happiness and well being after that resurrection, and all this whether
persons believe it yea or no, yea and a promise and certainty of it in case of
belief in this Christ, otherwise indeed a loss of the Resurrections becoming a
mercy, and benefit to them, and a lyablenesse even after that escape of the
first death, that came by the first Adam, to a sorer, even that second death,
that lake of fire, which by the second Adam, by whom comes eternal blessedness
on believers, comes upon all unbelievers, and that for ever.

So that if there be no salvation to infants without justification, yet there is
justification of infants without faith, or baptism either.

And whereas you argue from the cart to the horse, from the justification and
salvation of infants to their faith, I argue from their non capacity to believe
to their justification and salvation without it: no salvation or justification
without faith, say you, but infants are justified and saved therefore they
believe: if no justification and salvation without faith, say I, infants, who
cannot believe can neither be justified nor saved: but infants, so far as
they need justification, for they have no sins of their own, are justified and
saved also, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to them, therefore there is
justification and salvation for infants without faith.

To conclude therefore: this opinion of you adversaries to the truth, which
allows no salvation to infants without faith, puts you miserably to your shifts
viz. either to find out a new way of coming by faith, which Paul says comes
only by nearing, or else to damn innumerable dying infants, who whilst they
lived, were incapable to hear the word preached, and so to believe, or else as
you do p. 18. to dream out a new kind of hearing, whereby infants come by their
faith, viz. an inward, wonderful miraculous hearing of some voice of the spirit
within, such a sigment of your own brains, as the Scripture is wholly silent
in, and no true Church of God, nor rational man, but your selves, who dream
dreams, and divine false divinations, and things of naught, deceits of your own
heart, and tell them to the deceiving of others, did ever dream of; and
whosoever shall consider the impertinencies of your proofs in a cause of so
great consequence, shall have just cause to suspect all your other doctrines,
and to take heed how they take any thing any more upon trust, as the whole
world has done now of old, from these new masters, the Clergy, who instead of
being ministers in truth, or servi servorum dei, have bin domini dominorum
Lords over the heritage, and over the faith of all civil powers and people,
teaching them instead, of the true doctrine of the old ministers, the
traditions and commandments of men.

And so I have done both with the head of this third argument, and with that
long tail also that trails after, there remains no more of it to be meddled
with but a certain slender sting that sticks to this tail, put forth against
us, with more length then strength, in prosecution of the argument, which I
shall cut out into many pieces, and after set upon each section severally, and
then I hope your great hope of help from these three unworthies, will prove a
forlorn hope indeed.

Review.
But to prosecute this Argument for the full satisfaction of the simple but
honest Reader, since there is no way to come to salvation but by justification,
and no justificatnon but by faith, why should it be doubted by any but little
infants, which are ordained to salvation, are also by faith made subjects of
justifi^ation? those souls which please God so well as they are to see him
presently af ter their separation from the body, why should they not be capable
of faith, without which the Apostle says it is impossible to please God, Heb.
11. 6.

Re-Review.
The Reader had need be honest, for I dare say he will be simple enough, that
receives full satisfaction your way by your present prosecutions of it; because
there is no way for salvation and justification for men that are actu^l sinners,
and capable to believe, and to whom justification and remission is preached, to
the end that they might believe it to their comfort, is there therefore no
other wav whereby God willing, and ordaining to save little infants from eternal
wrath, can possibly, or does certainly save them, that can neither sin, or be
preached to, nor believe, but that very self same way of believing? is he tied
to that means to save infants by, as we are tied to it in order to the saving
of our selves, viz. the way of faith? if so, why not to repentance, and self
denial also? for both these are the way to us, Act. 2. 38. 40. Mat. 16. 24. and
would it not shift a man out of his seven senses to hear such doctrine, that
infants as ever they will be saved (dying infants) must even in their infancy
repent? is it not manifold more suitable to reason, and sense of Scripture that
as infants (so far as they are guilty) become guilty unwittingly to themselves,
by the presentment and imputation of the first Adams sin, without personal
disobedience in themselves, so also should be justified from that imputed sin,
by the presentment of the satisfaction and imputation of the righteousness of
the second Adam, as unwittingly to, and without personal obedience in
themselves? and because without faith it is impossible to please God, for such as
have actually incurred his wrath, such as come to him by prayer, for these
indeed must believe that is God, and is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him) there fore is it impossible for infants also who yet actually disspensed
him, nor yet are capable to come to him by belief or prayer. Is that Scripture
think you intended to infants? for shame scope the Scripture a little better.

Review.
Is it not the work of the spirit to infuse faith? and are not souls which are
all equal in their creation the subject of it? He works indeed where he will,
and therefore all have it not, for the spirit of God is not bound but where he
will work it who can hinder him.

Re-Review.
Are souls all equal in their Creation, and are souls which are all equal the
subject of faith? how then can it be so positively asserted, concluded,
attempted to be discovered, and made appear as it is by you, who confess also
that all have it not, that the infants of believers have it and therefore must
be baptized, but infidels infants have it not, and there must not? specially
since not only the one, by by your own saying that all souls are equal, are as
capable of it as the other, if the spirit please to infuse it, but also since
by your own saying too, the spirit works it where he will, and is not bound i.
e. (as you explain this place p. 18.) to work it in all the children of
Christian parents, nor barred from working it in any of the children of
infidels, and most especially yet, since p. 18. you say that unless it could
be certainly presumed what children have the habit of faith, what have not, the
working of the spirit being not known to us, he being not bound nor bard there
can be no conclusion made.

Have not we as much power to forbid the spirits working faith in the infant
you sprinkle, and so to forbid their being baptized as you have to forbid his
working it in the infants of infidels, and to forbid their being baptized? will
you bind him to all the infants in Christendom, and bar him from doing any
other infants in the world? O ye house of Levi is the spirit of the Lord thus
streitned? are these your doings? you that preach the spirit of the Lord is not
bound nor barred, do not you both bind and bar him, while you say and suppose
he must needs, and is by the Gospel covenant bound to be gracious, and show
mercy to believers children, alias such as are born in England, Scotland and
other nations of Christendom, so that you may safely sign them all as heirs of
his mercy, and barred from saving any infants of Turks and Pagans, so that not
one of them may be signed for so much as an hopeful heir of salvation.

Review.
John Baptist had not been filled with the holy spirit had he had not faith
Luke 1. 15. the Scripture shows us plainly in that one example what the soul of
infants is capable of, what the spirit of God can work in that, it was the
measure only of his gifts, makes his example extraordinary, the spirit and
power of Eliah in which he came: The testimony of an Angel renders it undoubted
concerning him. The Testimony of the Scriptures concerning other infants are of
equal authority saying, They have right to the kindome of Heaven, and that they
are called to come to Christ, and that Christ received them and blessed them;
compared with that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Jesus Christ is in you except
ye be Reprobates?

The Argument is this, They are not Reprobates.
Ergo Christ is in them.


Re-Review
Not to trouble the world with a Re-Review of every odd conceit, that lies in
this piece of Review about that particular instance, and extraordinary case of
John, which you mightily misunderstand, and most rudely wrest in as ordinary
rule in proof of an universal; and also about the proof of believers infants,
being no reprobates from 2 Cor. 13. 5. a place most absurdly abused by you, for
it speaks not to nor of infants, and if it did, no more of one infant then of
an another, no infants appearing reprobates in infancy, and of their right to
heaven above all infants, all which passages being spoken to above may be
reviewed there by any that have a mind to it, the utmost intent and drift of
this whole Section is to prove infants to be capable of faith, which thing if
it should be granted for truth, yet I wonder how that redounds to
infant baptism, since its neither bare capacity, nor actuality of believing,
but professing to believe, that is our warrant to dispense baptism to any
subject, for i^ will not follow from the having of faith to bap^ism, unless
that faith be professed, much less will it follow from a capableness to
believe or have faith, that a person has it and therefore must be baptized.

For then first heathen infants are as capable of it as other infants, all
souls being equal in their Creation, therefore they must be baptized also, yea
Sirs, if you give back, and let your Argument fall so low now, as to say
infants are capable of faith and therefore must be baptized before they have,
or appear to have it, then I Will warrant every ones right to baptism as well as
any ones, thus, viz.

The souls of men and women are capable of faith before they believe, and
whether ever they do believe or no, the spirit of God can work it in them.

Therefore men and women before they believe, or whether they believe or no,
must be baptized.

Yea all souls are as capable subjects of faith as well as the souls of
believers infants, and therefore must be baptized.

But Sirs though persons be not only capable subjects to believe, but such also
as (for ought you know to the contr^ry) do believe, and of whom you cannot say
they do not, yet may you not at all baptize them, without some kind of evidence
that they do; and that's more then in particular any infant can give for it
self; and as for that muddy manner you argue it in when you say, the Kingdom
of heaven consists of infants, they are called to come to Christ, and Christ
received them, therefore they must be baptized, besides that those indefinit
expressions ex^end no more to believers infants then unbelievers, we may as
well argue thus, the Kingdom of heaven consists of men, men and women have
right to it, are called to come to Christ, received and blessed by him,
therefore men and women, or these men and women, whether it be evident of them
in particular or individuo yea or no, may be baptized, which were absurd
nonsense in the abstract: yet such are your pleas for those particular infants
you sprinkle, whilst you deny baptism to heathen infants, viz. the testimony
of Scripture in gross, and infants capablenesse to have the inward baptism, and
such like: on this wise did Dr. Channel at Petworth dispute Ian. 5. 1651.
saying,

If infants are capable of the inward baptism, then they may have the out ward.
But etc.

And could not prove the consequence or sequel of his Major four times over
repeated by himself, and as often denied by his Respondent.

Review.
The difficulty in the understanding how fa it hshould be bred in them, and
after what manner, is that which has bred the doubts about their having it;
but if we had learned to believe the Scriptures, which by necessary consequence
confirm the thing, we would leave the manner of doing it to him whose work it
is, the spirit of God, who is able to do it: we do it in other articles of
faith, and the resurrection of the body, and ask not how it can be done,
because the Scriptures have delivered it; and this of the renovation of soul is
no less Miracle.

Re-Review.
And well may it be difficult to understand how faith should be bred in
infants, and doubted that they have it not, since if we have learned to believe
the Scriptures, they are so far from confirming such a thing so much as by any
possible, or probable consequence, that by necessary consequence they
contradict it, while they tell us that there is but one way whereby faith
comes, and that such a one as it can never possibly come to infants in, viz.
hearing the word of God preached, not inwardly by the spirit only (as you prate
below) for he speaks not of such a thing there Romans 10. but outwardly by some
visible, or audible creaturely ministration, as is plain by the words
foregoing, viz. How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? how
hear without a preacher? how preach except they be sent.

And whereas you tell us the spirit is able to work faith in them, therefore we
must leave the manner of doing it to him, not offering as it were to pry into
it.

Good Sirs spare your labor and talk not about the unknown manner, of a matter
as unknown as the other: for the thing it self is not yet clear in the (...),
neitherdoth the spirits ability to do it, prove that it is done, any more then
it proves there is a 1000 worlds, or that all men have faith, because these
things arepossible ^o be effected by him, but the evidence that he does such a
thing, which if it be wanting (as it is in this case) it is but egregious folly
to argue it from the other, so as to say God can do it, therefore though the
manner how he does it is not known to us, yet we must not meddle further then
to believe it is, leaving the manner of doing it to him.

Moreover Sirs, assure your selves of this that in some sort the manner is
usually manifested to us in the word, as well as the matter of such things, as
we are there called upon to believe, even that miraculous work of the
resurrection of the body, which is your present instance, wherein 1 Cor. 15.
35. to the end. the Lord condescendeth at large to explain the manner of it, as
well as to prove the matter of it before: and whereas you say you leave the
manner of the doing things when it is nor clear to you, to the spirit himself,
whose the work is, in other articles of faith, I wonder you are so forgetful as
to bear such false witness as this against your selves, when as in the point
of dying infants salvation, which for the matter of it is so clear, that you
cannot deny it, though not clear to you in the manner, you leave not the manner
of it to God himself, whose work it is to save them, but limit him to the way
of Church Membership faith, baptism, and holiness etc. whereas the word, that
was not at all for infants instruction, declares to men and women what way he
will save them in, asking in many places of your book, how can infants be
justified without faith? how can Turks and Pagans infants be saved? what hopes
of our infant salvation without baptism? and all this too, though there is no
fear of their damnation by actual sin, though it also ask you plainly enough,
how can they believe in him of whom they have not heard, and consequently how
can they be saved by faith? though it tell you also plainly enough Act. 8.
where that question is expressly asked what hinders etc. even because they yet
believe not with all their heart, you had said true therefore had your words
bin thus viz. we do it not in other articles of faith.

And whereas you say the renovation of a soul is no less miracle then the
matter of infants having faith, it seems you confess it to be a miracle, that
faith should be in infants: and for my part I fully confess it with you, for
surely it is such a thing as was seldom or never yet seen since the world began
to this day: but the renovation i. e. conversion of souls of men, and women
depraved, and corrupted (as infants never were by any actual sin p. 5.) is no
less miracle indeed then the other: for the one is not at all, and the other
where it is, is yet no miracle at all, but a matter that happens ever and anon
in the ordinary course of things, as a miracle does not, and besides you are of
those I am sure, who are in the mind that miracles are ceased.

And lastly, for you to sprinkle all the new born infants in all the Christian
nations at this hour, as taking it for granted that these all have faith (for
so you suppose (though you see not any individual or particular infant has it,
that is brought to you) and yet hold in fants faith to be a miracle, and yet to
hold miracles to be ceased also, it is, if not miraculum, yet mirandum monstrum
et horrendum, at least to me i. e. a marvelous work and a wonder that ever the
wisdom of wise men should so perish, and the understanding of prudent men so
come to naught.

Thus having done with your forlorn hope, I Will march on now to give checkmate to
that wretched crew of cavillers, that are so impudent, as to be responsive
against reason and its Regiment, and to undertake to make it good against them,
that infants have faith, and must have baptism.

Review.
The objection that reason makes against it will easily be answered, it is done
for satisfaction to the Reader.

Re-Review.
Yea Sirs? is Reason in so little request with you, as that you not only dare
so audaciously engage against, but also set so light by it, as to say its
objections are easily answered? let it be put to the vote if you please
throughout the whole earth, whether you deserve the title of good Logicians i.
e. Reasonable men, who here professedly wrestle against reason it self, and
whether your faith can possibly be found any other then faction and mere
fiction, against which Reason it self is by your selves confessed to be opponent.

I confess I have heard men (called divines) speak of many points of Religion
and faith as above reason, but I yet never met with men under the name of
ministers, so far devoid of Reason, as to say that Religion and faith are
against Reason, till I met with you, whose faith and practice of baptism to
believers infants (upon account of their appearing to believe, more plainly
then the profession of persons at years can make it appear of themselves) is,
as seems by your selves, a faith and practice against Reason, why else does
reason object against it.

Indeed the Papists are so unreasonable in sundry articles of their faith that
they hold some things not only above but against Reason, and that's the worst
that can be said of the most absurd, and abominable tenets that are amongst
them, and that is so bad, that even thereupon the Protestant priesthood finds
occasion enough to abhor them, witness their Tenet of transubstantiation, or
real presence of Christ's very body in the supper, of which when we say how can
this be? its not only against other articles of faith viz. his bodily
ascension, session, and local mansion in heaven, but also against common sense
and reason, it being in reason impossible, that one body should be at once in
two places, as well as in consubstantiation it is for two distinct bodies viz.
the bread and Christ's body to be at once in one place, they say much what as
you say here, and in the lines above viz. that howbeit its difficult to
understand how it should be so in Reason, yet if we had learnt to believe the
Scriptures, which in plain terms assert the thing, saying of the bread this is
my body, we would believe it, and leave the manner of its being so to him who
says it, with whom all things are possible, as we do in the articles of faith
e g. the resurrection of the body, not asking how it can be because the
Scriptures have declared it.

The Reformists tell them again that the resurrection of the dead is a thing
not only in respect of God, who can do all things (save such as imply
imperfection, as to lie, and die, etc. and contradiction, for its impossible
utterly that pure contradictories should be both true) but also in respect of
the thing it self possible to be effected, but the ubiquity, and the actual
universal eating of one and the same numerical body, and so small a body too as
that of Christ's, and at one and the same time, in so many several places, are
matters and fancies savouring of such contradiction, and so adverse to the very
nature of God, that as Kekerman system. log. p. 42. says, Ne deus quidem
producer^ potest; et logica e as e suis excludit ordinibus: such as God does
not, and Reason knows not.

O but says the Papists, nothing but humane reason judges this impossible and
repugnant to other articles of faith: to whom among other things our Divines
use to reply, that in matters of religion, and faith, and things of God, reason
is not to be laid aside, as if we were to bring bare bruit sense i. e. blind
implicit faith only to the word of God, but to be used by us, that we may
thereby, as without which we cannot, distinguish truth from falsehood: yea to
speak yet in the very words of your own author in this case, I mean Ursins
Catachise, to which you send us, whose these words mostly are, which I have
already spoken, see page 414. 415.

For even therefore was reason given us of God, that we might by the light of
the mind discover contradictory opinions, and clearly understanding what is
agreeable to the word of God, and what repugnant to it, may embrace this, and
refuse that:

Hoc nisi firmum maneat, nullum erit dogma tam absurdum, etc.

Unless this stand for granted, no opinion, though never so absurd, and
impious, yea nothing in the sincks of all heretics, though never so impure and
monstrous, can be confuted out of the holy Scripture; for heretics, and
deceivers will reply, their opinions do not contradict the word of God, but
only it seems so to humane reason.

You see then how among your own writers, the foundation of faith and true
religion, is laid not only in the Scripture as the rule and fountain whence we
fetch all, but secondarily in sound Reason also, improved in way of trial of
things by it, as without which no use can be made of Scripture: so that though
some Divines proclaim it to the whole world (for so do your selves in this
place) that Reason it self is against them in their way, and consequently that
their way is against Reason, and many Divines confess their faith and religion
in some articles, and particles of it to be above Reason (which is but a
gentl^-gigg too, if by above Reason they mean so, as that Reason cannot
comprehend how they are, at least conceive them possible so to be) yet however
farewell such a faith for ever for me, as Reason fights with, and far be it from
me either to do, or believe any thing against reason: for as they that see not
good ground in reason to believe what they believe, can never be always ready
(as every Christian ought) to render a reasonable answer to such as ask them a
Reason of the faith that is in them, and are at best but implicit in believing,
so they, who believe not only without, and beyond, but even against Reason it
self, opposing them in their faith, are most unreasonable believers indeed: and
such as shall find, that Reason (as easily as they think it is answered) will
make good what objection it makes against the most unreasonable of them all:
but to leave this, and to come to the discourse or ratiocination it self, which
follows between Reason and reasonlese, for what else can I fitly style such an
Antagonist, as stiffens himself against Reason, and counts it nothing to refute
it? yea it is done here in your Review for satisfaction to the Reader (as you
say) but it is undone again in the Re-review to the undeception of the deceived
and the deceiver.

The objections of Reason, and replies of reasonlesse and re-replies of Reasons
friend are as follows.

Review.
1 Infants have no knowledge of good, or evil, Reason.


Ergo no faith.

By the same reason they should be denied to have the faculty of understanding,
Reasonless.
the exercise of their faculty they have not, no more have they of their faith,
not the act but the habit, as was said before.

Re-Review.
Good Sirs, consider what a reasonlesse reply to reason this is.

For if by faith you mean only a faculty of believing, what ever in time may be
told them, which is the adaequate object of faith in general, that is in all
reasonable creatures: and is de esse to them, universally, innate in them, as a
part of the rational soul, as well as the faculty of remembering what in time
they may hear, and of willing, and chosing what in time may be propounded to
them, and of understanding what in time may be taught them; but what is all
this to your purpose, who plead faiths being in some infants only, not in all:
when as faith in that sense is as much in all infants as in some, and would (if
it could at all entitle such as have it to baptism) entitle all mankind to
baptism as well as some, since all have the faculty of believing things (as
beasts which are merely sensitive have not) flowing naturally from the
rational soul in man?

But if by faith you mean restrictively, that faith in special, whose adequate
object is the word of God preached, in the promise and precept of it, which
only makes us subjects of salvation and baptism, dare you say that it is of
equal necessity, and certainty that faith in such a sense is in infants, as
the faculty of Reason, and understanding is? so that by the same Reason that we
deny one of these to be in them, it may be therefore denied that they have the
other? and that their non knowledge of good or evil will as much prove them to
be habitually no reasonable creatures, as it proves them to be habitually no
true believers of the Gospel?

For shame Sirs blot out and abjure this absurdity, for you cannot but know
that the faculty of understanding in man is Habitus a nature a innatus, a habit
engendered in them in very nature, yea in all mankind necessarily, and qua id
ipsum: but your selves say faith, in the sense in which we speak of it, is but
Habitus infusus, a habit infused, and that into some only, for all say you have
it not, and I say it is Habitus acquisitus, rather an acquired habit, which comes
if not without the gift of God to persons therein, yet also in that way of
hearing the word, which on our parts is first done, in order to its being
begotten in us, whereby we come to know good and evil first, i.e. to be
convinced of sin and guilt in our selves, and righteousness and mercy in God,
through Jesus Christ, and then to have faith in him to justification: in this
therefore Reason remains unrefuted, and rather routs you, then is routed by you.

Review.
2. Their dislike at baptism testified by their crying: if they had faith they
Reason:
could endure it with much patience.

The same reason might be brought against circumcision, children, when they
felt the pain, it is likely cried as much: Reasonless.


Besides, we must deny faith to be in the best of Gods children, if their
sense under the cross, and their complaing of it be an argument to conclude
against it: against the weakness of faith it may, not against the being.

Re-Review.
Had circumcision bin administered on persuasion that the subjects to whom it
was set were believers (as baptism is to be Acts 8.) this same reason might
have been brough also against infants circumcision, though I must confess it
to be the least among an 100 that in reason may be brought to disprove infants
believing, and therefore possibly you (whom I observe sometimes to set up a man
of straw, of least strength to annoy you, and then to show your skill in
fencing at him) have singled out this easy opposite to encounter with; and yet
(so far as (...) see) you do not (as the proverb is) give him as he brings
neither: but circumcision, as is well known, well-nigh to every body but your
selves, was dispensed to persons upon a far different account from this, viz.
merely on their being males of a Jewish household, and sometimes one a more
slender acquaintance with Abraham's ^a mily then so, witness the whole City of
the Shechemites, whose males were all all circumcised on mere hopes of their
princes marriage with Jacobs daughter: but it was not dispensed as you senselessly
suppose it was on supposition of its subjects having faith: for as there was
not present evidence to any body that any of those infants that were signed had
faith, so (for all your childish conclusion p. 4. that the children of the
Jews had faith, witness their circumcision, therefore the children of
believing parents have now) by future experience it was evident to every body
that they had it not: how else came they to be complained on in general, when
at years, as a body of wicked ones, and unbelievers, unless you will say they
lost, and fell from their faith, as I am sure you dare not, and for my part I
cannot say they did, except I could see more clearly then yet I do see, or you
can ever make me see that at first they had it.

As for your further following flim-flam, wherein you tell us that we must deny
faith to be in the best of Gods children, as well as in little children, if
their sense under the cross and their complaining of it be an Argument to
conclude against their faith; I give you to understand Sirs, that its an
ignorant inconsequence, and so you will your selves discern it to be, by then
you have weighed what a difference there is, between that voluntary submission,
which by the power of faith in the Saintsis acted, and yielded to the cross,
and yoke of Christ, in either circumcision or baptism, or any other difficult
duty, or dispensation, service or suffering they are called to for Christ's
sake, and that forced and not more unpleasant then unwelcome imposition of it,
that is made when that cross, or yoke, viz. the affliction, or pain of
circumcision or baptism, is put upon the necks of infants, for the one freely
chooses it, when they have the liberty to refuse and decline it, if they please,
and therefore though they have some sense out to the flesh, no affliction being
joyous, but grievous, yet are so far from complaining of it, that they rather
comply with it of their own accord, as counting it better then to be without
it, witness Moses, who by faith chose rather affliction and rep^oach with
Christ, as deeming these better then the pleasures and treasures of Egypt,
which were at his choice as well as these; but the other, i. e. infants are so
far from offering themselves to either duty, or difficulty for Christ, as by
faith esteeming it better so to do then to escape, that they rather are solely
sensible of the smart, so as to gainsay, refuse and avoid it what they can, but
only that will they nill they, men make them bear it, and cross them whether
they will or no; neither can infants by faith choose, well-come or delight in
either the disease that is by dipping, or the sore that seconds circumcision,
but suffer both full sore against their wills; and whereas you say the sense of
the cross may conclude against the weakness of faith, not against the being:
that clause reasons Reasonlesly against Reason indeed, for it has neither good
sense nor reason in it to your own purpose, or ours either: the best I can make
on it for your turn is to suppose it a mere mistake, and that's the least a man
so concerned to meddle with it as I am, can well say of it, for surely Sirs if
I read it right, you write it wrong, and set down your mind in words, the sense
whereof is just contrary to your meaning: for certainly you would or at least
should have said [Against the strength or greatness of faith and you say
[Against the weakness of it] if this were but lapsus Calami, when it was penned,
yet it was lapsus animi, and Error men^ is too, to let it pass uncorrected, when
it was printed; but most of all when it was corrected after the for verily among
all the printers mistakes, which you hint to me in that corrected copy you sent
me, when you summoned me to answer your Pamphlet, there is no mention of this
mistake of the penman, who cannot impure this as an oversight, of the printer
but of the overseers themselves, which weakness (to conclude with you in your
own kind) may serve to conclude against the exercise, and eminency of your
Reason, though not against the being of Reason in you at all.

Review.
3 Why are they not after admitted to the supper?

Because the Apostle expressly requires of every one that comes to examine
Reason.
himself 1 Cor. 11. 28. Reasonless,


If any such thing were required of all that are to be baptized, they might
lawfully be barred from that.

Re-review.
Here reason demands of you why after bap^ism you admit not infants to the
supper? and good reason too for cui signum ei signatum, is a pigg of your own
sow, and

I add; cui admissio, et accessio per, et post baptismum, cui incorporatio, ei
continuatio, progressio, corporis communio fractione panis, et precibus, Acts
2. 42. cui nativitas ei facult as auctrix, nutrix; et quare non nutrimentum?

He that has the thing signified (as infants of believers appear it seems to
have to you, but not to us more then other infants i. e. indeed not at all)
must have the sign, he that has membership must have fellowship in things
pertaining to the body, he that is once born grows, and is nourished, yea (to
speak in Mr. Blakes phrase) being of the household, they must have of the food
of the household, the stewards of the mysteries of God must be accountable in
case they do deny it, why therefore should not infants have the supper?

Babist.
In answer to which I tell you that baptism is an initial sacrament of our
spiritual birth, and entrance only into the Church, of both which infants
being capable, in token thereof must be baptized so soon as they are born,
specially of spiritual parents (though that be but a fleshly birth neither,
that has no more appearance of the spirit, or spiritualnesse in it then is in
the birth of the children of the most carnal in the world) but the supper is a
sacrament of our spiritual growth, nourishment, continuance, further
establishment etc. of which infants being not so capable, are consequently not
capable of the supper till they come to age, and become men of some growth.

Baptist.
As if there is not a growth ensuing every birth, even the spiritual as well as
the natural, and as if every babe as well spiritually as naturally born, does
not continue, and desire the sincere milk i. e. to suck and receive nourishment
and relief, as if Mr. Blake were out (and so I suppose he is, but not that he
supposes himself so to be) in saying to the confutation of his fellow helpers
(as he does p. 32) that children of believers have such timly knowledge of God,
as to be sucking in somewhat of him, whilst they suck milk from the breast,
which if it be true, then if one sign belong to them, the other does also,
because the things signified severally in both do belong, and they are as
capable to eat, and to drink as to be dipped, and to know the meaning of one as
of the other, and in order to the one i. e. the supper as capable to examine
themselves, as to believe with all their hearts in order to the other i. e.
baptism, why therefore not have that sacrament of their spiritual nourishment,
as well as that sacrament of their spiritual birth? but if it be false, then
(besides the untruth of Mr. Bl^kes testimony) there is sure no such thing in
infants as spiritual growth and nourishment, and so consequently in infancy no
spiritual birth neither, and so no right in token of either to be admitted,
either to one sacrament or the other: but your reply to Reason in this place is
this viz. self-examination is to praecede in the subjects of the supper, no
such matter in the subjects of baptism.

No Sirs? are not repentance from dead works, and belief toward God with all
the heart, and confession of sins, and calling on God such kind of matters? is
not self-examination ever praevious ^o repentance Lam. 3. 40. Let us search,
and try, and turn, was there ever any confession of sin without it? yet these
things are all required in order unto baptism.

Does not Philip to one that asked him this question, why may I not be baptized?
return this answer, if thou believe with all thy heart thou may? and does
not that imply that else he might not? as much as let a man examine himself,
and so let him eat, is as much as to say or else he may not.

Babist.
That was spoken by Philip first to a man, and not to an infant, secondly, to
one man only, and not to all.

Baptist.
Was not that of Paul spoken of men only at years? yet is it reckoned by you
exclusive of infants, and why not Philips also?

Secondly if Philip spoke but to one single man, and Ananias to another, when
the one said if thou believe thou may be baptized, and the other arise and
be bapt^zed calling on the Lord etc. yet John baptist spoke to more then one,
even to all the people that came forth to his baptism, or to be baptized of him
when he said repent, and amend your lives, and they did so, and were baptized
of him in Jordan accordingly, confessing their sins i. e. they that were at all
baptized by him; and Peter said repent as well as be baptized to all that he
preached to, yea repent every one of you exempting no one from repentance, to
whom he enjoined baptism and they did so, and were baptized accordingly i. e.
as many (no more, for else its a fallacious relation) as gladly received his
word, that did not infants, therefore all this is also as exclusive of them
from baptism surely, as let a man examine himself, and so let him eat is
exclusive of them from the supper, or else I Will never trust reason more, but
f^rgo it, and become as reasonlesse as your selves.

To conclude then, in granting positively that without self-examination there
is no right of access to the supper, and also in granting it suppositively,
that if there be any thing equivalent to that required of all that are to be
baptized, then infants may lawfully be barred from baptism, you answer as
answerably to reason as men can do, or even reason it self: but in supposing
that no such thing as self-examination is required in order to baptism, as it
is to the receiving of the supper, you wretchedly bewray your
self-non-examination of the Scripture.

Review.
4. When they come to ripe years not one of millions gives testimony of his
faith Reason.
without further instruction.

Nor should he of his reasonable soul, not so much as in speaking if he be not
Reasonless.
taught.

Re-Review.
First, the faculty of not only believing in general, but also in special of
believing the Gospel, of believing in Christ to justification is belike as
naturally, and necessarily in infants of believers, as the faculty of reason it
self, so it seems by your talk, why else is that frequent analogy made by you
between these two, and such frequent allusion in proof of one of them to the
other, as if whosoever deni^s one of them viz. the grace of saving faith to be
in such infants must needs also deny the other, and as if whatsoever concludes
against such infants being believe^s concludes as much against their being
reasonable creatures? I am much amazed at your ignorance in this, specially
since your selves agree, that all infants, even those of Indians, Turks and
Pagans are reasonable creatures, and yet that few, not one of many infants are
habitually believers, as namely the infants of believers only.

Secondly I blush at your rudeness and folly in this also in that you assert,
that not one infant of millions should give any testimony of his reasonable
soul i. e. ever evidence it that he is a reasonable creature, when he comes to
ripe years, if he be not taught.

What S^s, will children never show themselves to be risible, and so
consequently reasonable by laughing, when tickt and toid with in such minority,
as they are not capable to learn in, if they be not taught and instructed how
to laugh? will they not show themselves intelligible, if not so much as in
speaking, which with you it seems is the first, and least expression of reason
in them, yet not so much as by understanding what is spoken to them? yea how
think you, must they not be imagined, and understood in some measure to be
understanding, and so consequently to have reasonable souls before they can be
rationally instructed at all? for verily he is a fool, unreasonable, and of no
understanding himself, that offers to teach children to act any act of reason,
that is to be produced by teaching, or to know their letters, or to read, or
write before they can discern them to be at least intelligible, and teachable
in these things they are to be taught in, and consequently to have reasonable
souls:

Yea verily the faculty of reason is habitus natura innatus and natura notus, a
habit that comes by generation, and puts forth it self into several acts of it
self, even so many as clearly testify it to be in us before we are at capacity
to be taught, and whether ever we be taught any thing or no, for a specimen of
reason in us must be before we begin to be endoctrinated, or else as good
endoctrinate a brute creature: but justifying faith, or belief of the Gospel is
such a habit of which we may not only say (as you do truly in the next page)
p. 18. that instruction of the understanding, in the object of it in some sort
must ^o before any act of it can be discovered, as whereby only say you
discovery of the habit can be made, but also that instruction of the
understanding in some sort must go before the habit of it can be in us at all:
for whether you will suppose it to come by infusion only, or by aquisition
only, or both, it comes not by nature and generation (as reason does) but by
teaching and instruction, if we will believe the word, which says faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

Review.
5. They lose it again when they come to more years, else why are they taught
Reason.
the element of faith?

By the same reason they should lose the faculty of understanding also, because
Reasonless.
after they are set to learning: learning is for the brin^ing forth into act,
and perfecting of the degrees; otherwise one that is at 24. years of age,
having received faith once, might give over learning more: for if this argument
might hold either they lose it, or why do they learn?

Re-Review.
H^op Sirs! what pretty, cutted stuff is here? as if you did not know well
enough, but that, for advantage sake to your crooked cause, you rather choose
here to seem ignorant of it, that teaching and learning is not only for the
further bringing forth of habits that are in us into their acts, and perfecting
of them in their degrees, but also for the begetting of some habits in us that
never were before viz. no^ natural and innate habits, as the faculty of reason
and understanding, for instruction is not for the engendring, but improving of
these in us, but all such kind of habits as faith is viz. acquired habits;
teaching tends not only, to the perfecting of such a posteriori after they are
once begun, but a priori also to the very being, and begetting of these,
whether they be habits about matters of this life, or that to come, it is true
therefore learning is to be continued for the perfecting of habits begun, and
begotten in a man, otherwise indeed (as you say) one of 24 years, having once
received the faith, need be taught no more, but it is to be also for the
beginning and begetting of faith in him, otherwise to one at 24 years of age
having not yet received it, the faith is preached by you in vain that he may
receive it.

There is a teaching to beget grace and faith where it is not, and a teaching
to increase it where it is, Mat. 28. 18. 19. a teaching before, and a teaching
after faith and baptism, and if you ask a reason of both these, the one is to
beget faith into both the habit, and the act, the other to build it up into
higher degrees, the second teaching indeed supposes a being of it in men, the
first teaching no being of it as yet when you begin first to preach to them,
for your preaching speaks to them as to unbelievers: whereupon this argument
holds good, that if ever they had faith in their infancy, they have lost it
now, for why else are they taught the element of it? why taught in order to the
receiving it? for reason in this objection must be understood as speaking
suppositively only i. e. in case persons had faith in infancy its now lost,
why else are they taught to this end that they might have it? but not so
positively as your expressions represent it, as if reason did really assert
that infants do lose any faith they had in infancy, for howbeit reason
acknowledges that such in whom faith is, may lose it if they look not to it,
yet reason knows well enough that those can never be said to lose faith, in
whom faith never was at all.

Review.
6. Habits incline more toward their proper actions, but children of
Christians are not more inclined to actions of faith then infidels. Reason.


An Argument from comparison is subject to many exceptions; caeteris paribus
being to be proved before it can hold, if the objector had considerd that among
chil dren born of the same Christian parents, under the same education, one
gives a better Reasonlesse.
specimen, not only in acts of piety, and religion, but knowledge; he would not
have concluded to the denial of the habit of faith in one, more then of the
faculty of understanding in the other. We must necessarily hold, 1. The habit
of faith must be, before it can work. 2. That the Spirit of God infuses this
habit. 3. That he is not bound to work it in the children of Christian parents,
nor barred from working it in any of the children of infidels. 4. Whersoever
this habit is, it inclines to holy actions when there is opportunity, and the
season for bringing them forth. 5. This inclination is not equally alike in all
in whom the habits themselves are. Sampson and David are sufficient instances;
David for exceeding in acts of piety and relegion. 6. Instruction of the
understanding in matter of faith in some sort, must go before any act of faith
can be discovered. Lastly, that no judgment of science can be passed till the
acts themselves be seen and examined, for a posteriore only the discovery of
habits is made. These premised, the answer is, 1. That unless it could be
certainly presumed what children have the habit, what have not, for the working
of the Spirit is not known to us, he is not bound nor barred, there can be no
conclusion made. 2. That in those children where there is less promptness to
acts of faith then in others, we cannot argue ad negationem habitus, because
they work not equally. Lastly, by this cross interrogatory, are those children
of infidels, with which the objector makes his comparison, being called and
instructed, inclined to acts of faith or not? If the former, it presupposes
they have the habit, and so the working in them, and those born of believing
parents may be one. If the later, the Argument is denied, for the children of
Christians are more inclined.

Re-Review.
This is wit whether will thou: I think he is wise that well knows either what
you say, or what to say to what you say, so reasonless are several pieces of
the return that is here rendered to reasons objection.

I speak not of a few faults, which in the first part of it escaped the press,
and made it nonsense, for those you corrected in the copy you sent to me, so
that I might do no less then do you right so far as to transprint it (as I have
done) according to your own emendation: Nec tibi Typographi crimina them vitio.

But of the faults which escaped the pen, or rather the pates of those that
composed this rambling responsion, the major part of which, whether it past
from you willingly, and ingenuously, or rashly, and unadvisedly rather I know
not, is a most flat unsaying of most of that you have said before; and much of
what you say again in the next page after, and an acknowledgement of the clear
contrary to that, which you have hitherto tugged for, and which you pursue the
proof of well-nigh throughout your whole Pamphlet, an absolute overturning of
the basis on which your book builds infants baptism, which is this assertion,
viz. That it sufficiently appears that these little infants in particular have
faith, meaning infants of believers in contradistinction to those of Turks and
Pagans, whom as concerning their original condition, and their birthright to
salvation you rather rank with the Devils, then with the children of
Christians; I say a plain deponing of that position you ground all on, viz.
that it is apparent the infants you sprinkle do believe, and so a serving of our
turn as much as we desire; and as for that little which seems not so directly
for us, though by reason of, not the profundity (for it is shallow enough) but
the darkness, and muddiness of the matter, it be hard to see clearly to the
bottom of it, yet if I do truly sound the sense of it, and reach to the utmost
of your meaning in it, it seems to speak as little for your selves.

You tell us first, that an Argument from comparison is subject to many
objections, and cannot hold, unless caeteris paribus be first proved; whereby
you subject the most of your own Arguments in the present point to exception,
for I appeal to your selves, and all men to judge, whether they are not mostly
drawn from comparisons between the children of the Jews, and the children of
Gentile believers, the circumcision of the one, and baptism of the other; and
yet caeteris paribus is not at all proved by you to this hour, nor yet ever can
be, since caeteris imparibus, I mean disagreement almost in all things between
Jews children and Christians, between circumcision and baptism is so
manifestly made appear by us, that there hardly appears any analogy at all
between them. Besides,

Secondly, So far as to the freeing of this Argument from comparison between
infidels and Christians infants, so as that it may hold without any exception,
caeteris paribus is granted by your selves, for if by this parity in other
things you mean an equality of souls by creation, your selves assert that
parity but a page above, viz. p. 16. where you say all souls are equal in
their creation, and so the souls of believers and unbelievers infants.

But thirdly, If by parity in other things, which you would have proved, you
mean an equallity in their natural capacities, and endowments of wit and
ingenuity, then either there is such a parity in infants of Christians and
infidels, or else so far as disparity is, the excellency may much rather of the
two be supposed to be in the children of Christians, in whom yet caeteris
paribus, suppose them to have the same education, and instruction, there is no
more inclination to believe in Christ by verrue of any habit of faith infused
into them in infancy above the other, then there is in the children of Indians.

Next you tell us, If the Objector had considered etc. he would not have
concluded thus as he does, The objector you say is Reason, so that Reason
belike was much besides it self in arguing so unreasonably against your fiction
of faith in the Infants of Christians; but what if Reason should consider the
very same, that you here wish it would, must its conclusion against the belief
of believers infants be thereupon ere a whit the more unconcluded? and what
though among children born of the same Christian parents, under the same
education, one gives a better specimen, not only in acts of piety and
religion, but of knowledge also, may not therefore the habit of faith be more
groundedly denied to be in one, then the faculty of understanding can be
denied to be in the other.

What still Sirs? still will you make the being of faith in the infants of
Christians of equal necessity with the being of the principle of reason and
faculty of understanding in infants? the faculty of understanding is an innate
habit necessarily to be concluded, and that in the highest degree to be in all
infants, it is in omni, per se, qua ipsum, but faith in Christ is by your own
confession, but an infused habit, and by your own confession as not in all
infants, so in you know not which, and which not till you see them act it: and
yet by your own conclusion (to go round again) it is in such not in such, viz.
not at all in Turks and Pagans infants (for they are all in a damnable
condition with you) but in all infants of Christians, even such as yet give no
specimen of it, and that so necessarily, that a man may as truly deny that
which is natural to them, even the faculty of understanding, as deny the habit
of faith to be in them.

Next in order to a fuller, and more direct answer you prepare the way by a
panel of six or seven positions, which you say you must necessarily hold,
concerning two or three of which we may say its no great matter whether you
hold them or no, for any undoubted, and infallible truth that is to be found in
them, in the sense wherein you take them, or at least for any great matter of
assistance, that acrues to your cause by them, and as for the rest, of which
you say you must necessarily hold them, you might have said rather you must
necessarily yield them to us, for indeed they are the giving up of your cause,
and no other then the drawing of a dash with your own pen over all that ever
you say, throughout the residue of your works, as concerning that sufficient
appearance of faith, you assert to be in believers infants: yea he is blind
that does not see you thereby perfectly blotting out again, what ever you
penned in that particular with your own hands.

First say you the habit of faith must be before it can work, I know no
necessity of holding this for truth, neither indeed would you hold it but that
you imagine faith to be another kind of habit then it is, for there are more
kinds of habits then one, though you speak of habit by the lump all along, as
if you were aware of but one, for here is ore and ore again, habit, habit, habit,
habit, habit, but not the least hint of what kind of habit you mean; you are
never the men that distinguish of habits, whereas qui been distinguit been
docet, there being some habits acquired, and obtained no otherwise then by
acting, and faith it self is such a habit, as will hardly be proved (for all
your confidence in the contrary) to be any other, at least to be apparent in
any one, or visible to the view of others till some act thereof has past the
persons in whom it is, neither is any one in the world, that I know of
habitually a believer in Christ, till having heard of him or his word he does
actually believe.

Secondly, whereas you say the spirit of God infuses this habit; I grant he
infuses it, if you take the word infuse in a true sense i. e. for begetting it
in persons by the preaching of the word, other infusion of faith (if yet that
may be properly called infusion, which is a phrase rather of your own coining
in this case) the word knows none: God indeed gives it, but he gives it in the
way of hearing the word of faith, in the way of hearing Christ preached, in
which way he never gave it to infants, neither is it his gift to them in any
other. the spirit works it, but not without the use of means, not per saltum.
and in (...) ocul. i. e. so suddenly as you fancy, but by the discharge of that
office he bears from the father to that end and purpose, toward the whole
world, i. e. moving, striving, persuading inwardly, whilst the word does
without, inlightning, convincing a man of sin in himself, of righteousness to
be had, and of a judgment to come, wherein we shall be saved, or damned
according as we believe, or believe not, accept, or neglect so great salvation;
upon which motions and convictions, which are stricter and stronger in some
then in other four, some yield, and believe, and obey the Gospel, and some for
all this rebel and obey not, so that it is true the spirit thus effects the
business within us yet not so as that he is said wholly to do it without us; he
is the supreme efficient, the operative cause of it, but we are to be
concurrent cum causa operante, we have a part to do as well as he, when he has
done his part toward us, i. e. to believe, which if we do not, he will not
force us, he will go no further, nor shall he be blamed, but we, and we not
only blamed, but damnd for not doing it accordingly: but if we do believe, and
turn at his reproof; then indeed there is a promise of an infusion, or rather
effusion of the spirit in other i. e. those more special and peculiar offices,
of a witness to our spirits, that we are Gods children, a seal, a comforter, a
reve^ler of the things freely given us of God, a supporter under sufferings
etc. all which it performs toward the Saints, and in respect of which only
its called the holy spirit of promise Ephesians. 1. 13. in this manner the spirit of
God in order to that sweet infusion of it self into us may be said (if you will
call it infusion, for which a fitter word may be found) to infuse i. e. to work
faith, other infusion of faith into men, much less into infants, or such a
downright infusion as I suppose you dream on, the Scripture makes no mention of
at all.

Thirdly in that you say he is not bound to work it in all the children of
Christian parent, nor barred from working it in any of the children of
infidels: this indeed you must necessarily hold (as you say) for it is undeniable
truth, but in holding it you must wholly let go ^ll you held before, concerning
believers infants appearing to have faith, and that in contradistinction to the
infants of unbelievers; for first you use to say as p. 14. out of Act. 2. that
the promise of it is to believers, and their seed, i. e. as believers seed, and
so consequently to all, and only their seed, not the seed of unbelievers: for
quod convenit qua ipsum, convenit omni, soli, semper, belongs always, to all
of one sort, and not any man of another, and thereby you use to bind the spirit
(unless he will be unfaithful) to work faith, as without which you think he
cannot give them salvation, in all the seed of believers, for a promise that is
made to such or such a seed (qu^ si^) must needs be sure as the Scripture says
Romans 4. 16. and made good (or else God that cannot lie breaks his word) to
all the seed to whom (as such) it is made.

But since now you say that the spirit is not bound to give faith and salvation
to believers seed, nor barred from giving it to any of the seed of infidels,
which is as much as to say he is at liberty from all obligation of himself by
promise to either of these above the other, and to work it in which he pleases,
you will I hope (unless you be more ashamed of seeming to have been ignorant,
then ashamed of your ignorance, so as to give glory to God by confessing it)
relinquish that wonted position of a birth privilege in this point, in
believers seed, more t^en in others, which you ground and prove from that
promise A^t. 2. and ingenuously confess, that for ought you know the one has
no more ingagemeat of God to them by promise then the other: so that unless
there were more warrant then you have to single out one from the other as the
special subjects of baptism, and heirs of salvation, you ought to baptize them
all alike i. e. in very deed to let them all alone till you come, as in infancy
you confess you cannot, to presume what children have the habit of faith, and
what have not.

Fourthly, whereas you say wheresoever the habit of faith is, it inclines to
holy actions, when there ^s opportunity and the season for bringing them forth:
whether this be necessary to be held or no, yet weel hold it to do you a
pleasure, in calling you thereby from your false cause, for else its like to do
you more displeasure in your cause of infants faith, then you well considered,
when you penned and printed it: for wheresoever faith is, the opportunity and
season for its bearing fruit, and working by love and other holy actions is
ever present and perpetual: yea its never unopportune or unseasonable for him
that has faith to be acting obedience in one thing or other: yea if any one
say I have faith and have not works, and holy actions, much less, if no
inclinablenesse to holy actions, that faith cannot save, nor stand him instead
faith without works being dead and profiting nothing: therefore if where ever
faith is it inclines to holy actions when opportunity and season for it is,
then I am sure there is no faith at all in infants, for there is no opportunity
or season at all in infancy, wherein faith is found fruitful in them: and if
you will say they have faith though you have no evidence of it, and prove it is
so because it is so, then it is a faith without works, and that faith is dead,
unprofitable and cannot save them, James 2. and if so, you would be better
opinioned toward infants in my mind, to hold them saved without faith, then to
hold they have a faith which cannot save them, for better never a whit at all
then never the better.

Fifthly, whereas you say that this inclination to holy actions is not equally
alike in all, in whom the habits themselves are, that may be so too, yet
Sampson and David are no such sufficient instances of it, but that more
sufficient might have been given, for as there are many worthy things recorded
which both these did by the power of faith, Heb. 11. so he of whom you say he
exceeded in acts of piety was in some things, not to say as impious, yet
impious as well as the other; besides to make comparisons between two such
worthies, as doing, the one more good, the other less, both which by faith did
no less the subdue, and in their times fully deliver Israel from the
Philistines, for which the spirit is pleased to record, and recommend them both
as examples to all ages, and rank them among others, of whom the world was not
worthy, in one line Heb. 11. 32. caeteris paribus unproved too, such comparison
(if any be so) is beyond all comparison odious, and subject to many exceptions,
but be it all just as you have said it, yet as little yields it to the support
of your infant faith, and childish baptism, as if you had said nothing at all.

Sixthly, whereas you say that instruction of the understanding in matter of
faith in some sort must go before any act of faith can be discovered.

And seventhly and lastly, that no judgment of science can be passed i. e.
true demonstration made of this habit of faith till the acts themselves be
seen, and examined, and that a posteriore only the discovery of habits is
made, and then from all these preparative premises draw up your conclusive
answer in three heads answering thus in the first place viz.

That it cannot be certainly presumed what children have faith, what have not,
and that the working of the spirit in that particular is not known to us, and
ore again also that the spirit is not bound nor barred, and therefore there can
be no conclusion made.

I say it is all necessarily to be held for truth, yea it is a truth so preciously
pertinent to our purpose against the purpose of your own pamphlet, that had we
been to conclude in a little compass all that need be said toward the
appearance of this position viz. that it does not sufficiently appear by any
evidence of it in their infancy, that infants of believers have faith, any more
then other infants, we could not in so few words have spoken so pithily to such
a purpose, which when I consider, I cannot but wonder, and conceive you will
once wonder at your selves, when your eyes are open, that they whose words all
these are should act against them all, so absurdly, as to make it the biggest
business throughout their book, to make it appear and that sufficiently, that
believers infants have faith beyond other infants.

Babist.
A charitable judgment concerning their having faith is sufficient to admit
them to baptism, and that is the utmost that we assert can be had of their
belief, not a judgment of certainty.

Baptist.
A judgment of charity that there is faith in persons sufficiently, warrantably,
and certainly grounded is sufficient to baptize upon, and such is that
judgment on which we baptize, who baptize none, but such as the word requires
us to believe to be believers i: e. such as personally profess so to be, and of
such as those, though we have but a judgment of charity concerning their
faith, yet have we from precept and president out of the word a judgment of
certainty concerning their right to baptism, but a judgment of charity taken
up on mere fancy and conceit, without warrant from, or rather against both
Scripture and reason, warrants no man to dispense baptism upon it, as from God,
for if it do I may as well baptize the great Turk as a little infant, and no
better is your judgment of charity concerning faith in little infants, upon
which you attempt to baptize them.

Babist.
Our charity is better grounded then so, yea far better than yours, as certain
as it is, and is as due to children of believing parents, as to persons at
years; for we have Gods testimony concerning them in this matter, whilst you
have but man's testimony concerning himself, yea Christ has amply declared his
good will to them in Scripture, whose testimony is not only Tanta-mount, but
to be preferred before men's, from which it more plainly appears, that infants
have faith, then the testimony of any particular person can make it appear for
himself.

Baptist,
So you say indeed both before page 5. and behind p. 19. but how dare you
assert then that you go not about to prove certainly, but only probably that
believers infants do believe, for verily if it be so as you say that God
himself gives testimony for them in Scripture, that these little infants do
believe, then never say no judgment of science can be passed, no discovery
made of the habit of faith, nor peremptory presuming what infants have faith,
and what not till you see them act it: for Gods testimony is more credible then
man's indeed, has he said it and is it not so? yea verily let him be true, but
every man a liar; for man's own word can create but probability and charity, and
not so much neither, unless he speak it from Gods word that believers infants
do believe, and in fidels infants do not, but if God have said so, then cursed
be he that will not believe it to be so, for if his word be not perfectly
demonstrative, and scientifical and past all doubt, (but I confess I find not
a word of his concerning such a thing) then I Will never trust self confuting
Clergy men any more.

2. Whereas you answer that in those children, where there is less promptness
to acts of faith then in others, we cannot argue ad negationem habitus, because
they work not equally.

What is this to the present question and position concerning no more
inclinablenesse to holy actions in children of Christians, then of insidels?
for those are such of whom your selves assert the one have faith, the other
have none: but these you speak of now are adult ones, such as in whom there is
some promptness to acts of faith appearing, differenced only secundum magis and
minus, some inclining more some less to acts of faith, concerning all whom,
since those of them that have least promptness, have at least an apparent
promptness to acts of faith, who denies but that they may have faith, though
they work not equally? but what is this to the proof of more, or less
inclinablenesse to holy actions among infants, who are so far from having some
more some less, that even none of them have any promptness thereto at all?

3. Whereas you fiddle it on a little further, and think to coop us up by your
cross interrogatory, you may well call it a cross one indeed, for its a net
that catches your selves, let us answer it which way soever you would have us.

For if we say heathens infants are inclined to acts of faith, and should make
that good against you, as we shall hardly ere trouble our selves to do, unless
we did believe it to be truth, can you give any just account of your denial of
baptism to these? yea who can forbid water why they may not be baptized, that
have and are inclined to act faith as well as the other, and in whom as in
those of believing parents the work is palpably at least possibly and probably
the very same?

But if we say no, infidels infants are not inclined, then we must take what
comes on it, for you are resolved to hit us home indeed, and so you do, while
you do that at last cast, which had you done at first, you had saved your
selves a deal of hurt, which you have done your selves, by circumlocuting so
long in way of proving the very Minor proposition of that last Argument which
Reason urged against you, viz. that Christians children are not more inclined
to actions of faith then those of infidels; for at last you fall flatly as your
safest way to deny that Minor, and assert contrarily thereto, that children of
Christians are more inclined to holy actions, then other children, which if it
be true.

First how grossly do you contradict that you say in the lines above, where you
seem to grant that there may be more inclinablenesse in infidels children, and
promptness to holy actions then in Christians?

Secondly, I wonder how you come to be experienced in it, for if you Clergy
men be all Christians, and so you are in your own account, your children
(excepting some that by the breeding you give them, grow up to the same stamp
of Christianity you print upon them) do (for all their native holy
inclinations) not seldom prove the lewdest and rudest of any men's children in
a Country; for not only through the Priests and Prophets own practice, but
from their posterity too often times profaneness goes out into all the world, or
else the Popes had never filled it with iniquity as they have done. The next
objection of Reason is as follows.

Review.
7. Faith comes by hearing. Reason.


Little children cannot hear, must less understand.

Ergo they have no faith. Reasonlesse.


They might also conclude they have no faculty of understanding neither, for
that comes by hearing: but infants have an hearing, the spirit opens their ears
he must do it in adultis, or for all their hearing they will never believe. He
is not tied to means though we are, without the outward hearings of the Word he
works faith in little children. The manner of his working is miraculous, as it
is in the conversion of every soul, enough has been said to that before; nor
ought it to be objected, if miraculous then not ordinary; for the work of the
spirit in the conversion of men is both.

Re-Review.
Had Reason had the managing, representing and writing of this Argument her
self, she would not have set it down in so weak, absurd and silly a manner, as
Reasonlesse has done it in in this place.

Reason never held such a thing yet as is asserted in this Minor, viz. that
children cannot hear, much less understand, for abstract hearing from
understanding, and take these two in sensu diviso (as you do here) and children
can hear; but in sensu composito they cannot: it cannot rationally nor truly be
said they cannot so much as hear, much less understand, but they cannot hear
so as to understand, or they cannot hear understandingly, as those must that
hear in order to believing, and whose faith comes by hearing: a hearing it is
true infants have, for they are not destitute of that sense, more then of
seeing, and the rest: Auriculas Asini quis non habet? the same hearing, that an
Ass, horse, or other bruit beast has, which is only the sound of words,
without the knowledge of the sense, who has not, save he that is deaf but the
hearing they have is neither such as Paul speaks of there, nor yet that heating
you say they have, viz. an inward hearing of the voice of Christ, and the
spirit opening their ears so as to make them learn things as adult ones do,
that is a mere figment, of your own fancies: besides if they had such an
internal hearing as you dream of, what were that to the matter in hand, or to
the answering the objection, that is grounded upon the alleged Scripture,
which speaks not of an inward but an outward hearing the word of God preached,
as that by which faith is begotten, and without which it cannot come? out of
which outward way and means if persons be brought to believe as usually as by
it (and so it must needs be if little infants believe by the understanding of
certain secret whisperings and teachings within) the spirit would not have
spoken of it, as such an unpossible case as he does, in saying how can they
believe on him of whom they have not heard? and how hear without a Preacher?

But say you that is the usual means, by which faith is begotten in adult ones
but the spirit is not tied to means though we are, he works faith in little
children without the outward hearing of the word.

Is it so Sirs, that the spirit is not tied to work by means in little
children, in the same cases, wherein he works by means in men, and women? I
wonder then that you, whose opinion this is, should be so forgetful, as to
teach quite contrary to your own tenet, for verily of all the men that are, I
know none that limit the spirit, and tie him to means in his dealings with
little infants, like unto your selves.

As for us we own this position fully, and to a tittle viz. that what God acts
at all for infants, he acts without means, as to their salvation, but as for
your selves you own and disclaim this by turns, according as it seems to serve
your own turns: so far as to hold it helps to hold up your monstrous odd
opinion of infants faith, which has no footing at all in Scripture, you
inwardly entertain it, and outwardly proclaim it for undoubted truth: but when
you find it makes against you, then it is no other then a figment of the
Anabaptists, for when we tell you there is no right to baptism without faith,
but infants cannot believe, because faith comes by hearing understandingly the
word preached, which infants cannot do then such of you as Rantize infants on
such a sottish supposition, as their having faith in themselves, excuse the
matter thus viz.

The spirit is not tied to means, nor to the outward way of hearing the word,
so but that though he begets men to faith that way, and by that means, yet he
begets infants to believe without it: and such of you as ashamed to assert that
the infants themselves have faith, do Rantize them on the fathers faith without
their own, excuse the matter thus viz.

The spirit is not bound to admit infants to baptism in that same way wherein
he admits men, viz. the way of faith, but admits infants to have right to it
without that outward means of believing:

But when we tell you faith and baptism are the way wherein, and the outward
means by which the spirit justifies and saves men and women, but without this
outward way of faith and baptism, he can and does save dying infants, and that
the spirit is not tied to the same means of belief and baptism, in the
justifying and saving infants through Christ, by which, and which only he
saves men, then you plainly disclaim what you proclaimd for truth before viz.
the spirit is not tied to means in infants, but works without them in infants,
though not in men, and hold that he does work by means among them so, that
there is no hope to be had by parents of the salvation of their infants, out of
the way of baptism, and no justification of them ou^ of the way of belief.

Thus you tie and unty, confine and lose the spirit at your pleasure, you give
him leave, for your own lusts sake, either to approve of your baptism of
children out of his own declared and only approved way of faith, or if it be
needful as some of you think it is, for infants to believe in order to
baptism, then to beget faith without that outward means of hearing the word,
but though it is his own good will to justify and save dying infants by Christ
without the outward means of faith and baptism, there he is limited, and
cannot obtain your good will, he must give way to you to baptize infants, out
of that ordinary way of faith, wherein his will is that men shall be baptized:
but he may not save infants out of the ordinary way of faith and baptism,
wherein his will is that men by Christ shall be saved, no not by any means in
the world.

There Is but a matter of four gross, false, unsound, and absurd assertions in
this reasonless reply, which I must entreat you to be ashamed of before I leave
it.

The first is that old piece of sing song, which is canted ore some three or
four times before, but would be rather recanted, if you were not resolved on
perseverance in perverseness; wherein you tune it out as if faith in Christ,
and the faculty of understanding were both so con-naturally and con-necessarily
in believers infants, and them only, that we may as rationally and safely
conclude neither to be in them, as not both.

This blue vain of artificial nonsense keeps its course well nigh throughout
this whole discourse of yours against reason, so that every foot when reason
alleges any thing that's clearly conclusive against the being of belief in
Christ in believers infants, as namely their not knowing good and evil, their
giving no testimony of faith when at years without instruction, nor upon
instruction neither sometimes, so much as the adult children of unbelievers,
their not having any faith at all for the most part, witness your
successelessenesse in your preachings to your parishes to beget it, whereby it
is evident, that either they never yet had it when rantized, or else have lost
it if they had, their non inclinablenesse to believe (caeteris paribus) more
then other peoples children, their uncapablenesse to hear the word with
understanding, which is the only way and means, whereby the word declares faith
to be given, and to be gotten, you answer all along (Cuckoo-like) in one tone,
and that's this viz.

That by the same reason we may conclude against the faculty of understanding
in them, and against their having a reasonable soul, as if it were full as
clear, and altogether as absurd to doubt that these infants have faith (which
yet your selves confess you cannot presume, what infants have, and what h^ve
not) as to doubt that they have the reasonable soul, which is notoriously known
to every Novice in very nature to be in all mankind by nature without
exception, and that so also, as essentially to difference them from other
creatures.

The second remaining and remarkable absurdity is this viz. in that you most
shamelessely assert that the faculty of understanding comes to persons by the
same way and means, whereby justifying faith comes, and no other i. e. by
hearing the word preached, for when reason argues against infants believing
thus viz. faith comes by hearing the word of God, but infants cannot hear so as
to understand the word of God preached, Ergo, not believe; you reply thus viz.

They might also conclude they have no faculty of understanding neither, for
that i. e. the faculty of understanding comes by hearing i. e. as faith does, O
prodigious piece of priestly prudence! did ever any; but men minded to manifest
their folly to all men, utter such a thing, that the faculty of understanding
comes, as faith in Christ viz. by hearing the word of God, are not the
faculties of the soul of man, I say the faculties of it, i. e. the faculty of
understanding, the faculty of the will so inseparable from it, so essential to
it that a person is neither sooner nor longer a reasonable soul, then it has
these? I confess that Plus notitiae, or acquisitio ul^erioris intelligentiae,
increase of knowledge, and the obtaining of more and more understanding may
come by hearing, wherein the faculty of understanding being set on work, not
only exercises, but improves it self also, and comes to act it self on more
intelligible objects then before, now newly discovered to it, but that Ipsa
facult as intelligendi, or ipse intellect us, the very faculty of understanding
it self, which comes by nature, and generation, and is as essentially in man,
as the reasonable soul it self, does come by hearing, is such a mess of matter,
as was never heard of to this hour, nor can I conceive what kind of hearing any
faculty of the soul can come by, since the understanding and will must both be
known to be in persons, and they thereby to be both reasonable, intelligible
and eligible creatures before they can be fit subjects to be spoken to, and
before intelligible, or eligible objects can reasonably, seasonably, or any
other wise then senslessely be propounded to them in preaching, neither, if at
all they had such a monstrous kind of inward teaching from the spirit, as you
talk of, can they have even that teaching, before they have the faculty of
understanding, for that teaching must be at least after they have a being, but
they are not in being sooner then the faculty of understanding has a being in
them: yea in order of time the sense of hearing it self is not in us before it.

And howbeit the Axiom be true, if rightly taken, Nil est in intellectu quod
non prius fuerit in sensu, the understanding apprehends nothing, which some
sense or other does not first some way or other apprehend, yer still the
faculty of understanding, whereby we conceive, and the will whereby we receive,
begin to be in us at least as soon as the senses, whereby we outwardly perceive
i. e. as we our selves begin to be.

Thirdly, other ridiculous silly stuff, that with the rest this section is
stufft with, is this, in that you would seem to make the spirits converting,
and begetting little children to faith to be some strange miraculous, and more
mavelous piece of business then his converting and begetting faith in grown
persons, because in infants he uses not that ordinary means, whereby he
converts men; without the outward preaching of the word (say you) he works
faith in little children, his manner of working i. e. in little children is
miraculous, and yet when all comes to all, instead of proving (as one might
very well expect you should do) that the conversion of infants is such a
different, transcendent and wonderful matter, ore that of men is, you confess
plainly in the very next words, that the conversion of every soul, is a matter
as miraculous as that: as also above p. 16. where your words are these, the
renovation of a soul (meaning of any souls of either adult ones, or infants)
is no less a miracle then that of the resurrection of the dead, which you mind
us of here also, saying, enough has been said to that before, and I say too
much, unless it were bee^ter, for they are both alike egregiously absurd, and
full of falsehood: as for the conversion of infants, at 7. or 8. 9. or 10. days
old, for then you sprinkle them upon that account, it is a figment, a mere Ens
rationis, and yet I can hardly call it so, so little reason is in it, unless I
may call a non entity so, or that which never has a being any further then in
the brains that broac hit, in a word nothing at all, and therefore no
miraculous thing at all, for that which is not, is not a miracle: and for the
conversion of men unto the faith of Christ, it is so far from being miraculous,
that of the two, though indeed neither of them is properly a miracle, it is
more to be admired rather, that no more persons are converted, and that
considering the pains, patience, and goodness of God, that leads to
repentance, the plain dispensations of himself to men in promises, and threats,
and discoveries of the way of their peace, they should yet be so obstinate and
unbelieving.

It was wonderful and mavelous indeed that the Jews (for the most part) did
not believe in the wilderness, for all they saw so many of Gods wonderful
works; but no wonder that some few of them did: herein is a mavelous thing
that ye know not whence Christ is, i. e. own him not by faith, as the son of
God (says the man Ioh. 9. 30.) and yet he has opened mine eyes: it was not so
marvelous that men believed in Christ, when they heard his words, and saw his
works, but much rather because they believed not, Act. 13. 41. it is wonderful
when Gods works are not believed though declared, yea Christ himself is
therefore said to marvel at their unbelief, Mark 6. 6. it is not mavelous that
some men see and accept of excellent things, when they are shown and tendered to
them, but that most men seeing do not see them, much less is a persons
believing as great a miracle, as the resurrection of the body from the dead,
for then it was as great a miracle that many Jews believed on Christ, when they
saw him raise Lazarus, as it was that he raised him from the dead, which thing,
who ever does believe, I believe him in that particular to be a marvelous
unwise man for his labor, it being rather no less then mavelous stupidity,
that when they saw Christ's marvelous works, yet for all that they did not
believe on him.

Besides if every conversion of a sinner to the faith be a miracle, the gif^ of
working miracles is given to men as commonly in these days, as in the
Apostles, for how usual a thing is it now for men by the gift, that is in them,
and given them from above as instruments under God (and no other were they that
wrought miracles) to convert sinners from the evil of their ways? but that
cannot be granted by you however, who cry out that the working of miracles was
an extraordinary gift, that has ceased since the times of the Apostles;
finally the conversion of souls of men to faith by the preaching of the word is
that, which is effected ordinarily, and therefore is not miraculous, for
ordinary and miraculous are clear contrary, so that they do rather (...)
invicem, then are capable to be denominated of one thing both at once, for an
ordinary thing is not only that, which comes to pass usually, and frequently,
but chiefly which is accomplished secundum ordinem, according ^o a common order
of means, and constant course of second causes, as faith in infants does not,
being wrought (if at all) without the outward means, as your selves confess,
and even thereupon, and in that very respect here called miraculous, and if I
could ever see such a thing at all (as neither you nor I ever did) I should say
it were a miracle indeed, to see an infant believe on him, of whom
understandingly they never heard, but Miracles are such things, which as they
are done more rarely then other things, so when they are done, it is (if not
contra) yet at least praeter, extra, supra ordinem, either against, or besid^s,
or out of, or above the usual way, not keeping the accustomed use of means, nor
process of second causes.

Fourthly, whereas to back one absurdity with another you assert the work of
the spirit, in the conversion of men, i. e. adult ones, which is by outward
means, to be both ordinary and miraculous, I judge it to be as very a Bull as
ever was conceived, and gendred in the brains, or calved out of the mouth of
man.

Review.
8. The only Scruple is the making it appear concerning particular children,
Reason.
which are brought to be baptized, whether they have faith or no, for say the
Anabaptists faith is an inseparable condition required in persons to be
baptized and we know not the heart nor the work of the spirit.

Though enough has been said to this in the disputation, yet these two things
Reasoulesse.
are added for further satisfaction.

1. That true faith is not required in every one to be baptized, for then none
but justified persons should be baptized, and those that are apostates
afterward, must be said to fall totally and finally from grace.

2. That a charitable judgment concerning their having faith is sufficient to
admit them to baptism, which judgment is as due to children of believing
parents, as to any of years that make profession.

First, because the Scripture has so amply declared the good will of Christ to
them, which is tantamount to any ones single profession of himself.

Secondly, because we know nothing against any particulars, whereby they should
be excepted from such judgment.

Re-Review.
You begin first to storm the rear or last clause of that Argumentative matter,
which you have here charged upon the Anabaptists, as their opinion: but you
might have spared that pains if you had pleased, for those you call Anabaptists
assert not such a thing, as that is, they say not that faith, but that an
outward appearance or profession of faith is an inseparable condition required
in persons before they be baptized by them, for they know not what belief is in
the heart, but as confession of Christ is made with the mouth, and profession
of him in the words and works: whether therefore persons have faith or not, and
whether there be any (as he that is blind ^ees no such) that receive the truth
in truth for a time, and after fall totally from it, that is neither here nor
there to us, in this case, for if there be inwardly no dram of faith at all,
yet if there be such an outward serious profession made of it, that we
thereupon (I say again) thereupon, and not on charity misgrounded, can judge it
to be, we are excused in baptizing such hypocrites and apostates, and their
coming to holy things with unhallowed hearts will be not upon us, but
themselves, but if there be never so much faith in the heart, and no profession
of it without, whereby it appears concerning this and that particular person,
that he believes, so far as we can discern, God will not hold us guiltless in
baptizing such persons for taking his name in vain.

That opinion therefore of a necessity of faiths being really in persons, as
well as a profession of it before we may bapt^ze them, Re^nlesse might as well
have written under his own head, as under the head of Reason, for that is owned
no more by one then by the other, it is a real profession of it, that in foro
hominum gives admission and warrants the administration, which because it
neither is, nor can be made by any particular infant, and consequently no
appearance made, that it has faith, therefore infants may not be baptized.

This indeed remains a scruple unremoved by you to this very hour, or is
rather a matter unscrupled and altogether undoubted by us, viz. that it cannot
be made appear concerning this or that particular infant (suppose any one of
them you sprinkle) that it has any faith at all.

You tell us enough has been said to this in the Disputation, I tell you that
more then enough is said against it in the Disprobation: yet since you are
pleased to add as little as can be in further satisfaction, I shall add as much
as need be in further refutation of your folly.

You say that a Charitable judgment concerning this or that particular persons
having faith (for your proof now is to be de individuo) is sufficient to admit
them to baptism, and that this judgment is as due to children of Christian
parents i.e. every particular amongst them, that are brought to be baptized as
to any a^ years that m^ke profession.

It seems then that the believing parents personal profession of his own
personal belief, which is that only whereby we judge him to be a believer,
does prove himself to us to be a believer, not one jot more plainly, then it
proves all his children (if he has never so many) to be believers as well as
he, and that we are bound by duty to judge all the children of a professor to
have faith, as certainly as we may judge that professor himself to have it, for
the same judgment of charity that is due to professed believers is (say you)
equally, and every whit as due to such believers children.

Are you not ashamed of such a blind business as this? what does a man's
personal visible acting, and professing of faith discover it to others that the
habit of faith (as you call it) is in himself, no further then it discovers it
to be also in his children? did you not say but the very next page above that
no judgment of science concerning a persons having faith, can be passed, till
the acts of faith themselves, which are never seen in infants, are seen and
examined? which is as much as to say that when the acts are seen and examined,
as they may be in men, then a judgment of science may be past on them; do you
not say that the discovery of the habit of faith to be in infants is made only
a posteriore i. e. only by their future professings, and personal actings of
it? which is as much as to say when children come once to act faith, then it
may appear and be known that faith is in them, but tell then, or in their
infancy it cannot appear to be in them: do you not say it cannot be certainly
presumed what children have faith, what have not, the working of the spirit
being not known to us, and the spirit himself not bound to work faith in all
the children of Christian parents, nor barrd from working it in any children of
infidels, and tha^ there can be no conclusion made of this thing, which infants
have faith, which have no^? which is as much as to say, that though it may be
more certainly concluded, presumed and judged concerning men at years, who
have, and who have not faith, yet the same does not appear concerning infants
in infancy; are not these your own sayings but a few lines above? and yet for
all that have you so soon forgot your selves, as to unsay it all again in this
page, where you engage to make it appear concerning the particular children,
which are brought to be baptized, that they have faith, and to determine that
in charity we are bound to judge faith to be in believers infants, as much as
we are bound in charity to judge it to be in the believing parents themselves,
that make profession? and such judgment is as due to one of these as to the
other? were there ever such contradictions as these committed to paper before?

But lets us examine your reason why we are to judge faith to be in these
infants, as we are to judge it to be in any that make profession, you say
because the Scripture has so amply declared the good will of Christ to them,
which is Tantamoun^ to any ones single profession of himself.

I answer, that the Scripture declares the good will of Christ to little
children in general, without exception, and not to one more then another, but
what is this to prove any of them to have faith? much more what is it to the
proving and making it appear that this and that particular infant has faith
(which is the matter now in hand) when other infants have it not? or to prove
believe^s infants to have it exclusively of the infants of unbelievers? yet you
say this declaration of Scripture, which your selves confess p. 5. declares
concerning infants in general, proves this or that single infant, in
contradistinction to others, to have faith as sufficiently as any ones single
profession proves it concerning his single self, Nay this report of Scripture
makes it appear (say you most ^ottishly p. 5.) that infants have faith, more
then the particular profession of any, whom we admit to baptism, can make it
appear of himself; and yet (to go round again) a p^steriore only i. e. by
profession of it only the discovery of the habit of faith is made: O curious
criss-crosse!

The second reason you here give, why a charitable judgment concerning their
faith is due to these particular infants, and not others i. e. infants of
believe^s, and not unbelievers is this viz.

Because you say we know nothing against any particular infants why they should
be accepted from such a judgment.

To which I answer.

Do you know any thing against the particular infant of an heathen? if this be
a reason upon which we are to judge any infants in particular to have faith,
because we know nothing againstany particular, it is a reason upon which we are
in charity to judge all particular infants in the world to have faith as well
as any, yea the infants of infidels as well as Christians: for who knows any
thing more against the infant of an infidel in his infanny, whereby he should
be excepted from our charitable opinion of him, then he knows against the
infant of a Christian? especially (that I may to your confutation conclude
against you in your own words p. 5. 6.) since it cannot appear that one of
these more then the other, has by any ^ctual sin barred himself, and deserved
to be exempted from the general sta^e of little infants declared in the
Scripture, viz. that the kingdom of heaven belongs to them.

So, having run through and repelled that rout of responsives that would not be
ruled by reason, I come now to enter skirmish with your Scarecrow, for verily
what follows is no other then a false Alarm, a sound of words, a number of
Iacke^s and Breeches stuffed with stubble, and bombasted into the shape of men in
arms to fright fools at a distance.

Review.
We shall only present to the Christian Reader those horrid sins, this wretched
error of the Anabaptists involves men in, and so for bear to be further
troublesome; it may be the sight will make many tremble and forsake their
tents, and not suffer them to be so frolic about the h^le of the Asp, or play
with the Leviathan, and walk upon the ridge of thos^ Alps, whose Praecipice is
so fearful.

Re-Review,
Bona verba quaeso, and not thunder without lightning.

Review.
1. It makes them deny their first ^aith, with their baptism, for there is but
one faith (says the Apostle) and one baptism Ephesians. 4. 5,

Re-review.
Alias it makes them first confess, and visibly profess that one faith, and
own that one baptism, which what ever they did in words, in works they denied
till now, and makes them renounce that none faith and none baptism, which they
had in infancy, for if they had faith while they were infants, how can they
deny it in your opinion, who deny any falling from faith? but if they had none
in infancy, then how can you deny but that they had none? and so they deny none
at all.

Review.
2. It makes them crucify Christ again, for we are baptized in^o Christ's death
and therefore but once because Christ dyed but once.

Re-review.
It makes them crucify Christ often ore and ore again indeed, i. e. in the
Supper where in a figure they break his body and shed his blood, an orderly
fellowship, and communion in which service they are engaged to, and enter upon,
after the example of those Acts 2. 42. immediately after baptism.

Other crucifying Christ I know none among them, that is caused by their
doctrine, but that of those, who after they are enlightened in it, and have
tasted the good word of God, etc. do after that fall away again, and such
indeed crucify to themselves the son of God a fresh, and put him to open
shame Heb. 6. 4. but I hope the truth among none, but Re^nlesse persons shall
bear the blame and be made the cause of their crucifyings of Christ, who depart
from it; as for us we are crucified, dead and buried with Christ by baptism
Romans 6. for we are baptized into his death; and that but once, because Christ
dyed but o^ce, and yet once, because Christ dyed once, and that is more then
any Rantized Priest in Ch^istendome can say of himself, for he is not so much
as once baptized at all.

Review.
3. It makes them count the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, for if it be
holy, what need they repeat it? if unholy, how do they profane it?

Re-review.
How far forth Anabaptism properly so called, i. e, the repetition of baptism,
(without such warrantable ground as it was repeated upon Act. 19. 5.) does
(saving the nonsense that is in that expression) repeat the blood of the
Covenant, and so count it an unholy thing, I am not so much a friend to it as
to gain say, but sure I am that A-no-baptism (and such yours is) does count not
only the blood of the Covenant, but also that holy ordinance of baptizing
believers, which is the token of it, an unholy thing, for if it be holy, why do
you neglect it? if unholy, in so saying oh how do you profane it?

Review.
4. It makes the Covenant of the Gospel worse then the l^gal, this taking in
all Children into the visible Church, the Anabaptists excluding them, making
them no better than Turks and Pagans.

Re-review.
What again?

Review.
5. It destroys all the comforts that afflicted parents can have over their
deceased children, the grounds of them being destroyed, their right in the
covenant and promises of Christ.

Re-review.
What again?

Review.
6. It unchristens the whole Church of God for many hundreds of years together,
and calls in question the truth of Christ's promises, of being present with his
Church to the end, and guiding it by his spirit into all truth.

Re-review.
What again? what ore and ore, and oreagain? are you drawn so dry, that you are
fain to fill up, to swell up your Review into the magnitude of a sheet with old
ends and pieces, and patches of things, that were precedent, or did these three
Renegadoes, fearing a storm, run from their old ranks hither to secure
themselves, by c^ouding in amongst the rest of this rubbish stuff? for every
one of them have faced us once or twice a piece before page. 6. 7. 12. 13.
nevertheless since I meet with them here again, I Will have a word or two with
every of them now.

To the first I say thus, if the legal covenant did take in all children into
the visible Church (as you say, and as indeed it did) i. e. as well the
children of unbelieving, as of believing Jews, neither had the one of these a
strawes more right to circumcision then the other, then since the Covenant of
the Gospel is enlarged and communicated to both Jews and gentiles, between
whom the partition wall is broken down, and they both made one.

And since now by the Priests own confession it stands in the same way to be
administered among the Jews and Gentiles as that legal Covenant did for a time
among the Jews only, the Priest himself makes the covenant of the Gospel worse
then the legal, that taking in, at least to the visible Church, all children of
that people to whom it extended, i. e. the Jews without any exception, without
any respect to the parents being godly or ungodly, believers or unbelievers:
the priests contrariwise under the Gospel Covenant, which extends and belongs
to the whole world, i. e. both Jews and Gentiles, 2 Cor. 5. 19. 1 John 2. 2.
and to all nations as well as one Mat. 28. 18. Mark 16. 15. Luke 24. 47.
excluding now the Major part, yea almost all children by their doctrine, viz.
the children of unbelieving Gentiles, of heathens, Turks and Pagans, and
unbelieving Jews too, which (for all their parents wickedness, and unbelief)
were wont to be received into the Church under the Law, and this not only from
the visible Church neither (for that were more tolerable of the two, and can
do them no hurt, if it be all) but also from the Kingdom of heaven, and
salvation it self in their cruel Charity, before they have by actual sin
deserved to be exempted.

And this I speak not as believing any infants in infancy to have right to
entrance into the visible Church, and fellowship thereof here on Earth, though
yet I believe all infants, as well as some, dying infants, and before they have
deserved exemption and damnation by actual rebellion, to have according to the
general declaration of Scripture, right of entrance into the kingdom of
heaven; but that I may discover the unruliness of the Priest, who wherein he
judges others of streightning the Gospel condemns himself, who undertakes to
make laws, prescribe rules, impose principles upon all men, and yet breaks his
own laws, varies from his own rules, straggles from his own principles through
blindness as much as any other whom he blames for it.

To the second thus, if it be so indeed (as you told us once before it is p. 7.
and here tell us over again that we may know your mind in it) that to deny
baptism to infants before they die, does ipso facto destroy all the comforts,
all the hopes that any parents can possibly have of the salvation of their
infants, that die unbaptized, and all the grounds of those hopes, i. e. all
those childrens right in the covenant, and promises of Christ, and consequently
(this necessarily follows) does subject them unavoidably unto eternal
damnation.

Then first as I told you once or twice before, so I tell you now again that
it is your selves, and not we who are the men, that say, no baptism, no
salvation, for (say you) there is no ground for parents to hope their children
can be saved, no though those parents be believers, though those children
believe also themselves, and so both by birth, and by their parents faith, and
their own faith too, have right (as you say the infants of Christians have) in
the Covenant, and promises of Christ, yet they must damn for all this, if
baptism be denied them, and if they dye without it, their parents must mourn
without hope of their Salvation.

This is your judgment of Charity concerning unbaptized infants; even of never
so believing parents, having also the habit of faith in themselves, for though
parents believe, and believe their children to have faith, too and right to
salvation, yet deny them baptism, and (all the other notwithstanding) there is no
hope of them, the parents can upon no good ground be comfor^ed concerning them,
but that they are damned.

It Is you therefore that place such high, and migh^y necessity in the bare
outward dispensation of the ordinance, that are so for the ceremony, that hold
that the substance does no good without it, why else do you say that be there
never so many grounds otherwise, on which to hope infants salvation, viz. their
parents faith, and their own faith, and title thereby to the Covenant, which,
though false, simple, and rotten, yet are the grounds on which you hope some
dying infants may be saved, though you fear the most are damned (for indeed the
true grounds on which to hope the salvation of all dying infants, is there
non-deserving exemption by actual sin, and personal rebellion against the
Gospel) why I say though there be never so much ground of hope of their
salvation, do you say the grounds, whereupon they elsewise may be hoped to be
saved, are all destroyed, if they be denied to be baptized?

Moreover I tell you, that you run round, like a blind horse in a mill, and
contradict your selves egregiously, by holding ^uch a high necessity of infants
baptism that there is no hope of their salvation if it be denied them, so that
unless you recant it, you will in the end repent it that ere you lived your
selves, and led others so long in such delusion; for mark how you mope too and
fro in a mist, sometimes you say that birth of Christian parents, and faith in
the children so born, these give right to the Covenant, and the promises of
Christ, and so to salvation, and the kingdom of heaven, and their right to the
promises, and the kingdom, that gives them right to baptism, and to entrance
into the visible Church, supposing their right to salvation to be without
baptism, and before it, as that which intitles them thereto, making their
visible right to baptism, and the visible Church to depend upon their visible
right to salvation, saying they must be seen by some thing or other
distinguishing them from others, who are not heirs, to be heirs belonging to
the kingdom, before they be signed as such, and so you argue, making an
apparent right to baptism posteriour to their right to salvation, viz. to whom
the thing signified i. e. heaven appears to belong, to them consequently the
sign i. e. baptism, else not, but that appears to belong to infants, therefore
this, which is as much as to say, we must first look upon them, and believe
them to be heirs of salvation, and upon that ground afterward baptize them, so
making the right to the sign depend upon the being of the thing signified.

Other while again (as here) you turn the cat ith pan, and tell us a tale, that
turns all this up side down again, and makes all their right to the Covenant
and promises of Christ, to salvation by him, to the kingdom, which all are
according to your other opinion to be Antecedent to baptism, and entitling to
it, so that no apparent right to the Covenant, and promise, and kingdom, and
salvation, no baptism, you make I say all these, on which you made baptism
depend before, so necessarily dependant on baptism, so subsequent to it, so no
way appearing to belong to infants without it, that no baptism no title to
life; deny them baptism, and entrance into the visible Church, and they are
visibly in the kingdom of the devil, there is no hopes they can be saved, if
their parents let them die without it, no grounds on which to hope it, but
though believers children, and apparently enough believing themselves, and so
thereby in apparent right to the Covenant and promise of Christ, and
consequently of salvation, and all this before they may be baptized, yet they
are in the visible kingdom of the devil, and do but deny baptism to them, and
all those old evidences are worn out, their names blotted out of the book of
life, their parents can have no hope of other then their damnation, nay all the
grounds on which to hope that any good comes of them, are utterly destroyed.

So then of the doctrine that you deliver this is the sum, in two round heads
viz.

That infants right to salvation must needs be apparent, or else they may not
be baptized.

Secondly (to go round again) baptism of infants must needs be, or else there is
no apparent ground, on which to hope they can be saved.

Finally, I tell you I marvel in my heart, it being so that such danger comes
by denying infant baptism, that parents cannot hope they can be saved, how you
dare for your ears delay so long as you do, sometimes a week, sometimes a
fortnight, sometimes almost a year, as the custom of England was of old to
baptize but twice in the year viz. at Easter and Whitsontide, and do not rather
baptize your infants so soon as they are born, least happily their lying in the
visible kingdom of the devil longer then you need to let them, they happen to
die before your good cheer can be made, and all your kinsfolks come together,
and then the parents be left without hope of any other, but that their children
remain in the kingdom of the devil for ever: for persons live or dye visibly
(say you) either in the visible Church of Christ, out of which you say also
there is no salvation, the visible entrance into which is by baptism, by which
therefore unbaptized infants never entered; or else in the visible kingdom of
the devil: this is one of Mr. Baxters diseased disjunctions p. 71. for there
isno more necessity then there is of sprinkling infants (and that's as little,
as little can be) of their being visibly in either, neither are they visibly in
either the visible Church of Christ, or visible kingdom of the devil, till
they are at years, but in medio abnegationis: you salve al^ that danger, which
I confess is none at all in infants dying unbaptized (but only that I speak
according to your own principles) by telling us that it is not the bare omission,
or neglect, but the contempt of the ordinance, that damnes the persons that dye
without it.

I tell you again, that if this may pass for true and curr^nt doctrine among
those that hold baptism due to men and women only, and not infants (as I
scarce know how it should, since neglect of known duty is damnable in a lower
degree, as well as contempt of it is in a higher) yet however its false, silly,
and nonsensical doctrine among you that baptize none but infants, apply it how
you will: for the parents neglect, and the parents contempt of the ordinance as
to his infant, is much at one i. e. neither of them damnable to the infant,
unless you will hold up that saying again in the world, which God protested
long since men should never have occasion to use any more viz. that the child
shall die (eternally) for the fathers sin, surely the fathers contempt does not
redound any more, then his bare neglect, with any danger, or disadvantage to
the infant, and as for the infant he cannot be damned for not being baptized in
infancy through his own neglect, or contempt of i^, for he neither contemnes,
nor neglects it.

To the third of these three things that you, and I both have thrust here into
one place, you in the Review, and I in the Re-Review in order to the
dispatching of them all together viz. it unchristens the whole Church of God
etc. I say thus, confessing that our doctrine unchristens whole christendom,
which the Pope has called the Church of God, but is indeed the whole world of
Gentiles, that has got into the outer court, the mee^ outward form, and name
of christianity, and has trod down the holy City, and true worship for 1^60
years, that whole world that has for ages and generations wondered after the
beast, nor is this inconsistent with the truth of Christ's promises of his
presence, and guidance among those that are his true Church, and people indeed,
for howbeit he has, according to the word, left those to their own ways, that
left and liked not his ways, yet he ever has, still does, and ever will lead
those into truth, that love the truth, and will be led by his spirit, when he
will lead them: yea though he tied not himself to teach them, that should choose
the Pope for their Tutor, yet according to his promise he has bin more ^r
less with those, that observed what he commanded them in his word from the
beginning, and so shall be even to the end.

Review.
Lastly it does the devils work in the sh^pe of angels of light, to make men
renounce their baptism, and if from Nero's hating the Chrictian Religion, the
ancient Apolo^etist of the Church did rightly gather the goodness of it; we
may the validity of infants baptism from the devils hatred of it: it has ever
been said of him, he will not make a bargain with any soul till it has
renounced its first bargain which was made with Christ at baptism: the
Anabaptists are his Pro^tors, and do it to his hand.

Re-Review.
Of whichdesire of his tohave us renounce our baptism being not a little aware,
though immediately after I renounced that Rantism, I once had (unawares to my
self) in the innocence and ignorance of m^ infancy, and in the room thereof
received real baptism, I had one messenger from Satan to buffet me, and beat me
off from further proceeding in, and owning of that practice, yet through the
goodness of God and that grace of his, wherein I still stand, I was so far from
being removed, that I was much more settled, strengthened, and stablisht in the
present truth, wherein I walk, and I trust shall walk in, unto the end, unless
I receive more evidence to the contrary, then ever I have done from any
wri^ings, or any discourses of any, that ever I met wi^h of what principle, or
profession soever: which messenger (whose name was William Everard after the
flesh, but the name that the father had given him was Chamberlin (as he said)
for he lived in the secret chambers of the most high) though he came to my
house, pretending that he was immediately sent from God, with a message to me
in particular viz. to renounce that practice of baptizing, which himself had
sometimes walked in also, but now relinquisht, did to my self, and some others
after half a days most serious observation of his speeches, strange ecstasies,
and uncouth deportment, by many prodigious passages, blasphemous pratings, and
(as by experience we then proved them) flatly false pretenses to what he had
not, and most presumptuous, yet successeless, undertakings and frivolous
fopperies (of which I am willing at any time, but not capable under a hours
time, to give fuller account to any that shall desire it) discover himself to
be one of the Archangels of darkness, which the devil now sends forth a new in
the shape of angels of light, and is now no less apparently I think to all
that know him, and where he is.

And howbeit, it has bin more then once, but once especially, as I have hinted
to the Reader in a shrewdshake of sickness, that befell me above a twelve
month since to the great retarding of this work, reported that I was shaken
sheer out of my mind, and judgment concerning this way and baptism, so as to
have recanted and renounced it, yet I call my God to witness, to whom also I
give thanks for his mercy toward me in that particular, that partly by the more
then ordinary advantages I then had, through my sequestration from all other
occasions, to seek the Lord, to search and try my ways, and turn again unto
him, partly by the more then ordinary engagements that were then upon me so to
do, and that seriously and sincerely, through my daily expectation to be clapped
up in clods of earth, till the great day of acccounts, I have bin much more
sweetly satisfied since then concerning the truth of this way, then ever I was
in all my life before, neither did I then find any cause to repent me of coming
to Christ in it, as neither shall any, that renouncing your Rantism do rightly
receive it, so they continue to walk uprightly in it to the end: but this I
must confess, I found good cause to repent of it that I had not honored it so
much as I might have done since I ownd it, nor walked so profitably,
serviceably, blamelesly, holily, and worthily in it, nor so suitably to so holy
and worthy a way as it is in it self, not withstanding the account of basensse
and foolishness that it has in the world, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

So that ever since that forenamed sifting I had from Satan, by the mouth of
that his Agent, by whom he solicited me to forgo my baptism, I side with you in
this, viz. that it is the Devils work in the shape of an Angel of light to make
men renounce their baptism, and though I am somewhat otherwise opinioned about
the Devils affection to infants bap^ism, then you are, for I think if he hate
it, it is as he hates holy water, or any other of his own inventions, whereby he
has juggled away the truth, and imitated Christ's ordinances out of doors, yet
I am fully of your mind that he so hates the true baptism, I mean the baptizing
of professed believers, from whence I gather the goodness, and validity of it
against him, that it is most of the business about which he is at work in the
shape of an Angel of light in these days, wherein his time grows short, and
his old kingdom begins to fail him by means of the true baptism, to erect to
himself a new kingdom, and in order thereunto to make men renounce that
baptism, as knowing that he cannot strike a downright* bargain with a soul to
become fully his, as the high Notionists, and spiritual Sensualists of these
times do, till it has renounced its first bargain, made with Christ in
baptism, not what was made with Christ at infant rantism, for infants are not
capable per se to bargain with Christ, and how they do it per alios I do not
see, since such as say they do it for them, were never appointed by them so to
do, nor by Christ neither, that I know of, nor do I remember any bargain to own
Christ and not be ashamed of him that either I, or others for me made with
Christ on that day wherein I was sprinkled, no though, as they tell me, in
token thereof, that I might never forget it, I was signed with the sign of the
Cross: this work of diswading men from owning baptism as long as he can, and
persuading them to disown it when they have it, though the Devil be at one end
of it, yet dares ^e no^ be seen in it himself, but acts all by his emissaries;
the Anti-baptists are his Proctors, and do it to his hand, the Rantizer and the
Ranter, the sprinkling Priest on the one hand, the sparkling Prophet on the
other, between these two he does, or rather undoes what he can: in order to
prevention of whose design, I shall as the Lord lends leave, say something to
them both, before this work go out of my hands, though it hang so much the
longer in them.

Review.
They will peradventure wave the fury of some of these blows by denying their
name, by saying they do not rebaptize, but baptize those, that were not
baptized before, whose baptism is null: But we should renounce our baptism too
if we should yield them that plea, till they have proved it null by better
Arguments, then any yet ever urged by them, they shall be denied that evasion:
and one would think they ought to be sure of their footing, and not walk upon
slippery ground, for no better is their proof, where the fall is into hell. If
thou art warned, thou will be armed against them, they will never encounter,
where they find this preparation, if thou will not be warned, we have delivered
our own souls.

Re-Review.
Having spent all your other Ammu^tion, and vented your verdict to the bottom,
you here once for all discharge your great Warning piece, and Roar us all at
once down into hell, what else mean you by this clause, where the fall is into
hell? is the error on which hand soever it lies, yours or ours, so damnable in
the question about the true subject, and the true form and administration of
baptism, that the opposite parties to the truth herein must needs damn without
more ado? I trow not in case they act through ignorance altogether invincible
in the very integrity of their hearts: but if the truths Antagonists in this
point, whether it be you or we, either see and see not, or may see and will
not, or can see and dare not, or find the footing and ground they go upon to be
unsure, and slippery, the proofs they practice from to be poor, pedling, and
paltry, as God knows yours are, if you do not, and yet for fear and shame of
men, find it not, then the fall may chance to prove a desperate one indeed, and
therefore Sirs see ye to it, see that ye see to it, for ye are a generation
that in these days of discovery are seen more into then you are aware of, and
may see much more then you do, if you will. And they that say it is so
dangerous to be out in the question disputed, that the error, on which side
soever, reac^es, and leads them that follow it to the end, as far as hell,
had need be more sure of their hand, then you can be in your cause, from the
most serious search of Scripture, that they are in the right, and if they find
that they are out to return in time.

Or do you make the game in this case, and question between us and you to go
thus, viz. That if it chance to appear hereafter that we are out in the point
of baptism, then we must to hell without remedy, but if the error prove or fall
out tobe on your side, it shall be so venial, and tolerable a trangression,
that you may go to heaven for all that? verily one would think it were to ^un
thus in the thoughts of you, Clergy men, of some of you at least, for some are
more moderate toward us and our tenet then other some, and some of you at
sometimes more moderate then your selves at other times; amongst whom bitter
Mr. Baxter is one who though he be far more immodest in his discoursings of our
dipping, then we are in our dispensings of it to any (in which respect I
confess I count him as keen to the full as he confesses himself to be) and one
that persues the controversy which more crabbidness then it calls for, for if
it be so small a matter as he makes out, yet however he is so modest about it,
that he can scarce afford the Anabaptists the term of Heretics, much less of
damnab^e Heretics as most of you do, yea, he speaks so diminutive^y, and
Apologetically of our supposed error, p. 9. 10. (but that (to go round again)
he is as hyperbollicall, and egregious in accusing it, page 12. 13. where he
loads us, who dissent from him in it well nigh as low as hell) viz.

That this controversy considered in it self is of less moment then many
imagine, and a point that God lays not so great a stresse on as many do.

Nevertheless some of you are tam in vestris talpae, in alienis linces, so
eagle eied a broad, and bleared eyed at home, that if your infant-sprinkling be
made appear to be the error (as more then one of you that persist in it deny it
not to be) O how its excused, extenuated, exempted from so much as guiltifying,
much more from damnifying hell deep its dispensers?

Though it had been better it never had been brought in, and that baptism
never had been changed, yet since it is now the present custom, and authority
requires it, there is not so much evil in it but it were better stand, then the
Church fall a contending about it.

But while our dipping is supposed to be the error, it is an error of so
dangerous concernment, that finally to stand in it, is to fall flatly into the
pit of hell: And little better then thus it is (for ought I see) with you
Ashford disputants, if we compare this place with page 26. of your pamphlet;
yet we take it the more kindly from you however, since it is your watch word to
us, whether we be warned from baptizing of believers by it yea or no: if we be
not warned, you say true you have delivered your own selves, yet (one good turn
for another) I warn you again, that you have delivered your selves hitherto
more against the truth of God, then from the wrath of God, unless you warn
more wisely, and deliver your selves more divinely for the future.

You tell us peradventure we will e^ade the fury of some of your blows by
denying our name, you may well say the fury of your blows, for the very title
of Anabaptists is a bang, wherewith in your wrath, and fury you wound many
honest men, and bast them till they stink again in the nostrils of their
neighbors for your sakes; whereby you basif^, and prate them out as odious
ones to the world, when you cannot prove them erroneous by the word: you need
not say peradventure, nay you may be sure out, that weel deny though not our
own name, yet that nick name Anvbaptists, which you are pleased improperly (not
to say impiously) to impose upon us, though we bear with your illiterateness in
so doing, for I trust we shall not more say, then sufficiently show, that we do
not Re-baptize, but only baptize those which never were baptized before, and
whose baptism, which you say they had in infancy, is null, i. e. nothing, and
yet not nothing, but a new thing rather, another baptism, another thing then
baptism, which is neither the baptism of Christ, nor indeed any true baptism at
all.

Let us both pawn our baptismes upon it, ours, which you call nothing but
Anabaptism, yours, which we call nothing but Rantism: if we do not make it good
that your baptism is no baptism, at least not that, which Christ instituted,
then we shall engage not only to yield up that our plea, but to renounce our
Baptism also, but if we do it, and you never disprove it, then we shall expect
it answerably from you, that you both yield up that your plea, and renounce
your Rantism also?

(...). ANTI-RANTISM, OR CHRISTNDOM UNCHRISTND, IN An Appendix added about
sprinkling wherein the shallowness of that dispensation is showed to be such,
that it can neither properly, nor possibly without perverture be called Baptism.
HAving razed the rotten Basis of your Babism, I come now to reckon with your
Rantism, and to examine whether our manner of baptizing, which is by dipping,
or yours, which is only by sprinkling, is the baptism which was instituted by
Christ, according to that small hint you give me, which is no other then a
bare, single, simple denial of your baptism to be null; for no less then that
is the next fault wherewith we charge it: As for your selves, as if you were
unwilling to have it sifted, as I verily believe, and have sufficiently
experienced that you are, you slide so silently by this question, which is as
requisite to be discussed, and duly understood as the other, that howbeit you
are not a little concerned for the securing of your baptism, to back it in this
particular also, specially since you confess that you must give it up, if our
plea against the form of it prove valid, yet you afford not so much as one
wea-bit of an argument, whereby to disprove our form of baptizing, nor yet to
prove the truth of your own, save only your homely reply to our plea, viz. we
should renounce our baptism too if we should yield them that plea: which words
of yours in a Sillogistical form run thus, viz.

If we yield them their plea we must renounce our baptism.

But we are resolved we will not renounce our baptism.

Ergo we will not yield them their plea.

Thus you are resolved to hold the conclusion: nevertheless such shameful
tergiversation, and utter loathness to put your selves upon trial by the word I
have ever found amongst you in this point, that how justly Mr. Baxter complains
of Mr. Tombs for refusing to dispute it publicly p. 134. I know not, but I am
sure not more justly then I have occasion to cry out of your unworthy
waywardness in this case: for though at the Disputation at Ashford I did in my
position (some, but not half the sum of which you set down in your Account)
positively declare my exception against two things in that, which you call your
baptism, viz.-

First the false subject.

Secondly the false manner of administration, together with my ear^est desires
to have satisfaction from you concerning the latter also, as in respect of
which I proclaimed it null, as well as in respect of the former, yet you
drilled away all the time about the first without either giving out a warrant
then, or granting us your presence another day, wherein to give your warrant
for the second.

In like manner at the public dispute, which was at Folstone before many
hundreds of people, where there was one, if not more, of my opponents at
Ashford, the Opponents part being put upon me, much more against my expecta ion
then desire, I told that C^ssis of Clergy men, who were there, that it was most
proper to direct my dispute to their practice, which since it was the Rantizing,
and not the bap^izing of infants, I would prove that their sprinkling of
infants was not lawful; but I could at no hand be permitted to proceed in such
a way, or to come near their copy hold in that p^nt, viz. their false form of
dispensing, though I promised to abide a whole week among them, rather than
they should not have discourse enough about the subject; at last I obtained
with much ado a division of the question into two, viz.

1. Whether infants were the true subject?

2. Whether sprinkling were the true manner of baptizing?

And a solemn Engagement from them, that if so be I would begin upon the first,
there should be a discourse after it upon the other.

But as I forewarned the people, and that before these men's own faces, that it
would be at first, viz. that they would evade all controversy about that, if
it were possible, even so it fell out indeed at last; for after some two hours,
or little more, though it were well-nigh a winters day yet to night, it was on
their parts so uncessantly urged, that the disputation might cease, and the
people for that time be dismissed, that the devil is blind if he did not see
that day, that those who sided with him, unseen, against the truth, did judge
that there was discourse too much, though but a little, about the Subject of
baptism, and enough, though none at all, about the form.

But I let pass this, and come to prove the point now in hand, which is this,
that dipping or overwhelming in water, and not sprinkling, is the only true
form, or manner wherein baptism is to be dispensed, and without which it is
either properly no baptism, or at least none of that baptism which is required
in the word and may be owned as the ordinance of Christ.

This is most plain, and ^n a most plain way I desire to prove it: and first
from the signification of the Greek word (...), which is ever used in the
original, as that whereby this ordinance is expressed, and whence it derives
that denomination of baptism, the proper plain English of which is to
overwhelm, or cover with water, to plunge ^ver head and ears, to put under the
water, to dipp, do^ze or drown in the water.: and it is the derivative of
(...), which is tinge, quod fit immergendo, to dipp in that manner, as they do
that die cloth and colors, which is by that total submersion of things in the
liquor, as all men know they do that die, and not by sprinkling here and there a
drop of water on them.

Thus I say the word baptiz^ signifies, and not to sprinkle; and therefore that
I may rouse all those people into a remembrance of this matter, whose Priests
deceive them, and draw them to dream that (...) signifies both to dipp, and to
sprinkle, which some, whether it be of that ignorance of the truth that
cleaves, and accrues to the common sort of Priests, through their taking things
upon trust, and tradition one from another without trial, or of mere malice
making them wilfully to hide the truth after they have received the knowledge
of it, I know not, God knows, but some I say stick not still as much as they
can to make their people believe it; But to awaken such to some attention to
the Heterodoxness of their Priests, as well as all ways to the Orthodoxness of
them, I here summon all the priests in Christendom out of either Stephanus, or
Scapula, the two Greek Lexicons that are in so great request, and of such
ordinary use among you, and such friends to your selves, as you may see by the
bitter invectives of both of them against us as Anabaptists, as a Diobolicall
sect, and therefore would favor your cause as far as in conscience they could,
to show the contrary to what I here have said, viz. that (...) either does not
signify a total dipping of the immediate subject that is denominated baptized,
or dipped by it, or that it ever signified such a thing as sprinkling at all.

Yea the word that signifies to sprinkle is another word, viz. (...), which is
ever used in Scripture by the spirit, when he speaks of such a thing as
sprinkling: yea it is used three times in one chapter, viz. Heb. 9. 13. 19. 21.
and is all along englished by sprinkling, neither is there any one place of
Scripture wherein the word (...) is rendered to baptize, or used to signify
baptizing, neither is there one Scripture wherein the word (...) is rendered
sprinkling, or used to signify such a thing as sprinkling, nor is there any
reason why it should be so rendered, specially if you consider

Secondly, The Non Identity, and deep diversity that is between these two
actions, viz. Sprinkling, and Baptizing [Anglice dipping] by which, as by a
second Argument, its most plain that sprinkling is not only not the baptism of
Christ, but in truth no baptism at all, and so consequently that he is properly
no-Anabap^ist, who baptizeth them that were but sprinkled, and he A no-Baptist
that does but sprinkle.

Rantist.
Our sprinkling is baptizing as well as your dipping, and these two are one say
you what you will.

Baptist.
I tell you, and you will see it at last, that as Christ has but one water
baptism, and as he has by appointment but one subject for that one baptism,
and not two kinds of subjects, as you dream, viz. a believer only, and not both
a believer and a believers seed, so he has but one true way, and essential
form, wherein that one Baptism is to be dispensed, and that is baptizing
[Anglice dipping] and not two ways, forms or dispensations of it specifically,
and essentially distinct from each other, so that they are not so much as in
special kind the same but sprinkling and baptizing [alias dipping] are truly
two ways, two forms, two actions, two kinds of actions, so really different in
their essentials, so specifically diversified in their nature, as actions, that
even homo and bru^um, which he is a brute that will say are all one and the
same, do not differ more essentially in Praedicamento Substantiae then
sprinkling and baptizing [alias dipping] do differ in the Praedicament of
action: and therefore they cannot be called one and the same.

It Is true, all things that are, are the same in general i. e. genere remoto,
for Ens dividitur in omnia: so that all things that are, are equally
denominated entia i. e. things that are, so a man and a beast in genere proximo
they are both Animals, yet are they not so all one as that the one may be
universally understood by the naming of the other, nor the one denominated by
the other, so as to say a man is a beast, and a beast is a man, they are one in
genere, two in specie; and the like may be said of dipping and sprinkling,
which are two dividing members of one and the samegeneral (as Homo and Brutum
also are) and as specifically distinct, they are in genere remoto both actions,
yea they are in genere proximo both wettings with water, yet are they not one
kind of action, or wetting in specie nor all one, so as the one may be
universally used, and done instead of the other, and yet the business be as
well done, or both done, and yet but one and the same thing done, but one and
the same word of command obeyed in so doing; nor so as that the one may be as
well understood as the other, when either of them is expressed, nor so as to be
denominated properly by each other, nor so as that the one is the other; but
all actions that are so specifically the same as sprinkling and baptizing
[alias dipping] are made to be with you are so, as that they may be
indifferently, promiscuously, universally used, and done one in the room of the
other, and yet no other then the self same thing in specie is done still, as
much as if we had used or performed the other; yea so as they may be properly
denominated one by the other, so as that in specie one is the other, so as that
in speech sense and signification, they are so alike, that it matters not which
term you use, or which of the two you speak by, for the sense ^ill still remain
the same, and stand perfect sound and entire, and the sentence have no
nonsense at all in it notwithstand: e. g. smiting and striking, or to smite
and strike, to be smitten and stricken are all one, and may be denominated one
of the other, so as that one is the other, and though here are two terms, yet
but one thing is expressed thereby, and the sentence you place them in may be
without nonsense, and as entirely the same as before, if you use one of them
in the room of the other; as he mas stricken, or he was smitten are the same in
sense: yea universally in all speech where you may use the word smite, you may
use the word strike, and both the sense and matter signified thereby will still
be the same:

But now so it is not between sprinkling and baptizing, it is so indeed be^ween
baptizing and dipping, baptizing and overwhelming with water, baptizing and
putting under water, baptizing and dousing, or plunging ore head, these are all
one they all denote the very same kind of action, the very same kind of wetting
with water, and though here be a difference in terms, yet it is in word only not
in deed, the distinction is only nominall, not real, not specifical, not
essentially formal, for take any sentence of Scripture that has (speaking of
water baptism) the word baptized in it, and you shall find any of the other
terms in sense coincident with it, and consistent properly in the room of it in
speech and signification: as Mark. 3. 5, it is said of the people they were
baptized of John in Jordan confessing their sins, it may as properly be said
they were overwhelmed, dipped, plunged ore head, put under water by John in
Jordan, but it is scarce propriety of speech to say they were sptinkled of John
in Jordan.

Rantist.
No? do we not in common loquution say the same, while we say sprinkled in a
font, or in a Basin?

Baptist.
I confess in common loquution we speak so (as brevitatis gratia we do
improperly many times in other cases) yet is it scarce so proper, as to say
sprinkled with water out of a font or basin: but however Mark 1. 7. it is said of
Christ that he was baptized of John (...).
into Jordan, now I am sure you may say sensibly enough he was dipped, plunged
of John into Jordan, butit cannot be said without most palpable nonsense, he
was sprinkled of John into Jordan: therefore certainly the form of Christ's own
baptism, then which we cannot have better president for ours, was dipping (as
ours is) and not such a simple sort of sprinkling as is still in use among your
selves; in the doing of which you do not only (as is evident by the premises)
another thing then that which was dispenst to Christ, and enjoined by Christ to
be dispensed, but indeed, as toward the fulfilling his command in that
ordinance, you do plainly nothing at all that you shall be accepted in for your
labor, for in vain you practice another thing, as in obedience to him,
neglecting what he has required, which he never required at your hands: and
such is that sprinkling, which by custom in the corrup^ion of the times came
superstitiously to bear the name of baptizing, and then by little and little,
till it had wholly worn it out of the world, to be practiced, and pass for
current instead out, and this I will give you some account of too, since I have
given you the hint ont, for in Cyprians time people being overgrown with such a
superstition, as because baptism was the token to them of remission of their
sins, therefore they would commonly after conversion delay their submission
to that dispensation till toward their latter end, as near as they could guess
it approaching on them, that they might thereby have evidence of remission of
all their sins at once, fearing, if they should be baptized before, least
they should sin again, and so spoil all the comfort they received by baptism,
(so far were persons from posting (as they do now a days) to dispense baptism
in infancy to their infants, that they at years did too much delay their own)
hereupon it came to pass not seldom, that the procrastinators of baptism were
taken with sickness on a sudden, and confined to their beds unawares, before
they could be baptized, in which case not knowing how to be baptized in that
manner, wherein it was usually dispensed i. e. by dipping in places of much
water, and yet unwilling withal to dye without it, they sent to Cyprian, who
was the oracle of his time, to be resolved, whether in such a pressing case as
this was, wherein they were as unwilling to die without Baptism, as incapable
to be baptized as they should be, it might not as well serve the turn, and be
counted sufficient baptism to have a little water applied to them, or sp^inkled
upon them in their beds? to this the good man being loath to leave poor sick
souls upon the wrack, whom he saw somewhat afraid to die unbaptized, returns
his opinion to this purpose viz. that in this case, wherein without manifest
hazard of the sick persons life it could not be so well done as it should, it
should be done as well as it could, and that they might have some application
of the element to them in their beds, which if they died at that time should
pass for current, and be counted lawful baptism:

Nevertheless (says he himself) if they happen to be restored to health
again, let them be had to the River, and there be dipped:

He that doubts of this may read it in Cyprians own Epistle to Fidus, who wrote
to him about the case.

So that we see he judged it fit to be done ore again, to be done better, to be
done indeed if they lived, but if they then died, he allowed it to be called
Baptism (though it was none) in favor to the weak, rather then otherwise.

And here now comes in the first Rise of your Rantism, and no small occasion I
believe (if it were before begun) of the growth of your Babism also, for when
the needle was once so clearly entered, how easily would the thread follow after?
when it had once past through the mouth of a man so reverend, and respected in
his generation (as Cyprian was) that it was baptism enough to be sprinkled
only in such a case, how easily might not only every tender person that is
loath to dipp the foot in cold water, but even every person also, that will do
no more then needs must against the will of the flesh, mistake it so far as to
make it serve the turn in every case? and when such an easy kind of baptism as
that was, was grown into use, that could be no more dangerous to infants then
to men, how willingly would all persons (specially those of that gang that grew
apace a little after, (for Cyprian himself, and 66 Bishops more gave ground for
it, when in a certain council they gave this ground for infant baptism viz.
because, so far as lies in us, no soul is to be destroyed) who held baptism
in such necessity as to say it saved ex opero operatio) how willingly I say
would they embrace such an easy, and such a necessary baptism, not only for
themselves, but for their infants also?

But to return (I pray pardon this digression) this sprinkling which you use is
not baptism, or at least not the baptism of Christ (Cypriano Iudice) let
Cyprian judge of it, for if it were, he would not have required persons to be
baptized after it, in case conveniently they could.

Rantist.
Miscarriage in the manner of baptism does not nullify the matter it self,
neither does an error in mere circumstance annihillate the substance of the
ordinance, so but that's its baptism, and stands Christ's ordinance still.

Baptist.
True miscarriage in the mere manner of doing any thing does not null that
thing, if that very thing be done indeed, which we wot of, though error in bare
circumstance (and such it seems you confess your retained Rantism to be) is
too abominable to persist in, but miscarriage in the matter of a thing, and
such gross miscarriage as makes it another matter, or thing (and such is that,
when not the same that's reckoned on, but another thing formally, specifically,
essentially distinct from it, is done instead of it) then that's another matter
I trow, is it not?

And such as this, is your miscarriage in the matter we mean i. e. your Rantism
wherein besides your foul faultering in materia circa quam i. (...). the petty
party about which you busy your selves in that dispensation, for that being
not a believer discipled by your teaching (as the subject of baptism ought to
be according to Mat. 28. 18. 19.) but an untaught non-believing infant, does
clearly null it, in case you did baptize, from the name of the ordinance of
Christ, that only being his ordinance that is ordained by him, who never
ordained baptism to be dispenst to other, then such as are disciples so made by
men's teachings;

Besides (I say) your foul faultering in the subjects, you dispense to, it is
another thing then baptism you dispense to them.

Rantist.
What then dipping belike is so necessary, and essential in baptism, that
baptism is no baptism if it be done in another form, or if it be done by
sprinkling.

Baptist.
No not so, for baptism is baptism still, let it be done in what form soever,
nevertheless what is not baptism, is not; and such is that sprinkling, which
you call baptism, for it is not thing you call it; for if it were baptizing
that you used, whether it were thus or thus, it mattered not, because that
thing that's properly styled baptism is still dispensed, yea though your subject
be so false, as to bar it, even then, from bearing the name of the baptism of
Christ yet, even then, might it bear the name of baptism, but since it is not
that which Christ at first instituted, but which men have since invented in
stead thereof, notwithstanding its being done of old among the Clergy, yet is
it no other then an old nothing.

Rantist.
This practice has born the name of baptism before you were born, among wiser
men then your selves for ages and generations together, and must it now be
dis-nominated, and digraded from that title it has been denominated by so
long, and cease to bear its own name?

Baptist.
Its own name? no, sprinkling is sprinkling still, and so it ever will be,
where its used, but it must cease for ever from bearing the name of baptism,
because baptism it never was: if your administration has indeed the form of
baptism then baptism it is, but then it can be called spirinkling no more, but
if it have the form of sprinkling then sprinkling it is, and can be called
baptism no more, for these two, though the materia qua et circa quam i. e. both
the Element which you use, and the subject, to which you use that element, be
never so the same, yet are two such specifically and formally different actions
and dispensations, as do not ponere, but tollere se invicem, and can in no wise
meet in the same subject at the same time, so as that by the dispensing of
either of the two, it may be denominated indifferently (I mean properly) by
either, for he that is baptized cannot be said thereby to be sprinkled, and
likewise he that is but sprinkled cannot be said there upon only to be
baptized, for these two actions of sprinkling, and baptitizing, having two
different forms, they cannot possibly be properly called the same.

Rantist.
Then it seems the different form wherein we do things, makes the thing so done
so to differ, that they may not admit of one and the same denomination: and by
this reason, since there are several and various forms, wherein you dispense
your dipping to persons, for happily you dipp them sometimes forward, sometimes
backward, sometimes sidewaies, these various ways of dispensing cannot all be
called by that one name of dipping.

Baptist.
By forms I mean not the accidental but the essential forms of things, which
whenever they are two, those things, whose forms they are, cannot be one, for
unius rei est unica tantum forma i. e. essentialis, of one thing there can be
but one essentiaell form, there may be more accidental, for the essential form
is that quae dat esse rei, which gives every thing to be what it is, and
distinguishes it so exactly from every thing else, that its incapable thereby
to be at that time another thing, and another thing of another essential form
incapable utterly to be that: now it is the very essential form, wherein
sprinkling and baptizing [alias dipping] do differ for the essential form of
that action of baptizing [Anglice dipping] of persons is the putting of them
under water, a covering them with water, or plunging them over head in water,
but the essential form of your sprinkling is only the f^ing of a little water
upon their foreheads, for it is not so much as a total sprinkling you use
neither.

In a word Baptizing properly is the application of the whole subject to the
whole element of water Collectim, here or there gatherd together, so as to
overwhelm him in it, but sprinkling properly is quite another thing, viz. the
application of a little water, or some liquid element to the subject guttatim,
i. e: by dropps or small portions only, so that these two, viz. your sprinkling
and true baptism are no more one thing, then the hurling of a man down some
Praecipice, or steep place upon spikes, that let out his heart blood, and the
pricking of him till be bleed only with a pin, which in general are both a
shedding of blood, as ou^ two parrallels are both a wetting with water, but in
special not the killing of a man, as neither are the other both baptizing: so
that there may be many ways and means of doing a thing, and the thing be but
one still if it have essentially but one form, but where there be many
essential forms, there are ever as many several things as those are.

A man may ride many ways, viz. East, West, etc. many manner of ways, viz.
backward, forward, apace or slowly etc. and yet all this is riding still, while
the man moves to and fro on horse back, because the very formality of that
action of riding consists in being carried by another, but while he moves upon
his own Legs up and down, you cannot at that time denominate him riding.

In like manner a man may be baptized [Anglice dipped] or put under the water
many manner of ways, viz. forward, backward, sideway, toward the right hand or
left, quickly, slowly, and yet all this while he is baptized, if put under,
because the essential form of baptism, viz. dipping in water is to be found in
all these ways; but if he have two or three drops of water only flerted upon
his face, he is no more truly baptized then if you sillip him with a wet
finger, for here is Differentia essentialis, the very formallity of baptism is
absent.

If accidentalls only, and mere accessaries be wanting unto baptism, specially
such superfluities as were in use about the Popish Rantism, as Christ, salt,
spittle, crossing, Gossips, Fonts, Basins, Cakes, and Wine, and other silly
solemni^ies, there may be good baptism without these, but abstract the
absolutely necessaries, i. e. two things, or but either of them, which yet are
both wanting among you, and as blind as the Priesthood is now, yet my life for
his he shall behold it once, and own it too, that his business is not only not
the baptism of Christ, but truly not any baptism at all.

These two are first the true Subject, to whom Christ appointed baptism to be
dispensed, which who it is, and who it is not (and how it is but one, for there
is but one baptism, and not two) viz. believing Abraham's spiritual seed, and
not a believing, nor unbelieving Gentiles fleshly seed, i. e. all that quoad
nos believe as Abraham did, and not all that ever shall to all generations, for
such are the seed as well as the immediate, descend naturally from the loins
of such as do believe with Abraham, I have abundantly showed above, nor is it
my business here.

Secondly, the true form in which Christ appointed baptism to be dispensed to
believers discipled by us, which what it is you cannot be so ignorant as your
practice proclaims you to be, for I dare say it is not rantism, and you da^e
not deny, but that it is baptism: Both these are universally wanting, as I have
proved, to your practice, yet if but either only were wanting it were null
enough: For

First, it is most certain that a mistake in the subject, to whom any t^ing is
appointed to be done, does so nullify that thing so appointed, that it can
neither be said to be done as it was apponted, no nor yet that the thing
appointed is done at all, e. g. The Parliament commanded men to take, or in
ca^e of their resistance to sl^y those Rebels that were routed at Worcester,
but should he have been taken by them as obeying their command, that should in
persuance thereof have beaten and killed other men, who were never there, nor
at all engaged in the Kings cause? they ordered a thousand pound to him that
should bring in Charles Stewart, should he have been rewarded as a doer of
their will in that work that should have brought in another man in his stead?
Christ has ordained, and so consequently it is his ordinance that persons shall
be first taught by us and then baptized, is it therefore his ordinance to
baptize them who were never taught? the Papists have a trick to baptize (as
they call it, for they do but rantize as you do) bells as well as babes, but if
they did truly baptize their bells, were it the ordinance of Christ? you say
no; because bells are a wrong subject, which Christ never appointed baptism to
be dispensed to: the very same say we of your babies: a mistake therefore in
the subject makes a nullity in the service, i. e. denies it to be any ordinance
of Christ at all.

Secondly, it is most certain that mistake in the matter ordained, so as to make
another matter of it, or do distinctly some other thing instead of it, makes
all that is done of no effect: Quod fieri non debuit factum valet holds only
where the error is in accidentals, and merely circumstantialls, and not in the
very substance of the thing it self: if men do one thing on their own heads
instead of another that God bidds, they may have pardon in case they cry him
mercy, but very little thank from him for their pains: neither is he
accounted, much less accepted as doing the ordinance of God, that does not so
much the same things that he ordained otherwise, but other things then he has
ordained: when the Parliament ordained, and gave commission to have
Canterburies head cut off, those Synodians, who also themselves waited to have
his kingdom, would hardly have counted that ordinance performed had the
Trustees cut off his little finger only, and let him go.

Nor would the law little less then hang that executioner, that having strict
charge to hang one man, lets him escape, and in satisfaction falls a whipping
of another: the case is yours, who being commanded to teach persons, and then
baptize them, and to keep the commands of Christ without spot till his
appearing, do in his absence let go the making and baptizing disciples, and in
place thereof only rantize and rantize only little infants too: in doing which,
since ye do not the thing Christ appoints, ye had as good do nothing.

A certain man had two sons, and he said to them both, go work to day in my
vineyard, one said flatly he would not, but afterward repented him and went,
the other said he would, yet did not, but found himself work of his own to do:
the first did the will of his father; so I say that the Rebellious Ranter
repenting and being baptized, for else indeed heu quam procul? how far is he
from it as now he stands, whilst he says plainly he will have no baptism?
shall enter into the kingdom of God, before the responding Rantizer resolving
wilfully to persevere in his error, under a pretense of willingness to obey
the truth, and refusing to return, when he is convinced of it.

Rantist.
But the word (...), which you so much stand upon, signifies though not to
sprinkle; yet not only to dip and overwhelm in water, but also to wash, and so
it is rendered in the Lexicons, where Lavo, abluo, are set down as at least the
remote signification of it, and therefore though sprinkling be not dipping, yet
it is a kind of washing, or wetting, and so may be called baptizing, as well as
that, and in aliquo sensu in some sense it is one and the same with that, for
quae convenient in aliquo tertio sunt idem, dipping and sprinkling meet both in
the word washing, whch is a secondary signification of the word (...), and so
may well enough both be styled baptizing.

Baptist.
No such matter Sirs, no not by any means in the world. For

First your Rule of two things being the same that agree in a third, holds
first only and properly quoad mensuram in matter of measure, as two pieces of
cloth that square every way both with one ell are the same i. e. in length,
breadth, etc. not necessarily any way else.

Secondly, quoad rem it holds in the things themselves in some case and sense,
i. e. if the ^ight respect be had to that same third thing, in which they
agree; which third is no other then that which stands the genus, in reference
to them both, as Homo et Brutum agree both in the general name of Animal, but
this serves not your turn here at all, where you are to prove sprinkling and
baptizing [alias dipping] to be all one, not in general, for so many things may
meet in one, that are as different as things can be, for omnia corpora sunt
substantia, yea all things are one, for omnia sunt entia, but in special, so
that the one is in specie the same with the other, but this cannot be said of
dipping and sprinkling, for though they are both wettings with water, yet are
they not both baptizings, for baptizing is not the genus in respect to them i.
e. the general of which dipping and sprinkling are the special dividing
members, but baptizing it self, or dipping, for these two are adequate each to
other, is the member opposite to sprinkling, and and specifically different
from it, under the general word wetting with water: so that still these are not
the same so as that sprinkling can possibly be called baptizing.

Secondly if the word (...), do signify to wash any other way then by dipping,
yet that's not the direct, immediate, primary signification of it, for that is
to dip or plung, as you see in the Lexicon, but at the best it is but
indirectly, collaterally, by the by, improperly and remotely that it so
signifies; and I ask whether when we try any matter by the signification of the
word, as ^is in the original, we shall go to the direct, original, prime and
proper, onto the the occasional, remote, indirect, and improper signification
to be tried by? your practice it seems is built only upon the indirect,
improper, remote acceptations of the word, and therefore is at best only an
uncouth, indirect, improper, and far fetched practice.

Thirdly, (...) signifies washing but it is a real total washing only, such a
washing as is by dipping plunging, and swilling the subject in water, and that
signification is yet many miles off from sprinkling: (...) signifies L^vo,
abluo i. e. to rinse, to wash away, to cleanse, which things are done only, or
at least most effectually immergendo, by putting things in water, and swilling
them therein: So that still such a washing as baptism is, sprinkling is not,
and so you are never the nearer for all this. Yea

Fourthly, neither do baptizing and sprinkling meet one another so much as in
that third word washing, so that they may be both properly predicated by it,
though in that more general word wetting they do: for howbeit baptism is truly
called a washing Heb. 10. 22. and your bodies washed in pure water, yet ne in
aliquo sensu can sprinkling be truly so called unlese it be in insano sensu
alias, non-sensaliter, for in sano sensu it cannot: yea I appeal to all men to
recollect to their remembrance, whether they ever saw any thing truly washed in
the way of sprinkling, especially whether ever they saw any one wash things so
well as they must do, who are said Lauare, abluere, to rinse, to cleanse, which
are the senses, in which (...), signifies to wash, in such a slight way of
wetting them, as is made by such a sprinkling only as you use?

Rantist.
The Pharisees Mat. 7. 4. held the washing of hands, cups, pots, brazen vessels,
beds and tables, and their washings are called baptisms, and ye can you (...).
conceive they did any more then sprinkle water upon them?

Baptist.
Yea surely Sirs, why not? they swilled, and rinsed, and cleansed, and totally
wetted them with water, or else I am sure they could never be said properly to
baptize; but by the spirit, whoever uses that word when he speaks of
sprinkling, they would certainly be said to Rantize them:

Besides show me any that use to wash, whether it be hands, face, dishes,
spoones, trenchers, pots, cups, clothes, brazen vessels, or beds either, when
they are by any ishue defiled, and I Will venture to vent this verdict on such that
they are but sluts, and slovens if they do but sprinkle them.

Rantist.
There may he washings though, and dippings too, but what needs such a total
dipping as you use? what command can you have in all the Word for such a mad
manner of administration, that surely is more then needs: a man may love his
house well enough, and yet not ride on top on it, and so many persons like the
way of dipping, and washing in the dispensation, we now talk of, yea and
practice it too, and yet judge it needless to run persons into rivers, and
ponds, and there plunge them quite over head and ears.

Baptist.
To make good this doctrine of total dipping against such as dippe only
secundum partem, as well as those that (in part also) do but sprinkle, I argue
as follows.

Secondly, from the practice of the primitive times, wherein it is most evident
they were totally baptized, or dipped, and that they were so appears plainly.

First, by the Scripture forms of speech, and expressions used about that
matter, which import and betoken no less, viz. 1. if there were no other
evidence the very denomination it self of baptized that is given shows it,
which in propriety of speech, and according to the prime and native
signification of the word is as much as totally dipped, or wholly overwhelmed,
and covered with water, put under water, which they could not possibly in
common sense, and reason be said properly to be, if they were but a little wet
about the eyebrows only, as those are to whom you dispense, handling them as
if you were afraid too much to wet them: surely i^ would not have been said
baptized, much less baptized in Jordan, least of all baptized into Jordan, (as
it was said of people had they not been immersi, submersi, for so baptized is, i.
e. put into, put wholly under the water by John.

Rantist.
But if you stand so much on the signification of the word, why do you not
drown persons when you baptize them? for (...) signifies to drown, as well as
douze or dip.

Baptist.
This interposition is so weak and silly, that some may suppose I frame such a
simple business as this my self, on purpose to render the Rantists the more
ridiculous; but I prosesse, as ridiculous as it is, it was once put to me by a
Country Clergy man before a great Auditory of people, and was as well laughed
at by them.

To which I answer (if a little more yet much what) to the same tune as I then
did, viz. besides the signication of the word, which justifies our practice of
putting under water, we have president, not only for that, but also for the
bringing persons up alive again, not only for burying them in baptism, but for
the ra^ing them again therein before their bodies are dead, neither have we any
president that they of old did use to drown them, and thereupon we let it
alone; yea Sirs we leave that Diabolical dispensation of Drowning the
disciples of Christ to the Churches, of whom Dr. Featley boasts, who at the
Rates, whereby you reckon us to be Anabaptists are An-Anabaptists, whilst they
ordered as he sa^es p. 68. That such as profaned their first baptism by a
second dipping, should rue it by a third immersion: as namely at Zeurick where
after many disputations between Zwinglius, and the Anabaptists the Senate made
an act, that if any presumed to rebaptize those that were baptized before, they
should be drowned; and at Vienna, where many Anabaptists (so you call Christ's
true disciples) were so tied together in chains, that one drew the other after
him into the river, where they were all suffocated: This president we leave to
those Ministers, and their Churches, that list to prosecute according to it, as
Dr. Featley, and not he only, whose patience was Praelatical, but even
Presbyteriall Mr. Baxter also seem to do, whilst they incense the Magistrate
against us what in them lies, merely for baptizing believers totally according
to Christ's will, as if we were even therefore only the veriest vipers under
heaven, and charge us downrightly (for so Mr. Baxter does) p. 134. as wilful
murderers, which in conscience can call for no less then cutting off by the
civil sword, which rash charge of us the Lord never charge him with if it be
his will to condemnation, but only to conviction; that he may see and confess
with confusion of face to his cons^lation, that he has wronged a people
precious to God, and more privy to his will in many things then himself.

But if he or any still list to be contentious for such a baptizing of
disciples as that was viz. a drowning of them in the deep waters of affliction,
and overwhelming of them in the proud billows of persecution, the baptism
wherewith Christ himself was and every disciple of his must be baptized, let
that be the custom of them and their Churches to baptize the Saints so if they
will, But I assure you we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God.

Rantist.
Now you talk of dipping and drowning and baptizing by afflictions, you put me
in mind of one thing which seems to me to make against you in this, for the
very sufferings of the Saints with Christ (as you hint above) are styled a
baptism, and therefore sure the word baptism may be used to express a smaller
matter, then that total dipping and drowning, which it signifies sometimes, for
the Saints, though they have many sorrows, yet are they not totally drowned,
nor s^nk under them, for Christ both bears them up, and brings them out, if he
should contend for ever their spirits would fail before him, and those souls
that he has made; and yet these are said to be baptized: and also they are
said to be baptized with the spirit, when yet its but powered upon them.

Baptist.
Totally drowned? no: who doub^s of that? neither do we totally drown them we
dip, but bear them up, and bring them out, and save them from dying, as else
they would do, under the water, if they should ly there after a while, and this
we do in token and resemblance of that salvation, which Christ shows to his
Saints, both under and after some small sufferings for him. Nevertheless the
Saints sufferings are not so small, but that they are often times totally drenched
thereby, and overwhelmed (as he that is baptized in water) with tribulation,
temptation, scorn, ignominy, and covered therewith as with a Cloud: as we see
the Saints complaints in this case Psalm. 55. 5. horror has overwhelmed me
Psalm. 61. 2. my heart is overwhelmed Psalm. 77. 5. I am troubled, my spirit is
overwhelmd Psalm. 102 1. entitled a prayer of the afflicted, when he is
overwhelmed, or covered is the title of the Psalm, and this is with the waters
of affliction, Psalm. 124. 4. so 142. 3. -143. 4. -so see Psa. 69. 2. 16. where
there is complaints of sinking as it were over head and ears, in deep mire, and
in deep waters, where the floods overflow, and prayer for deliverance from
those swallowings up by them, in token among other things of which continual
dying in the world, as well as to it, and universal passing under the waters of
affliction, and overwhelming therewith here in this life, we do baptize, i. e.
sink persons over head and ears, as well as raise them again alive, in token of
their resurrection from all troubles at the last day: therefore o how much of
that precious signification, and representation, that is in true baptism is
lost in your sprinkling, and dribling dipping the face only, which some use? In
respect also of which plungings and overwhelmings with sufferings their
sufferings are Metaphorically styled a baptism Mat. 20. 22. which Metaphor is
very familiar in Scripture, which compares the calamities, and miseries the
Saints suffer in this mortal life gurgitibus aquarum, quibus veluti merguntur,
to overflowing streams of water, wherein they are almost drowned, and therefore
said to be baptized.

As for the baptism with the spirit, he that shall say it is not such a pouring
out, as seasons the whole man soul and body, and every faculty of one and
member of the other (which if it be, it may well be called a baptism) where in
part atleast all parts are purged, but of spiritualizing of some parts of the
man only, suppose his face and head, not his he art hands and feet also, but
leaving other parts of him carnal and unsanctified, is not yet so well seasoned
as he should be with understanding in the Grace of the Gospel. All this
therefore speaks plainly to our purpose, and so it is evident still that the
primitive Saints were totally dipped, by the bare denomination of baptized,
which in that particular is spoken of them.

Secondly it appears yet much more plainly by the subject so denominated in
Scripture, and said to be baptized, which is their whole persons, for it is said
they were baptized, i. e. men and women, and not their faces or their hands, or
their feet only; for if any member only had been baptized, it could not be
said properly but only figuratively and improperly (and we are to take things
in the most proper sense they will well bear) that men and women were baptized,
or that their bodies were washed with water, as in baptism they are said to be
Heb. 10. 22. (...), when a denomination is made of any whole subject to be so
or so, that is not wholly and totally so, that denomination is commonly made
saltem ex majori, from the Major part of the subjects being so atleast, and
then too it is but by the figure Synechdoche, whereby we must understand that
by that whole some part only is meant, but a denomination of a subject Ex
minori part, only from some small part thereof being so, is a thing seldom
or never used, and scarce cleared always from absurdity, when it is by
Synechdoche it self: for he that should denominate his horse white, and
commonly call and distinguish him from all his other horses, by the name of his
white horse, only from a star he has in his forehead, when all the rest of
his body is black, would be counted as brutish as the horse himself, specially
if he should conceive himself speaking properly enough when he speaks so: yet
little otherwise then thus do you speak, and think you speak properly enough
too, whilst you commonly call them i. e those persons, baptized, that never had
more then a little, baptism I cannot call it neither, but mere Rantism on their
faces, from which though we are foold together with you by a custom of speech
to afford persons that denomination of sprinkled at least, yet to say the
truth, it is more then may be well challenged from us, if we should stand upon
it, and plead for propriety to the utmost, or for denomination but ex majori,
which reason would back us in if we should, so little of that little subject i.
e. the infant, whose face only you sprinkle, is sprinkled by you when all is
done, but we let that pass:

Nevertheless, know this that total baptizing is the only true baptizing,
and a subject not baptized totally may not be said to be baptized properly, but
only figuratively and Synechdochecally, and surely the spirit speaks not all
along by Senechdoche, and it is as improper almost if not altogether to say that
man is baptized, whose fingers, face, hands or feet only have touched the
water, as it is to say the swan is black, because his feet are so, or the
black-moor white, because his teeth are so: express not dentes et pedes, and
then Ethiops albus, and Cygnus niger are two monstrous creatures indeed, and
baptizatus mere rantizatus is no other, then rara avis in terris nigroque
simillim^ Cygno.

We may not therefore, without abuse to our selves and them, conceive them that
wrote the hystories of the new Testament, that we might know the certainty of
those things, which were at first done Luke 1. 14. and to this very end too
that we might do thereafter, to speak so improperly all along, as to declare
and denominate those to us to be baptized i. e. in true English washed, plunged
in water submersi dipped under water, who if it were then as you say, or at
least, as you do now, were only wetted with a few drops, or if dipped, whose
noses, foreheads or faces only felt the water: the wisdom of the spirit in
them would rather have used the word (...) as he ever does, when he would have
us conceive no more then sprinkling, as Heb. 9. or else some more moderate
phrase suitable to such a petty padling as face dripping is, had that been the
only way of those times, then the word baptize, or else have expressed that
particular, or member of the body, which only was baptized, if he would not
have been understood as speaking of the whole, for that's the usual way wherein
the spirit speaks, when he speaks of the dipping of some members only, as Luke
16. 24. when he speaks of the dipping of a member only, he expresses the
member so dipped, and the particular subject so denominated, he says not send
Lazarus that he may be dipped, or that he may dip himself, or that he may dip his
body in water, but that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my
tongue, so Mat. 26. 23. ^e that dippeth his hand with me in the dish; he
denominates not the man dipped from the dipping of so small a member as the hand,
or face, or feet, or what ever member of the body it was that you imagine was
then baptized; for that wetting of the face only came up surely in Cyprians
days, when they had got that trick of ease to be baptized, I should say to
have their faces, the only member at that time extant, besprinkled in there
beds.

Rantist.
But Mark 7. 4. Christ speaks thus of the Pharisees, (...) i. e. unless they
be baptized they eat not, and yet by that baptism is meant no more but the
washing of their hands, and that appears plainly in the very verse above where
its said (...) i. e. unless they wash their hands, and then immediately after
thus, and when they come from market, (...), except they be washed i. e. (...)
in their hands, suitable to what is said before, they eat not, yea and surely he
would have expressed so much as (...) after (...), but that it was expressed so ^ust
before under (...), that it was needless to repeat it, and therefore he rather
leaves it to be understood, therefore sometimes you see Christ denominates men
baptized, or washed, when no more then some members of them are dipped, or
washed.

Baptist.
Thatby the baptism or washing spoken of v. 4. and expressed by the term (...) is
meant no other then the washing of the hands of the Pharisees I freely grant,
and also that the 3. verse so clearly proves it, that no man living I think may
rationally deny it: nor can I think that the Pharisees when ever they came from
market were plunged ore head and ears before they sat down to dinner, or were
washed or baptized any further then man^um tenus, only in that pa^ viz. their
hands, but I beseech you be you as ingenuous in acknowledging what you must
also necessarily grant, and what you have in a manner given and granted also
viz. that the force and sense of the word (...) in the verse before is carried
to the 4 verse, so that it must be understood to the verb (...) also, as
following it, as well as it follows the verb (...), though it be expressed only
under the first of them, and then your recourse to the former verse for the
finding out of the sense of this (...) makes much for the proof of what I say
viz. that Christ does not usually denominate the whole man to be dipped, or
baptized, when yet he means that some part of him only is baptized or washed,
without expressing some way or other that part of the body, wherein he is
washed, and according to which only he denominates him so to be: for even here,
by your own plea (and it is the truth) we must to the word [(...)] except they be
baptized, subaudire (...) understand this word [their hands] which as you say,
so I say also would undoubtedly have been set down under the word (...), to
show that to be the plain sense and meaning out viz. washing the hands, but
that it was so newly named before under (...), that its more elegantly
understood then expressed.

So that the place runs as smooth for us as we would have it, (...) (subauds
(...)) (...), the Pharisees except ever and a non they wash or be washed (as to
^he hands atleast (for (...) is the first future of the middle voice, and is
read either actively, or passively, but rather passively) they eat not, and
when they come from the market unless they be washed (meaning manu^ ^enus as
just before) they eat not.

Assuredly, therefore Sirs, since the Apostles, and Evangelists all along in the
new testament tell us of men and women that were baptized, or washed by dipping
into the water, without varying this word, or using any more words, whereby to
give us to take that in a more moderate sense then for total dipping, and all
this too without any expression of any particular parts, or members of those
men and women, nor any more particular subject of that baptism then the whole
persons, the bodies of those men and women, they meant to acquaint us thereby,
that those men and women were totally dipped, that we might be so also after
their example, or else their denominations of men and women baptized, dipped in
Jordan so often, so only used are scare ^fair, free, plain, and proper, but
rather (contrary to what Paul professes, when he says we use all plainness of
speech) forced, improper, figurative, dark, and delusive, which far be it
from us once to think.

Thirdly, as far as the thing well can, or atleast need to appear in the word
by instance, and example it appears in Mat. 3. 16. Act. 8. 38. by the baptism
of Christ, and the Eunuch that the form and manner of baptizing was then, and
is now to be by a total dipping of the party.

Rantist.
There is no pooof of universals by particulars; besides it will hardly be make
good that Christ and the Eunuch were dipped: mark and peruse what Doctor
Featley says to this, and some other passages, and places of Scripture p. 69.
This ^aith he is a weak and childish fallacy, for ex particulari non est
Syllogizari, no man in his right was will conclude a general from a particular,
viz. some men tha^ were baptized went into the River, therefore all that are
baptized must do so; the word (...) sometimes signifies to dip, Ergo it must
always signify so, besides Act. 11. 16. John 1. 26. the Preposition (...)
signifies not in but with (as the words immediately following (...) make it
plain) notwithstanding I grant (says he) that Christ and the Eunuch were
baptized in the River, and that such baptism of men, especially in the hotter
Clymates, has been, is and may lawfully be used: yet there is no proof at all of
dipping or plunging, but only of washing in the River, but the question is
whether no other baptizing is lawful, or whether dipping in Rivers be so
necessary to baptism, that none are accounted baptized, but those, who are dipped
after such a manner? This we say is false, neither do any of the texts alleged
prove it, it is true dipping is a kind of baptizing, but all baptizing is not
dipping, the Apostles were baptized with fire not dipped into it, Tables and beds
were baptized, i. e. washed, yet not dipped, Israel baptized with the cloud not
dipped into it, Christ and Zebede^s children baptized with blood, yet neither
he nor they dipped ^to it. All this he writes in Answer to what you say as if he
had foreseen it by way of preoccupation, and one thing more which I had like to
have left out, The Fathers called Tears a Baptism, yet there is no dipping in
that Baptism.

Baptist.
These are Dr. Featleys feat, feigned and frivolous interjections indeed, in
Answer to A. Rs. Argument from the same examples, to all which I reply as
follows.

First, from particulars universals will not follow is a rule that will not
universally follow neither, but in some particular cases only, For first out of
its particulars coll^im consideratis considered all together the knowledge and
true understanding of the universal does not only consist, but exist also, i.
e. appear by all its singulars severally observed.

Secondly, Though there are cases, wherein one or some few singulars singled
out, and considered Sigillatim apart from the rest, do not prove all the rest
universally so to be, as they are, as namely when that one, or these few
particulars are extraordinarily, or (as I may ^v) singularly or choicely so or
so, e. g. the particular cases of John the Baptist being filled so timely with
the holy spirit, and of Ieremiahs being separated (for so the spirit means by
that word sanctified Ier. 1. 5.) from the womb to be a prophet, and of Paul's
being separated from the womb to be an Apostle, Gal. 1. 15. these do not prove
(as you sometimes very simply, falsely and fallaciously infer, at least from
that of John) that therefore infants of believers at least are in general
filled with the holy spirit, and ordinarily sanctified in their infancy: for it
was only the measure of John Baptists gifts (say you my Ashsord Antagonists p.
16.) that makes his Example extraordinary as if it were ordinarily commonly,
and generally so, that believ^rs in fants are filled with the spirit, as well
as he, though not so fully as he was: but these are childish consequences, and
infantish inferences indeed, from these singulars, for the cases were singular
cases, and notoriously known not to be incident to all.

Or else when the matters in such particulars, from which we would argue that
it is generally or universally so, are merely fortuito, accidentally
adventitious, not necessary per se, de essentia, and natura thereunto, then
there is no evincing a general by it, for it follows not that because one man,
or a few men are blind, and lame or maimed, or sick, therefore all are so; or
when a matter is merely indifferent, ad placitum, and not ex necessitate
praecepti, necessary by any positive command of the same thing unto all, as
well as some, then it is silly Syllogizing from some to all, as to say some men,
who were weak did eat herbs, therefore all the disciples did, and we all must
eat no other.

But again there are cases, wherein it follows from one to all, as when the
matter spoken of that one does agree to it, per se, and qua tale, then it is true
de omni also, as one man qua homo is a reasonable creature, Ergo all men are
so; there are cases also, wherein the Example of what particular persons then
did do prove what all then did, or should have done, and what all ejusdem
capacitatis now should do in like manner; as namly when the matter done by
those particulars is necessary and no other then what by duty they stood bound
to, and that by virtue of a clear command given out not to them only, but to
all those that are in the same capacity in common with them; but specially when
those particulars are recorded for our instruction, and to be patterns and
examples for us to follow, then all ought to be in general, as that is, and so
Paul followed Christ, and others ought to follow him and be as he was: and of
this sort is the case here in hand, and the examples of the baptism of Christ
Jesus and the Eunuch, from which we show how all men (if at all) ought of right
to be baptized: for though your Doctor disciples you (not denying in the mean
while but that baptizing in Rivers is lawful, and mark that I pray, for it sets
our baptizing in rivers out of the reach of all your exceptions, who snarle at
it) though I say he disciples you blindly into a belief, that there is another
baptism lawful besides that which Christ and the Eunuch had, and that dipping
in rivers is not so necessary to baptism, but that they may be accounted
baptized, who never were dipped after such a manner, yet I tell you, through
whom he being dead yet speaks, that if by Rivers he means as we mean viz. any
places where there is so much water as will well serve to dipp persons (and
some must mean, for else it might be but a pond for ought he knew, where the
Eunuch was dipped, for it is called but a certain water in the way) and if by
that other lawful baptizing, then that which is received in Rivers, and places
of much water, he mean no other then rantizing at Fonts, or as you have now
contracted the business at Basins, where there is water enough to sprinkle an
100. but not half water enough to baptize one, you will find that at last to be
so far off from being the same water baptism wherewith Christ and the Eunuch
were baptized, that it does not come so near it as it would do, if it were (as
the Doctor calls it) another baptism, since it is not so much as any bap^ism at
all, for another baptism (such as Paedo-baptism would be if men did use it)
would be some kind of kin to the baptism of Christ, they both meeting at least
in the name of baptism, yet so little that Christ will never own it for his,
but no baptism, and such Paedorantism is, is not so much as nomine tenus in the
bare name of baptism any kin to Christ, but that you falsely father it on him as
his.

So that in truth our talk with you about another kind of baptizing then that
of Christ, and the Eunuch will be but impertinent, unless, you practiced
another, nevertheless for discourse sake, and in resolution to the question as
the Doctor states it in reference (no question) to his own practice, viz.
whether no other baptizing th^n that which Christ and the Eunuch had is lawful?
which is as much as to say, whether another water baptism may not serve the
turn as well? or whether Christ has not more water baptismes then one? I
answer no there is, i. e. ought to be but one baptism Ephesians. 4. but one water
baptism, one kind of baptism of that one kind, that must be the meaning, for
else there is more i. e. more kinds of baptism then one: Hebr. 6. 2. i. e. of
Water, Spirit, Sufferings.

Supposing therefore your Baby-rantism to be that other baptism (where note
that himself confesses yours, for that sure he means to be another baptizing
then that John and Philip dispensed) supposing it I say to be that other
baptism he pleads the lawfulness of, yet since Christ ownes but one, even that
alienation were enough to discard it as unlawful, and none of Christ's, as well
as its being none at all, for new baptism and no baptism will speed both alike
with him at last; or if he mean only that another manner of baptizing in water
is lawful then he has no enemy of us in that point (save that we still shall
differ about the subject) for let any administrator take professed believers
only, and baptize them, i. e. overwhelm them in water, and let him do it where
he will, yea how he will for me viz. backwards or forwards, sidelong or
headlong, so he do it, and they be not naked.

Rantist.
But still me thinks the main things the Dr. drives at remain unresolved, for
he tells you first that if it could be made appear that Christ and the Eunuch
went into the water, and were totally dipped, yet thereby it appears not that all
others must be baptized in such a manner.

Secondly that it cannot be made appear, that either of them were dipped or
plunged, but only washed in the River.

Baptist.
No? did I not show you sufficiently above in what cases particular examples do
prove, what the general primitive practice was, and may be argued from as from
a general rule of what ever ought to be viz. when that, or those particular
practices are enjoined to all as well as to some, in one and the same word of
tighteousnesse, but specially when propounded as paterns, and written as rules
for our instruction, and such are both these baptismes of Christ and the
Eunuch, which had never been recorded, but for our learning and for examples
sake unto us, in which respect, though he needed no baptism, as we do, to be a
token to him of the remission of any sins committed by him, Christ himself
submitted to baptism, for howbeit it was partly, and perhaps primarily, to
fulfill all the righteousness of his own law, as well as of Moses Law, in his
own person, as he testifies it became him to do in Mat. 3. for he exacts, and
expects no more obedience to himself, and the father either active or passive
from us, then he acted and yielded to the father first himself, yet was he
baptized partly also to the same end, in order to which he did all things else,
that he either did or endured, which was imitable, and remaining for us to do
after him, as baptism is viz. that he might leave us, who are so often charged
to follow him, an example that we should follow his steps Mat. 16. 24. 1 Pet.
2. 21.

Rantist.
This is true the matter of his baptism is imitable by us, and we are to be
baptized as well as he, nor do I yet see reason (as the Ranter seems to himself
to do) why Christ himself should be engaged to baptism, or the Eunuch either,
and our selves exempted from it: but whether it be so needful to be done just
in that manner as you would make it to be, I see no ground yet to believe that.

Baptist.
Can you be baptized in a better manner think you then that wherein John
baptized Christ, and Philip the Eunuch? me thinks you should not derogate so
much from the wisdom of those Primitive Administrators, as to imagine such a
thing, and if you cannot are you not half wild in contending for a worse?

Or Secondly would you be baptized in, not so low, base, contemptible,
ridiculous tedious a way to the flesh as they, but in a more honorable, more
moderate, more easy, more tolerable, more world winning, more self pleasing,
more flesh favoring a manner? or what is it you would have? me thinks either
that sour service of going down into a River, or pond, and being dipped, or
overwhelmed in water there, which served our Lord Jesus Christ, and that
honorable Eunuch, might serve you, or else that easy sweet service of
sprinkling which you content your selves with, might have served them, one of
the two: for as they were required to be baptized no more then you, so surely
in no more unwelcome a way of baptism then your selves; and they would not have
so far supererrogated as to have been baptized at all, if it would have
fulfilled righteousness in that point to have been sprinkled only on the
forehead.

Nay that would not, for says Christ when he came to John, and John at first
refused to baptize him, Thus it becomes us to fulfill righteousness:

Thus i. e. not only in this matter, but in this manner, but if you will needs
perform this service more easily then Christ and the Eunuch did, perform it
only (as in sprinkling you do not) and let be done in what manner, or
accidental form you please, and if you like not to do it openly in Rivers or
such like places, we stand not on those nicities (though many thousands of
Primitive Saints as well as modern were, and are so baptized) let it be done in
a Cistern, so it be totally and truly done, yea make one big enough for the
disciple and the dispenser to go down in both together, so that the one may
conveniently be overwhelmed in water by the other, and then let it be done in a
basin, if you please.

As for the other thing the Dr. says viz. that there is no proof at all of the
dipping, or plunging Christ and the Eunuch, but only of their washing in the
River I wonder the Dr. did not look into his Lexicon, before he asserted such
an absurdity as this, if he had, he might have fonnd cujus contrarium, that
there is proof enough that they were dipped, or plunged in the alleged texts,
but no proof at all that they were washed in any other way: for the very thing
that is related of them both, is that they were dipped, plunged, or washed by
dipping; it is said of Christ plainly Mat. 3. 15. (...).
that he came to John to this very end that he might be baptized by him, and
verse 16. (...).
being baptized he ascended presently from the water, and of Philip and the
Eunuch Act. 8. 38, they descended down both into the water, both Philip and the
Eunuch, and he baptized him, and ver. 39. when they were come up or ascended
out of the water:

Now I appeal to all rational and unprejudiced men in the world, that are
skilled so far in the greek word (...) as to have once seen the genuine
sense, and signification of it in any Lexi^on, which is to dip, plunge, put
under water, overwhelm (...).
with water primarily, and secondarily to wash or cleanse by dipping, or
dousing, whether there be not in those Scriptures plain proof of their dipping
(...).
and plunging, or washing by dipping, and not the least hint or evidence of any
other washing at all.

The Dr. himself grants that they went into the River, I marvel to what purpose
if not to be dipped there, he confesses also that Christ and the Eunuch were
baptized, which in plain English is dipped, or overwhelmed in the River, mark his
words [in the river] also that such baptism of men, especially in the hotter
climates, both has been, is and may be lawfully used, and yet for all that,
denies either of them to have been dipped, or plunged in the River, or that any
one may now lawfully be served so: I marvel much what they did in the river,
before they came out of it, o^ quoth he) they were washed in the river, and yet
not so as by dipping neither, good Sirs let us examine this a little, for I
cannot for my life ken what washing the Dr. means, besides this of dipping, or
how any other washing was performed.

First to be sure it was not by sprinkling, which yet is all in all among you,
and that for these reasons.

First, because its most certain that the greek word (...) has no such
signification as to sprinkle, neither is it rendered any where Aspergo, in any
Lexicon or any translator of the testament whatsoever.

Secondly because sprinkling is no kind of washing at all, neither is there any
thing in the world (save as I said before by sluts and slovens) so much as
undertaken to be washed only by that act of sprinkling, much less by such a
sparing sprinkling as yours is, who sprinkle not the 20th part pro toto: indeed
a thing may in time be so totally wetted by a continued sprinkling, as it may
be put thereby into some kind of capacity to be cleansed by rubbing it while the
water is on it, and that is far from your practice too, but not half so well
as when it is swilled in water; and in a long while a garment may be all
covered colored, and as it were died by sprinkling, as Christ is said in the
continued war he wages at the last, partly by the sprinkling of peoples blood
upon him, and partly by his riding up and down in the wine press, where there
are, as there are usually in wars, garmen^s rould in blood, and blood up to the
horse bridles, to have his raiment all stained and his vesture as it were died
and dipped in blood, but all this is hyperbolicall locution, and not to be
wrested to such purpose as Mr. Cook and Mr. Blake do, who because there is not
enough near hand, fetch a proof for sprinkling forty miles off, which yet
proves nothing when it comes, for they know Allegories do rather illustrate
then evince, but this is not such a deep dying as is by dipping.

Thirdly, it had been a most vain thing for them to have gone down into the
River merely to be sprinkled, if that were the only business they might well
have been dispenst with from descending into the water, but since they were not,
it shows that such a thing as sprinkling might excuse them, and if not them, I
know not why it should excuse the best of us; though men do much in the service
of God in vain, when they do things that man does, but God never did require at
their hands, yet we cannot think Christ did any thing in vain, yet so we must
think if we think he went into a river to receive no more then sprinkling: and
so we must think of the Eunuch also, of whom we have little reason so to think,
for great folks and nobles, such as he was, love to do as little as may be in
contradiction to the flesh, and no more then needs must be in this point of
baptism, if at all they stoop to it: for he need not have hindered himself so
long in his journey, nor diseased himself so much in his body, as to have
descended out of his chariot, and after into the water, but might much rather
have sent Philip, or his servant to have fetched so much water in the hollow of
his hand, as would have served very well to have sprinkled him, if no more then
so had been required.

Fourthly it had been stark nonsense for Mark to have said of Christ as he
does Mark. 1. 9. he was baptized of John in^ Jordan, if he were not dipped, or if
by baptized we must understand sprinkled, for he was sprinkled into the River
is (...).
as absurd and unelegant English, as to say he was dipped into the rain.

Secondly it was not by pouring water upon them, that Christ and the Eunuch
were washed: this is the baptism Mr. Baxter pretends to, as that, and that only
which ever he saw dispensed in all his life, as it were disclaiming the way of
sprinkling, which yet is your only wonted way: I believe he saw good cause to
be ashamed of owning that any longer for baptism, as many a one besides him is,
who with him puts it off thus, that their baptism is not by the way of
sprinkling, but pouring of water upon the infans, for my part (says he p.
134.) I may say as Mr. Blake, that I never saw a child sprinkled, but all that
I have seen baptized, had water powered on them and so were washed.

And Mr. Blake says p. 4. of his answer to Mr. Blackwood, that he never saw
nor heard of any sprinkled.

O the egregious shifts and shuffling evasions of these men, who perceiving the
perverse practice of sprinkling infants summoned, and sub paena'd, to come to a
trial by the word of God, do disguise it out of its old name, that it has born
with content, and without control for ages and generations, and does still
among many of their own party, till now they begin to see it more strictly then
ever enquired after, and likely to come into trouble for its transgression from
Christ's command) and shroud it under another name, whereby to secure it, so
that now they know not, nor ever saw or heard of any such manner of thing done
in all the world.

No Sirs? what never? that is strange: what parts of Christendom have you
lived, or do you live in? I profess for my part I have lived a Sprinkler of
infants myself about some seven or eight years, not only in several parishes,
but in several parts of our English Christendom, far distant, yet so far as I
remember, I did never see till I came acquainted with the people, whom you nick
name Anabaptists, any thing done by any in that particular, that might well
bear any other name then that of sprinkling, yea I know where a dispensation of
baptism (as it was called) was done so slenderly once to the child of a noted
Clergy man, that the father himself was so far in doubt, whether there was so
much as sprinkling, or any water at all dropped from the fingers of the
Dispenser, that he doubted a while after (whether he do still or no I know not)
whether it were not his duty to have it done over again a little better; the
Gentleman I speak of, if ever he read this, will surely remember both what, and
what Child of his I mean.

Mean while what more then sprinkling was ever done by myself, or any other in
that place, or any other wherever I have been, I cannot call to mind, neither
do I know that ever (till of late, that men see advantage lost by it in this
controversy) the name of sprinkling was denied to what was done in all places
of England, save such where the manner was, and very newly is upon sight of the
falsenesse of the way of sprinkling, to dippe a little more then the tippe of
their Noses.

Besides though the Rubric did prescribe dipping as the only right form,
wherein baptism is to be dispensed and in case of weakness declared it
sufficient to pour water upon a child, yet what kind of pouring was universally
used by them who never used dipping, is evident by the Rubric, if we will give
it leave to expound itself, for in the Catechism thereof, which is not unknown
to Mr Blake, and Mr. Baxter both to have been taught or commanded to be taught
all children at any years in all parishes of England, this question, viz. what
is the visible sign or form in baptism? is thus resolved viz. water wherein the
person baptized is dipped or SPRINKLED with it, in the name etc.

So that how beit the Bishops were pleased to use the word pouring water (as
you do) yet a great piece of pouring it was I promise you that their Priests
practiced to infants (and it is a chance whether Mr. Baxter and Mr. Blake have
not in the infancy of their administration, which I suppose was in the bishops
reign, done the like, though now happily they make a little better measure, or
at least seen the like at some time or other, but me thinks they cannot choose
but have heard of the like in one place of the world or other) a poor piece of
pouring, I say when their hands only being put into water were after held up
perpendiculariter over the infants face, that it might be wetted a little with
what fell guttatius from their fingers ends.

And this has been the most usual way that I have seen, in respect of which I
may say the Priest that administered all commonly by book, and within book, did
act beside book, and without book in that service, for howbeit he was in joined
to dip the child in the water, as the most expedient way at least, and not so
much as to dispense by pouring water, unless in case of weakness only, yet
he made bold, having an inch given him to take an ell, i. e. upon leave granted
him to forbear dipping in time of weakness only, to forbear dipping
altogether, and being authorized by the same Ghostly fathers the Bishops to
make pouring suffice instead of dipping at such time only, wherein dipping
might not be safely used, to make sprinkling serve instead of pouring also: and
in this manner I am persuaded the world was gulled by the Clergy in Cyprians
days, and after, who having the verdict of so grave a Father as Cyprian was,
that application of water in the bed might stand for baptism in time of
sickness, in case the sickness proved unto death (for if they recovered even
in his judgment they ought to be had to the River and dipped) for ease sake to
the flesh, and such like self ends, made some slender slabber to stand for
baptism altogether.

And that sprinkling only has been the general way of England its evident
enough to any, save such, as seeing see not, and have ears and hear not: yea as
shy as Mr. Blake and Mr. Baxter are of that name sprinkling, as blind and deaf
as they would make themselves in this case, as though they never saw nor heard
of any sprinkled, yet there are Divines famous in their account, who own it,
some of which seem to speak, as if they never heard of such a thing as pouring
of water in the dispensation of baptism, but only of dipping and sprinkling as
the only forms that ever they had the hap to hear of: w^tnesse (besides several
other Catachistical composures, that I have seen) that specialy of Mr. Ball a
man not only vindicated by Mr. Marshall, but much magnified by Mr. Baxter by
the titles of Rutherfords second, excellent Mr. Ball, judicious Mr. Ball, no
Dull Divine to be easily ^isled p. 131. 132 which Mr. Ball in his Catachise p.
24. speaking of the outward sign, element, action, speaks much what asit is in
the Rubric, viz. water, wherewith the person baptized is washed by dipping or
sprinkling in the name etc. as if he had never seen water poured on a child,
but all that ever he saw had been either dipped or sprinkled.

Nay more then all this, witness also the very man that manages this very
cause together with them, viz. Mr. Cook, whom I dare say Mr. Baxter and Mr.
Blake have read, and made no little use of, for he has furnished them both
with sundry of their Arguments against dipping, this man in opposition to A. R.
which A. R. speaking of sprinkling, excludes it by this disjunction, viz. that
the use of water must be either by infusion or dipping answers thus, not only
to the clean contradicting of Mr. Blake and Mr. Bax^er and to the proving of
them but so so in their denyals, that ever they saw, or heard of any sprinkled,
but also to the excluding of infusion or pouring, which yet in other places he
pleads for, which Mr. Blake and Mr. Baxter say is the only way, vea all the way
that they have seen save dipping, which yet one of them never saw at all, and
to the evincing of sprinkling to be one of the ordinary ways of baptizing: for
page. 11. where is A. R. says the use of water must be either by infusing or
dipping, but not by infusing nor sprinkling, for he counts them much what one,
therefore by dipping, Mr. Cook tells him, as if he had never seen or heard of
such a thing as pouring, which is all that Mr. Baxter says he saw in his
days, that the ordinary use of the water is one of these two ways, viz.
either by dipping or sprinkling yet Mr. Blake that has read Mr. Cook, never
heard of any sprinkled: So Calvin, Tylenus, Buchan, and all call it either
Aspersion, or ^mersion: yet again some Divines seem to speak, as if they never
saw nor heard of such a thing as dipping, unless among the Heretical
Anabaptists, which yet is the only true and primitive form of Baptism, but
only of p^ring on of water or sprinkling, witness the whole Synod of Divines,
who in their directory direct the world further out of the way of the word in
point of baptism, then the Bishops in their Rubric did, for they in their
Liturgy appointed dipping to be done, as the most expedient form, and pouring
on water only in case of necessity, but the other in theirs directly exclude
dipping, as a thing no where appearing to be needful, and order that either of
the other shall serve without it: for these are their words p. 45. of the
Directory, viz. He is to baptize the child with water, which for the manner of
doing it, is not only lawful but sufficient, and most expedient to be by
pouring or sprinkling of the water on the face of the child: whether any thing
that ever has been done by any in obedience to this directory in that second
way of sprinkling, which Mr. Baxter denies that he ever saw done, and Mr. Blake
that he ever heard of as done to any, did ever reach Mr. Baxters eye, or Mr.
Blakes ear, I leave them seriously to examine; but this I am sure of that the
baptism of Christ and the Eunuch was dispensed neither by sprinkling as I have
showed above, nor yet by bare pouring on of water which they so plead for: and
this I shall now make appear as plainly as the other. For

First in vain did they descend into the River to have nothing but water poured
on them with no greater spout or stream then what runs down contiguously from
the hallow of ones hand; but Christ did nothing surely in vain, and Philip and
the Eunuch might well have spared their pains in wetting themselves so much,
as they must needs do by going down both into the water, and as sufficiently
discharged such a service by standing only on the shore.

Secondly, if by pouring you mean the pouring of a far greater quantity of
water then what can he held in the hand, as namely out of some scoop, or vessel
used to such a purpose upon the face or head, as that might have been done full
as well by the water side, if they had not gone down into the water, so it must
have been as tedious by running down into their necks and bosoms, and so
necessarily have occasioned the trouble of the shifting of themselves, as very
dipping it self can be, or do.

Thirdly, it was not by washing them in any other way, excepting still that of
dipping, suppose by applying water to them with their hands or otherwise, and
then rubbing it on their bodies, for if so, then this washing must be of their
whole bodies, or of some part or parts of them only, if some part or parts
only, then of those parts which we commonly keep uncovered as the face and
hands, or else let it be assigned what other parts, but it was not the face or
hands only that were thus washed, for this again were a very vain thing to go
down into the water for, as its said of Philip and the Eunuch that they both
did: frustra fit per plura quod potest fieri per pauciora: it is mere
foolishness to fetch a beetle and wedges to cleave a stick no bigger then ones
singer, and little wisdom to run so much as ore shoes merely to wash ones face
or hands, which may be done as well at the waters side, as in it: if their
whole bodies were thus washed, then it must be done either with their clothes
on, and that is impossible, for though the whole body may be baptized i. e.
washed by dipping or swilling it under the water as conveniently, and more
comely with clothes on then otherwise, yet they surely have little else to do,
and find themselves more work then becomes wise men, that go about to wash
persons by rubbing water upon them through their garments, besides while you
can totally wash one in that form of washing, I Will wash by dipping at least no
less then a score: or else exut is vestimentis i. e. stark naked, and that were
more immodest then naked dipping.

Fourthly, nor was it done by dipping some part of their bodies only into
water, but the whole, for to dip a person but in part, besides that it is not
properly to dipp that person, but only to dip some part of him, is to the
dispenser, and the disciple too, tantamount in difficulty if not surmounting a
total dipping, yea to dip the whole body of a man at years (for we speak not
now of infants, that may at ease be dandled any way in ones arms) is easy
enough to the dispenser, when the disciple is once gone down with him into the
water, and yields himself to be laid along in it by his hands, but conceive
what part of a man you will, except the hands which you will not for shame say
is the only member to be baptized, and I Will say hic labor, hoc opus est, it is a
matter of no small difficulty to dip merely that: for if you will dip a man's
head and shoulders only in the River, you must poise and posture him
Archipodialiter with his heels upwards, if his feet and legs only, you must
first at least lift him up wholly, and carry him in clearly from the ground,
which kind of dipping men in Rivers, as it is more toilsome surely then that
total dipping, which John and Philip used, so let him take it, who is minded
to make himself more moil then needs, for our parts we have a way wherein to do
it with more ease, and to do it more sufficiently too, then by the halves.

As for the other of the Dr. quibbles viz.

First (for the rest of them are elsewhere removed) That the Israelites were
baptized in a cloud, not dipped into it.

Resp. nor sprinkled neither, but only metaphorically baptized.

Secondly, that Zebedees children were baptized with blood, the baptism
wherewith Christ was baptized, and yet neither he nor they dipped into blood.

Resp. Both he and they were baptized with sufferings, shame and contempt, and
affliction, and all misery in the world for truths sake i. e. pene, yea penitus
submersi, sunk ore head and ears in deep waters of the proud, going over their
souls, and overwhelmed with the waves of the wickeds wrath, prevailing against
them for a time, and that's the bloody baptism he speaks of, not literally the
sprinkling of their own blood upon them, when they were slain, for John
suffered otherwise, but his blood was not shed at all.

Thirdly, that the fathers speak of the baptism of tears but no dipping in that
baptism.

Resp. we mind not what your fathers spoke hyperbolically, but what our fathers
spoke in truth, and plain soberness in this case.

It was therefore a total dipping certainly, which was then used, and by which
Christ and the Eunuch were baptized in the water, and not any other kind of
washing there, as the Dr. dreams, which is also evinced yet a little further
by this, forasmuch as though the Eunuch was gone down with Philip into the
water, yet he was not said to be baptized till Philip had dipped him therein: for
if the wetting or washing, or dipping of some parts of the body only might
pass for sufficient baptism, then as soon as Philip had conducted the Eunuch
into the River, he might have led him out again as a person sufficiently
baptized, for he was washed already and dipped so far as to the Ancles, but the
business was not done though the Eunuch was in the River, till he had baptized
him thereinto.

Rantist.
Give me leave though to put in one thing by the way, and that is this, it is a
question to me for all your confidence, whether Philip and the Eunuch went down
into the water at all or no, the praeposition (...), whereupon you ground it,
does not always signify into, but sometimes unto, and why may it not in this
place be thus read viz. they went down both of them unto the water, both Philip
and the Eunuch?

Baptist.
No it cannot, for they came unto the water before, and so its expressly
spoken in the text ver. 36. where its said, and as they went on their way, they
came unto a certain water, (it is probable some foord or brook that they were to
pass through) and the Eunuch said see here is water, what hinders me to be
baptized, if they were come unto the water already (as the word says they
were) they could not be said properly (except they had gone from it first) to
come unto the water again after they were come unto it, therefore the next
motion was into it without question: yea the very Dr. himself, with whom we now
deal, confesses no less then this, that Christ and the Eunuch were baptized in
the river, and that such baptism of men has been used, if then they were used
to be baptized in the water, they went down first certainly into it, not unto
it only, for then they could not be well said to be baptized in it.

As therefore to that other quirk whereby the Dr. seeks to evade all baptizing
in water, and pleads for a baptism with water only viz. that the praeposition
(...) which commonly is put after the verb (...), signifies not in but with and
is so translated) and this is one of Mr. Cooks Crotchets too p. 12. of his
book) the Drs own grant quite cashieres it, while he says that John and Philip
baptized Christ and the Eunuch in the river, for though I deny not but that
(...) may be, and sometimes is truly enough translated with especially in Rev.
19. 21. the place quoted by Dr. Featley and Mr. Cook, who both strive to
enervate A. Rs argumentation from that praeposition, which is used Mat. 3. 7.
Mark. 1. 8. where John says I indeed baptize you (...) i. e. in water (says
A. R.) with water ^saith the Dr. and Mr. Cook) yet if it be granted (as it is
by the Dr) to be in the River, then it cannot be denied but that it is in water
however, and so the Dr. thwarts himself in that.

Neither is there such inconsistency in my conceit between baptizing in water,
and with water, as that either this or that should be held exclusively of the
other, for they rather necessarily stand both together, yet so as that the
advantage stands still by it on our hand, for whoever baptizes at all, yea he
that baptizeth in water baptizeth with water also, and likewise he that will
baptize wi^h water must necessarily baptize in water too, i. e. obruere over
whelm or plunge persons over head and ears therein, or else if we go to the
truest signification of the word (...), in reality he baptizeth not at all.

Let it be rendered therefore baptize in water, or with water which you will,
its all of a price to us, since the one of these includes the other.

And whereas the Dr. and Mr. Cook both make such a matter of the words that
follow viz. (...).


He shall baptize you with the holy spirit and fire, the Dr. pleading that the
Apostles were baptized with fire not dipped in to it, and Mr. Cook that one may
as well say Christ baptized in the holy spirit, and in fire, or put the party
into the holy spirit and fire, as that John baptized in w^ter, the praeposition
(...) being there also.

I answer, we may as well say so indeed, for it is a truth as well as the other,
they that are baptized with the spirit and fire, are also baptized in the
spirit and in fire, and put into the spirit, and into fire i. e. wholly into a
holy flame of zeal for God, and the Gospel, for that's the baptism with fire
that is there mainly spoken of, and not as the Dr. divines that outward
appearance of cloven tongues only, like as of fire that sat upon them in the
assembly Act. 2. 3. for that was but a special, accidental, visible token of
Gods presence extraordinarily appearing among t^ose particular persons at that
time, baptizing them inwardly with the other, which is no more necessarily
incident to all persons that are baptized with fire, and to all those unto whom
that baptism with fire is promised, which are indeed all the Saints, that
repent and believe the Gospel, as well as those that were met on the day of
Pentecost, (as we see Mat. 3. 11. where John promises the baptism with fire, as
well as with the spirit to all penitents, most of which never had that vision
of cloven tongues) which appearance of cloven tongues I say, is no more
incident to, nor to be expected by all that are baptized with fire, then the
appearance of the spirit descending in shape of a dove, and lighting upon
Christ at the time, when he was baptized or filled with the spirit, which was
much what such another special, casual and visible token of Gods presence as
the other, is incident to, or to be expected by all those that are baptized i.
e. filled with the holy spirit: and albeit this phrase [in the spirit] may
seem to found so non-sensically to Mr, Cook out of our mouths, that are a
people of no account with him, yet I hope it shall seem congruous enough out
of the mouth of the holy spirit, and the holy Apostles themselves, for they use
it more then once, or twice in the holy Scripture, and me thinks he should not
be, unless he be willingly, ignorant of it; for not only does John say twice
viz. Rev. 1. 10. 17. 3. of himself in this manner viz. I was in the spirit, and
he carried me away in the spirit, but likewise Paul says plainly to all Saints
Gal. 5. 6. walk in the spirit, and to himself and all Saints, v. 25. if we live
in the spirit let us walk in the spirit, and testifies of the also Romans 8. 9.
that they are not [in] the flesh, but [in] the spirit, if the spirit of God
dwell in them, where by [in the flesh] he means all over, altogether, or
totally fleshly, drenched, drowned in flesh, plunged over head and ears as it
were, in flesh, filth, and corruption as the world is that lies in wickedness,
so that there is nothing but flesh to be seen upon them, as he is that is
buried in water, whom that Element has wholly covered, and by being [in the
spirit] no other then that which is the baptism with the spirit, i. e. being
endued with the spirit, wholly sanctified in every part though but in part,
with the spirit, all over seasoned, washed, cleansed by the spirit, for thus he
is, that is baptized with the spirit, i. e. he is in the spirit as well as the
spirit in him.

More then this yet, though the word [(...)] may be rendered [with] as well as
[in] for it is both [with] and [in] water that we are baptized, when we are
baptized as we should be, when it stands between (...) and (...) so that we may
read it as well I baptize you [with] water as [in] water, yet can it not be
very properly read so when it stands between (...) and (...) and (...), and yet
so it stands Mat. 3. 6. Mark 1. 5. for though I can bear with him that says
thus, viz. John baptized [with] water, yet he that shall say that John baptized
[with] Jordan or with the River Iord^n, as if all Jordan was used to every ones
baptizing rather then [in] Jordan and [in] the River Jordan, I shall think that
his brains crow out nonsense which is intolerable.

Whereupon as to the word [(...)] all Translators do there English it [in] and
not [with] and though I can read it [with] together with them, as well as [in]
when the Greek is (...), yet by their leave, and with non-submission to their
judgments (as no way sleighting them) further then I find them not fallible,
and saving both the Dr. and Mr. Cooks conceits to the contrary, I see no reason
since one of those places is a relation of the same thing with the other, but
that as Mat. 3. 6. Mat. 5. 1. we must read thus, viz. they were baptized of
John [in] the River Jordan, so we may without such uncouth utterance of the
thing, as seems to them to be in it, yea and as agreeably to Scripture language
as otherwise read Mat 3. 11. Mar. 1. 8. thus viz. I indeed baptize you [in]
water, but he shall baptize you [in] the holy spirit and fire.

But more then all this yet, though the word [(...)] that is used in those
places, may without any advantage to you be read with as well as in yet the
praeposition [(...)] which is used Mark 1. 9. where it is said that Christ was
baptized of John into Jordan, that cannot possibly be rendered with which yet in
the intent of the * (...).
spirit is doubtless the same in sense and signification as [(...)] is in the
other, and more significant to our purpose, for howbeit, it be rendered in
Jordan as [(...)] is elsewhere, yet into Jordan were more agreeable to that
rendition of it, that is usual in other places: but so to read it, viz. he was
baptized of John into Jordan does render your sprinkling a plain piece of
Nonsense, for it cannot be sensibly said, he was sprinkled into Jordan,
therefore you will in no wise give way to that: the Doctor indeed leaves A. R.
and bids him farewell in that point, as if he were afraid to have any noise of
it, and says not a word against it; but Mr. Cook and Mr Blake, who saves
himself a labor, and uses not a jo^ more then what Mr. Cook furnishes him with
to that purpose, do both sternuously stand against the reading of the word
[(...)] Mark 1. 9. by into Mr. Cook p. 14. and Mr, Blake p. 4. of their
respective returns to A. R. and Mr. Blackwood, who both make mention of that
passage; yet the utmost that both these repugnants bring against it is of no
more force then a very feather, for all that they say is this, that the word
[(...)] does often signify in or by and not into as Mat. 2. 23. Mark 4. 13.
Mat. 5. 45. Mat 10. 9. 11. 13. 33. he dwelt in Nazareth, in Capernaum; neither
by Jerusalem andt. neither possess money in your purses; in the name of a
prophet, she hid it in three measures of slour, in all which places the word
[(...)] is Englished in or by.

Resp. As i^ because this word (...) has other significations besides into,
but specially the signification in in other places, where very common sense,
and reason show that it cannot there bear be Englished into, but only in,
therefore it cannot by any means bear to be Englished into in this place where
its as good sense, save that it shows sprinkling to be nonsense, yea and more
suitable to a genuine, and candid construction of the word (...), and
undoubtedly to the spirits meaning in the place to English it into then to
English it in, for though he was rantized [Anglice] sprinkled into Jordan be
ridiculous, yet he was baptized [Anglice] dipped into Jordan is as proper to
the full, as he was baptiz^d in Jordan, yet they blush not to say, for so says
Mr. Cook, and there lies the very force of his reason, viz. that because (...)
signifies in, though he knowesi signifies into also, therefore it were absurd
to render it into here at all; Mr. B^ake also makes this his sole ground
whereupon to say that the Scripture is against our Englishing (...) here by
into, because elsewhere, viz. in the places they allege, where the sense will
not bear it to be read [into] ^s rendered all along in or by; I cannot but
believe that those two gentlemen are Judicious enough to discern their own
halting, and mere shuffling (...) this case, for if I should argue upon them,
as to but one of those places, where they will have (...) to be Englished in on
this wise viz the word (...) very frequently, and most properly signifies into
as namely Luke 5. 3. he entered into one of the ships Romans 11. 24. thou art
graf^ed into a good ol^ve tree Ephesians. 4. 9. He (...).
descended into the lower parts of the Earth, Mat. 6. 6. Enter into thy Clos^,
Mat. 6 13. lead us not into temptation Acts 8. 38. they went down both into the
water both Philip and the Eunuch, therefore it is absurd for you to render it
in in Mat. 4. 13. and the Scripture is against that interpretation, if I say I
should urge so upon them (and so they argue to us ward) they would quickly spy
out my nakedness in that consequence, but O how abominable blind are they at
home?

Nevertheless I tell you plai^ly that though right is right, and to be stood
for to a tittle, and that if the word (...) Mark 1. 9. were rightly rendered, it
should be rather into then in yet the service the word in will do us in that
place, is little less then what the word into will do, so that we need not
stand contending for the sense of into having enough from your own professed
sense of in without the other, wherefore waving our right in that at present,
we w^ll freely fall in with you as the sense is in, yea we grant that (...)
signifies in and that in many more places, then those alleged by your selves,
as namely to add to your store Act. 2. 27. thou will (...).
not leave my soul in hell Luke 11. 7 my children are in bed with me.

But is it so that (...) signifies in and is so rendered in that place, and many
more? then I am sure hat here it does not signify out of for he that is in a
City (put a Nazareth or Capernaum) is at that time when said to be in it, not
out of it nor only by it but in it, money that is truly denominated to be in a
purse is at that time truly in it and neither out of it nor beside it, leaven
hid in three pecks of Meal, whilst hid is in it, overwhelmed, covered with it,
and not on the outside with a few dusts of meal sprinkled on it only; He that
is in hell i. e. the grave, in bed while he is truly said to be in it, he is in
it, and not at it only, and so he that is truly denominated to be baptized in
water or in Jordan in the River Jordan is not ou^ of it, not at it, not by the
side of it, not near it only as you fancy them to have bin that were baptized
of John in Jordan.

He I say who is said truly (and the spirit lies not) to be baptized in Jordan
must needs be, whilst he was in the Act of this baptizing, not out of Jordan,
nor just by it only, but truly in it, and that's more then he needs to be in
order to baptism, if he can be baptized as well standing by it only in that
fiddling way of sprinkling.

Whereas therefore you contend against baptizing, i. e. dipping into Jordan
into Rivers, and plead for a baptizing in water only by the Example of Christ's
baptism which you yield in Jordan, but not into it, I marvel what wide
difference you see in these two, that you should grant it to be in, and yet be
afraid to grant it to be into Jordan: you cry out not into, not into by any
means, for that is no way consistent indeed with your dry washing, but by all
means let it be in only, viz. in water, in the River, in Jordan: let it be in
water then as [much as you will for me, so it be [in] water that you are
baptized, and not out of it, and not well nigh without it, as most of your
christened Creatures are, whilst little or none, in comparison of such a
measure of water as must necessarily be in order to a true baptizing of them,
does once come near them.

Fourthly, it appears plainly that the way of baptizing in the primitive times
was by total dipping, not sprinkling, in that they chose to do it in places,
where there was much water, or many waters, which they need not have done, if
sprinkling might then have past for baptizing, John baptized in the River
Jordan, and was baptizing John 3. 23. in Enon near to Salem, and the reason is
rendered thus, viz. because there was much water there, and there they came and
were baptized; and as the reason why they went to be baptized there, was
because there was much water, or many waters (for the word is Plural) so
surely the reason, why they went to such a place was that they might be
baptized i. e. dipped in water, as they could not conventently be elsewhere, at
least not every were, for where might they not easily have bin sprinkled? and
upon this account no doubt, as John chose to preach about those River sides,
viz. Jordan and Enon, that their conver^s might conveniently be baptized, Paul
and Silas being at Philippi, and abiding in that City certain days to preach
the Gospel, on the Sabbath, the most likely time of vacuity from other
occasions for people to assemble to hear in, went out of the City by a Rivers
side, and there sat down, and spoke to as many as resorted thither to hear,
viz. certain women, (for men for the most part were more shy of the Gospel as
now they are) that they might conveniently dispense baptism to them, as should
embrace the Gospel, as a certain woman named Lidya, and her household did, and
thereupon out of hand were all baptized, Act. 16. 12. etc.

Rantist.
Their baptizing where there was much water for this reason, that they might do
the work so effe^ually to every person as by dipping, is a frivolous
conjecture, as if there could be no reason, why John should chose a place,
where many waters were but that he might dipp the whole man in the water, the
cause rather seems to be this, because waters in those hot Countries were rare,
and in some places could not be had in a great distance, and because there came
multitudes to be baptized, for the dispatching of which they might well seek
places of many waters, where John and his disciples might at once be employed,
one water of depth sufficient would have served for the use of dipping, for
dipping sake he might have sought for a deep, but needed not to seek many
waters.

Baptist.
So says Mr. Cook indeed to A. R. p. 15. 16. and Mr. Blake to Mr. Blackwood,
who jumps as just with Mr. Cook, as one that never saw nor heard of any
sprinkled, can likely do with another, who maintains sprinkling to be the
only way of baptizing, but both weary themselves to little purpose.

The question is not whether John had no reason. but that which we allege of
baptizing, where there was much water, but whether that which we allege viz.
that he might dipped the whole man be not one reason: as for that you bring viz.
because there came multitudes to be baptized, and that John and his disciples
might at once be employed in baptizing, that can be no reason at all of their
running into rivers to baptize, nor of their dispensing in Jordan, In Enon, and
in places of much water, or in many waters, and therefore (for ought I see yet)
ours is the only one: for verily were it not for the sake of total dipping,
they need not for the multitudes sake that came to be baptized, nor yet for the
multitudes sake who did baptize (I mean John and his disciples, who no doubt
were all at once employed in that work) have sought for a place of much water,
or many waters: for as one basin of water may well serve to sprinkle a whole
parish of many persons, or if not, its easily replenisht, so many persons
employed at once in sprinkling might easily put their hands into one, or if
not, might they not easily have it in many basins? what a poor shift is this?
Rivers, Jordan, Enon, many waters, and why? because many were baptizing, and
many to be baptized; one water of depth (quoth Mr. Blake) would have served for
the use of dipping: for dippings sake they he might have sought for a deep, but
needed not seek many waters: but would not one water of no great depth, as a
basin, yea of no depth at all, as a cock or conduit have served for the use of
sprinkling 1000s? for sprinkling sake, even of multitudes, they need have
sought for neither deep waters, nor for many waters neither: or if they must
needs have had as many waters as they had dispensers, they might quickly have
made many waters out of one, by filling out of one well, one cock, one bucket,
many basins.

Mr. Blake rejoices in Mr. Blackwoods rendering the word plurally viz. many
waters, which the translators render in the singular viz. much water, supposing
he has such a prize in our yielding to read it so, as takes off the whole
force of our reason: but I hope he understands himself better then to believe,
that by many waters is meant several waters, waters in several sourses or
channels divisim, Sigillatim, seorsim sumptae, divided and a part one from
another, for by many waters is meant a confluence of much water together, many
waters meeting in one, flowing, running contiguously, and contained jointly in
one sourse, river, channel; otherwise in one River Enon it could not be said
there were many waters, for it was but one flood, as Jordan was, so that by Enon,
or many waters he must needs understand much water, a sufficiency, a competency
of water for the occasion in hand, enough to baptize i. e. to dip, and
overwhelm in, and not several waters, for several persons at once to sprinkle
in, for this might be done easily without much water, and if not without
several waters, yet at least in several basins of water only, but the other
could not: many shallowes were sufficient for many to Rantize, and be Rantized
in, but they sought some one deep, one Jordan, one Enon of depth sufficient,
those being only the most fit to baptize i.e. to dip in.

Fifthly, it appears plain that the Saints in the primitive time were totally
dipped, or overwhelmed in water by that denomination that is given to them
after baptism Romans 6. 3. 4. where the Romans are said to be baptized into the
death of Christ, and buried with him in baptism into death: also Col. 2. 12.
when the Collossians are said to be buried with Christ in baptism, and therein
also raised with him, through the faith of the operation of God, who raised him
from the dead:

Now we all know that he that is buried, is totally put under that element
wherein he is buried, whatever it be, whether water or earth, and all over
covered with it, not sprinkled with a little only. Non quaelibet aquae
guttula, nec quaelibet terrae globula: it is not a little parcel of water,
sprinkled on a man can denominate him baptized, as it is not a little clod of
earth crumbled on a man can denominate him to be buried, for baptism is a
burial, an ordinance, and visible sign, wherein every believer is to be visibly
buried, and every one that's truly buried, is totally covered, subjected to that
element that buries him, and for a time at least translated by it out of sight.

Rantist.
Buried? yea, but mistically and spiritually, invisibly and inwardly only, in
respect of the thing signified in baptism, and effected in them viz. death to
sin by virtue of Christ's death, in which respect also they are said to be
raised i. e. to newness of life by the power of Christ's resurrection; but this
is not meant nor spoken with reference to the visible sign it self, as if there
were to be a burying of the body under water, and bringing that up again: Its
the inward grace, and not the outward sign it self, in respect of which baptism
is called a burial, and a resurrection, the things signified being our dying to
sin, and rising to righteousness, even as Christ did die and rose again.

Baptist.
I am glad to hear you grant so much truth as you do at the present, and I hope
you will see the whole out in the end, for all will not own so much, some,
perceiving no doubt what a foundation it lays for us to build firmly upon all
that in this point we contend for, do rather choose to deny this truth that
baptism signifies, or at least that it resembles a death, and resurrection,
then by owning it, be forced to own the true way of baptism indeed.

Your Dr. Featley little better then denies both at first p. 70. saying thus,

As for the representation of the death and resurrection, that is not properly
the inward grace signified by baptism, but the washing the soul in the laver of
regeneration, and clensing us from our sins, but I can little less then
admire that he above all men, who quotes the Rubric with little less
authority, then he does the bible, and has no question little less then an
100 times in his days taught little children the catachism contained therein,
should quite forget to learn it himself, for there its set down plainly, that
the inward and spritual grace signified by the outward sign of baptism, is
death unto sin, and a new birth unto Righteousness; and besides he knew that
in true regeneration, there is a death and resurrection.

Rantist.
However in the manner of baptism as it is administered in the Church of England
there is a resemblance of a death and resurrection, for though the child be not
always dipped in water, as the rubric prescribes, save only in case of
necessity, which would be dangerous in cold weather, especial if the child be
weak and sickly, yet the minister dippeth his hand in the water, and plucketh
it out again when he baptizeth the infant: and these are the very words of Dr.
Featly next following the words you quoted, and therefore whether he be right
in those or no, I am sure he is in these, for there is a resemblance of death
and resurrection in our baptism.

Baptist.
Whether the Drs mind misgave him or no after he had asserted that a death and
resurrection is not the thing signified, and that which is to be resembled in
baptism I know not, but me thinks he speaks as if he feared whether that would
hold water or no, and therefore least it should be found to leak, in the v^ry
next words, which you now speak in, as one supposing it the safest way to grant
tha^ there ought to be a res^mblance of a death and resurrection in right
baptism, he rather goes another way to work viz. to patch up a proof of it that
there is a resemblace of a death and resurrection in that administration of it,
that is used in England; but it is in such a way me thinks as may well make all
the seers ashamed, and Divines confounded, specially you that so dote on that
Doctor as to give up your selves to be so blindly discipled by him (as you do
and would have others to do so also) that ever such a piece of doctrine should
be delivered (and yet behold you justify and side with it) by Englands Doctors
in Divinity.

It seems then you dare nor quite gainsay, but that a representation of a death
and resurrection is fit to be made in the manner of baptizing, and that the
Church of England has prescribed that it shall be done in such a manner, as
may be tanta mount thereto viz. by dipping, unless of necessity through the
infants sickness it be done otherwise (yet notwithstanding that prescription
of the Church, which of you priests did ever do any other then sprinkle the
healthiest infants?) but because the subject of your baptism in England, being
an infant, is too tender at all times to be dipped or buried in water (where note
that your false subject of necessity ingages you to forgo the true way of
baptizing, which your selves prescribe unless necessity forbid it) because I
say the child cannot conveniently be buried with Christ in baptism into death
in his own person, therefore (ecce signum) this visible death, burial, and
resurrection with Christ must be all transacted for him per altum i. e. by the
ministers hand, that is dipped into water, and brought out again as it were
instead of the child.

And this is even very suitable to all the rest, for all the rest of your
service in the point of baptism is done by representatives, as little as it
represents what is malnly to be represented by it, and one part would mock the
other is this should not be done so too: it is true all is done in the child's
name, and in the child's stead, but nothing done that of right ought to be done
either by, or to the child himself: The infant indeed is asked, do thou
believe in God? do thou forsake tho devil? will: thou be baptized etc? but
others must answer, and promise, and profess, assent to, and vow all these for
him, others mouths must speak his mind, and there is the profession: again he is
spoken to by the minister saying to him, I baptize thee i e. dip or bury thee
with Christ in baptism into death, for so it is in a little plainer English, and
true sense and intent of the service, but alas its nothing but the ministers
hand that is dipped, buried, raised again with the drips that hang upon which the
infant is only rantized, and there is the resemblance of the death, burial and
resurrection: but I trust Sirs you will understand at last that when Paul says
to the Romans and Colossians that they were buried and raised in baptism, he
does not mean that the dispensers hands, but that their bodies were put under
water, and brought out again, in respect of which they were said to be buried
into death, and are raised again, i. e. not spiritually only, and really in
respect of the souls dying to sin, and living to righreousnesse, but
outwardly, visibly, bodily in water also, and this significatively, and
representatively of the other, and this is my third argument for total dipping.

Rantist.
Significatively I grant if you will, but not representatively, I know no
necessity that in every sign there is to be aresemblance of the thing signified
thereby.

Baptist.
If that be granted you will not easily withstand the other, yet that is
granted by the most, and must be granted by all whether they will or no: as for
Mr. Cook and Mr. Blake themselves they neither of them seem to me to deny, but
that such a thing as a death and resurrection are signified in baptism, yea Mr.
Cook affirms it, yea, who questions says he p. 19. but our justification and
sanctification, or remission of sins, together with mortification and
vivification are signified by baptism? and he says right, for none can, and I
think none does deny it, but Dr. Featley, of all Divines that I know of: yea
Calvin and Zanchee both assert it in their several expositions upon these very
places Romans 6. 4. Coloss. 2. 12.

This participation in death says Calvin, is principally to he respected in
baptism, for not only purgation, but also mortification, and the dying of the
old man is proposed there, etc.

And of spiritual circumcision Paul makes two parts says Zanchee, the first
he calls burial with Christ, the other resurrection with him, and of both
these he makes baptism the sign etc.

Nevertheless our above named opposers will at no hand give way. that there
should be any representation or resemblance made in baptism of these two
things, which are the prime significations of it, by putting under water and
plucking out again: yea they seem to chide with their several Ant agonists A.
R. and C. B. for offering once to urge that the outward sign ought to hold
analogy or proportion with the thing signified in that particular; A proportion
between the sign, and these things signified, viz. a death, burial and
resurrection Mr. Blake grants there is in our way of baptism by dipping, but
that there need be, or should be so by institution, this he hears not of with
patience, no, nor Mr. Cook neither.

But if it please you to have patience with me so long, since those two are the
maine men that (beside the Doctor whose repulse is not worth a rush) so mainly
oppose our Argument from Romans 6. Col. 2. He take the pains to transcribe their
several replies, and then see what strength there is in all that they say to
the contrary.

Mr. Cooks defense is as follows.

What you go about to gather says he from Col. 2. 12. Romans 6. 4. l know not,
unless this, that as Christ was buried, ab^de in the grave three days, and
then rose again, So your party baptized must be put under the water, abide
there some considerable time, and then come up again, for if you press a
similitude of Christ's death in going down into the water, and of his
resurrection, or coming up out of the water, why not also of his abode three
days by abiding three days or some considerable time, under the water? which
will make bad work, neither can any such thing be gathered from those
Scriptures.

I would demand two Questions (says he) 1. How you gather from these places a
dipping of the whole man over head and under water? and that a similitude of
Christ's death, burial and rising again, to be represented by dipping in water,
is signified here? these Scriptures show indeed that the end of our baptism is
to seal our communion with him in his death, and resurrection, by which we are
dead to sin, and raised again to holiness: but if you will press hence a
resurrection by our descending into, abiding in, and coming up out of the
water, take heed least you be one of those, which add to Gods word, least he
reprove you as a liar, and add unto you the plagues written in his book, for I
know no word of God, wherein this representation is necessarily employed, much
less expressed.

Besides if you urge death and resurrection to be resembled by deseension into,
and ascension out of the water you must urge also burial, which is principally
there expressed by the biding of the whole man, head and all under for a time,
answerable to Christ's three days burial, which cannot be without danger, yea
certainty of drowning.

2. If it should be granted that a representation and resemblance of Christ's
death, burial and resurrection is set before us in baptism, and so of our death
to sin, and rising again to holiness, yet I demand why this may not as well be
by infusion of water as dipping? can you give me an example of so many killed
and buried by immersion, or dipping into the water, as I can give of them that
have been put to death and buried by infusion of water? I am sure a whole world
of men and other creatures (those few that were in the Ark only excepted) were
buried in the universal deluge at once by infusion, not by dipping: so that
infusion or sprinkling may as well clearly signify death and burial as
dipping: and to the preservation of No^h and those that were with him in the
Ark (on which waters were poured) from drowning: the Apostle compares baptism
as its Antitype. Thus far Mr. Cook p. 16, 17.

And then again p. 19, 20. 21. he undertakes further viz. to argue back again
upon us at large, and to prove, that if there must needs be a resemblance and
representation in baptism of the things, that are signified thereby, then it may
be as well, nay must be rather by washing, pouring sprinkling then by dipping
and putting under the water, sprinkling and infusion being as (if not more)
agreeable to the nature and institution of baptism then dipping or immersion,
for as the word used, i. e. (...) signifies washing, so the thing represented,
sig^yed and sealed (says he in the wonted implicit phrase) in baptism is a
washing (...) Cor. 6. 11. ye are wasted. etc. the washing of Regeneration 2
Tit. 5. having your bodies washed with pure water Heb. 10. 22. it is a cleansing
and purging 1 John. 1. 7. blood of Christ cleanses us from all our sins Heb.
9. 14. blood of Christ shall purge your conscience, which things viz. washing,
clonsing, purging are done as well by infusion of water says he as dipping,
and though it were granted says he, that in those hot countries they commonly
washed by going down into the water, and being dipped therein, that will no more
enforce a necessity on us of observing the same in baptism now, then the
examples of Christ, and the Apostles gesture in the supper ties us to the same
which was leaning and partly lying, but it may be objected (says he) that
sprinkling a little water does not so fitly represent the washing of sins away,
as dipping or plunging, since here the whole body is washed, there the face or
head only: I answer first says he, the Scripture no where requires washing of
the whole body in baptism.

Secondly, with as good reason one may plead thus, that it is most convenient
that at the supper every communicant should receive his belly full of bread and
wine, and take as long as his stomach and head will hold, to signify the full
refreshment of the soul with the body and blood of Christ; but who would endure
says he, such reasoning?

These outward elements of water, bread and wine are for spiritual use, and to
signify spiritual things, so that if there be the truth of things, the
quantity is not to be respected further then is sufficient for its end, namely
to represent the spiritual grace, and that it be neither so little as not
clearly to represent it, nor so much as to take off the heart from the
spiritual to the corporal thing: yea the spiritual grace and visible act of
God upon the soul signified, and represented by the outward act of baptism viz.

The application of Christ's blood, and donation of the spirit is expressed in
Scripture by the name of pouring, spr^kling, and that probably, if not
certainly, with allusion to the administration of baptism Isa. 44. 3. Joel 2.
28. I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, Ezech. 36. 26. He sp^inkle clean
water upon you, and you shall be clean, this clean water questionless is the
blood and spirit of Christ represented in the water of baptism, so in the new
testamet Act. 2. Heb. 10. 22. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Heb. 9. 13. and 14. verses compared
together and Heb. 12. 24.

Now (says he) let any one without prejudice consider these Scriptures,
whether at least some of them speak not in allusion to baptism, and whether
baptism be not a lively resemblance and representation of the things here
spoken of, and withal let him consider whether the thing exhibited in this
sacrament, be ever so fully set forth by dipping, and then I leave him to judge
whether sprinkling be not as, if not more, agreeable to the nature of this
sacrament as dipping or immersion.

In this manner Mr. Cook delivers his conceptions in his to A. R. we will only
see what his parallel says, who argues as Mr. Cook does, epitomizing as it
were the labors of Mr. Cook, unto his own turn against C. B. weel first fully
receive his charge also, and then fully return what in right reason remains to
be returned to both.

If by baptism says he we are planted into the likeness of Christ's death, and
also made partakes of his resurrection, will it follow therefore that there
must be some ceremony in the application of the water to resemble it? if you
may take this liberty of argument, give me leave says he to attempt the like,
and with as good reason to conclude, that baptism must be no other then
sprinkling, that there may be proportion between it, and that sprinkling of
blood and water, that did foreshadow it: or baptism must be only by pouring of
water, there being a lively representation between that and pouring out of the
holy spirit; or that baptism must be by washing with water only, there being a
lively proportion between that, and washing away of sins by Christ's blood; you
see (says he) what you will gain from these disputes from Analogy and
proportion.

To this purpose Mr. Blake p. 6. as if he had stopped all our mouths, by this at
once for ever, yet I hope he shall see that he has left us room enough yet to
breath in, and by which to breath out some reply.

Now to give the more plain, quick, clear, and condign check to these two
palpable controulers, not to say contram^lers of the present piecious and
apparent Truth, reducing Mr. Blakes sharp and snap-short Syllogisticalls unto
that long circumferaneous collation of Mr. Cook, out of which (for ouhgt I
find) he fetch it, and in the answering of which Mr. Blake is answered as well
as he, I most earnestly entreat both those two, and all other opposites to that
one, and only true way of baptizing we plead for, viz. of total dipping,
seriously to advise what is granted and denied, what is asserted and argued,
and by what weak Mediums, and on what crazy grounds those things are, that are
in contradiction to us denied, asserted or argued by them or either of them.

They are indeed Copar^ners so that both seem to side with what either says,
which yet I marvel at the more, because Mr. Blake who quotes but contradicts
not Mr. Cook in it at all, so far as I find occasion to guess by some passages
in the first and fourth pages of his Reply to Mr. Blackwood, is against
sprinkling, so far at least as to judge the way of dipping Mr. Blackwood pleads
for, which himself professes he has been an eye witness of, and known to be
the constant practice of many Ministers for many years together, when yet he
never saw nor heard of any sprinkled, to be more suitable to the word then
sprinkling, but Mr. Cook is so earnest for the way of sprinkling, as the most
excellent and pertinent way, that if we may judge his meaning by his words, he
thinks dipping does set forth the things signified but by the halves in
comparison of it; why else does he say sprinkling is as (if not more) agreeable
to the nature of the Sacrament as dipping.

Mr. Blake grants not a necessity, but an expediency at least in dipping more
then sprinkling, yet is silent toward them, and sides exceedingly against us
with them, that are both againt us and himself too for sprinkling as more
evpedient then dipping* what reason he has so to do is worth his earnest
examination, he grants that in baptism we are planted into the likeness of
Christ's death, and made partakers of his resurrection, he grants, and Mr. Cook
cannot deny it, that de facto there is a proportion and similitude of Christ's
death, bu^al and resurrection, by which we are dead to sin and rise to
righteousness, held in the way of dipping, and in that respect I am persuaded
judges dipping in his conscience more expedient then that of sprinkling, yet
will no more then Mr. Cook himself allow, but denies us the liberty to argue
that by duty, necessity or institution, there ought to be de jure any ceremony
to resemble it: what little reason he has so to do will appear easily, and
without further proof to himself, who grants so far, if he consider that it is
duty, and necessary for us, necessitate praecepti) by command, commission and
institution from Christ, to do that ever that is most commodious and expedient;
and whether it be not most expedient, and more then expedient too, to resemble
the death and resurrection of Christ, and ours with him in baptism, and whether
dipping be not more expedient then sprinkling, or any other way, and more
pertinent to represent all those things, which are signified and are to be
resembled in the ordinance of baptism, will fall under our examination by and
by, when we come to consider what the things are that are specially signified
in baptism, and how requisite it is that they be also represented in it.

In the mean time let it be considered what is granted and denied by Mr. Cook
of whom I may truly say so little do I ken what the man means by it, that he
both grants us full as much as we desire, and yet denies us too no less then
every thing we would have; denying indeed, to the contradiction of himself, the
very self same things that yet he grants: the truth is I know not what to call
it but confusion, nor find I a way how to reconcile some parts of it to the
rest, so full of vatiance it is within it self: one while he grants, asserts
and argues the same in general that we do, viz. that the spiritual grace, or
thing signified in baptism is, and ought to be represented, or resembled in
that outward sign, and that respect is to be had that the outward element of
water, which is to signify the spiritual thing be used, as to the quantity of
it, though not further, yet so far as may be sufficient to us end, which end
(says he mark his phrase in this passage p. 20) is to represent (which is as
much as to say to resemble, or lively to set out to our eyes) that spiritual
grace or thing signified, and that it be not so little as not clearly to
represent it; yea and which is more, and as much as we say our selves he
grants, and asserts it for undoubted truth that the spiritual grace, or thing
signified by baptism is (among other things) a death and resurrection: for
(...) questions (says he p. 19.) but our justification and san^ication or
remission of sins together with mortification and vivification (which is as
much as to say those two parts of our sanctisication, viz. our spiritual death
and resurrection) are sealed and signified by baptism, i. e. are the spiritual
grace of it. Also p. 17. these Scripiures viz. Romans 6. Coll. 2. show indeed
(says he) that the end of our baptism is to seal our communion with Christ in
his death and resurrection, by which we are dead to sin and raised again to
holiness.

And in all this he sides so sourdly with us, and jumps so just into our
opinioo, that if we did hire him to speak our mind for us to the world, we
could scarce desire him to propound it more plainly than he does, bating only
his stiling baptism by the name of a seal, instead of which I wish he would
call it only a sign: yea he gives us all that in this case we contend for from
those scriptures, viz. that the spiritual grace or thing signified in baptism
is to be therein also represented, and that our death and resurrection by
virtue of Christ's is that thing that is signified there, or that spiritual
grace the signifying of which other things not excluded) is the chief end of
our baptism.

Otherwhiles again he gain says this grant, speaking of it suppositively only
as page 17.

If (says he) it should be granted that a representation and resemblance of
Christ's death, burial and resurrection is set before us in baptism, and so of
our death to sin and rising again to holiness,

As if he were never the man that had granted, as you see he does, or ever
would grant, or give way to such a thing, and not only so, but as if he were
loath, and half angry that any man should speak the truth but himself, or the
same truth with himself, he charms A. R. and little less then charges him as a
liar, and in him consequently us all, for saying no other then what (if you put
his sayings together) he says himself, which is this, viz.

That our mortification and vivisi^ation by virtue of Christ's death and
resurrection is the spiritual grace or thing signified, and that respect or
care must be had in the administration of it, that the quantity of water be
sufficient clearly to represent the spiritual grace [but how that can be
without enough to be buried in water and raised again, what ere he thinks I
know no:] but if you will, says he, press hence a necessity of Resemblance
of Christ's death, burial and resurrectiby our descending into, abiding in, and
coming up out of the water, take heed least you be of those that add to Gods
word; least he reprove you as a liar, and add unto you the plagues written in
his book, for I know not any Word of God, wherein this representation is
necessarily employed, much less expressed.

Thus whereas he says elsewhere, as I have showed above, that the end of
baptism was to represent the spiriual grace as well as signify it, and that the
spiritual grace, or thing signified, and to be clearly represented is
mortification and vivification, or communion with Christ's death and
resurrection (which things it is strange he should say against the word of God,
for he protests it to be against the word when we say it, and if there be any
word expressing or implying a representation, which himself so much talks on, I
am sure there is none like those two which we produce, viz. Romans 6. Cot. 2.
which most lively show it, as I shall show anon, and undeniably declare) yet
here in the passage last cited, he that talks of this representation, and
resemblance of Christ's death and resurrection, and ours with him, as needful to
be made in baptism, is a liar with him and an adder to the word, which warrants
no where to press a resemblance of the thing signified in the dispensation of
the outward sign, no not so much as in those Scriprures Rom 6. Col. 2. So this
representation in baptism is with him it seems a matter that must be, and yet
must not be, and yet must be.

And yet for all this (which is the wonder of me, and will be of many more, but
specially of every wise man, that has his wits about him, and would have bin
of Mr Woodcock too, who without taking notice of any weakness in it, extolled
the Book in the beginning of it, and put it forth to Sir John Burgoines
patronage, had he well weighed these passages of it) Mr. Cook wheels about
once again, and will needs have a representation and resemblance of the thing
signified by baptism in the manner of administration of it, and argues stiffely
for it to, but the representation must be of what he pleases among the things
signified, and not of the main thing signified in baptism, it must be of
sanctification as it is called a washing a cleansing, a purging, a pouring of the
spirit on us, a sprinkling of the blood of Christ on us, and so be done by
sprinkling water: but not as it stands divided into its two parts mortification
and vivification, a death and resurrection: or else if there must be a
resemblance of this death and resurrection in baptism, then by an As for
example fetched from the old world, that was drowned, dead, buried by an
infusion of water, not an immersion, and from the Ark which was rained upon
only, and not overwhelmed, this death and resurrection must needs, and may
better be resembled by an infusion and sprinkling then by total immersion or
dipping in water, for if we urge to have the death and resurrection resembled
by dipping, i. e. a descension into the water, and ascension out of the water,
which we all know was the way of Christ's and the Eunuchs baptism, we must urge
also burial, which is principally expressed. Romans 6. Col. 2. to be resembled
too by biding of the whole man under the water for some time, answerable to
Christ's three days biding in the bowels of the Earth, which cannot be without
danger, quoth he, yea certainty of drowning: and if sprinkling should not so
fitly resemble as dipping and plunging, yet the Scripture no where requires the
washing of the whole body, to all which I answer.

Resp. 1. which thing of his called sprinkling of water on the face, for all he
says it may as well or better (since so many were of old killed and buried by
sprinkling, or raining on them in the days of Noah) serve to resemble our
death, and burial then dipping does, yet in truth resembles a death, burial,
and resurrection, little more then a knock of the pate.

Secondly, which drowning of the old world, as it would make not a jot for such
a purpose as he pleads for, had it been by such a way as he dreams it was by
viz. sprinkling, raining on them, by infusion and not immersion, yet in very
deed (and so heel see, when he is awake, and his eyes are open) was by
immersion immediately, and not infusion, for it might have rained long enough
upon the earth, before the men that had houses to shelter themselves in from
that, would have bin killed, and buried under water, if the waters had not
prevailed by a flood so high over the earth, as to overwhelm the men under it,
and plunge them ore head and ears: and if he call that sprinkling and infusion,
let him sprinkle or infuse water in such abundance, till the water sprinkled or
infused, become of such depth about the parties he is about to sprinkle, as to
swell ore their heads, and to swill them wholly under it, and I shall own such
infusion for right baptism, yet none of Christ's ordinance neither, unless
dispenst to a right subject i. e. babes or beginners in the faith.

Thirdly, which elegant allusion of his to the ark, as that on which water was
only powered or sprinkled, whence he seems to argue thus viz. that it rained
only on the Ark, or water was only powered or sprinkled upon the Ark, which
Ark was a type of baptism,

Ergo, baptism must be dispenst by sprinkling, is as simple a delusion as ever
was devised, for if he intend that for an argument to prove that baptism is to
be done by sprinkling (and if not what does it there?) it does rather conclude
that baptism must be sprinkled as the Ark was, for reduce his matter into the
form of a syllogism, and see how sillily it concludes viz. thus

The Ark was a Type of baptism.

But the Ark was only sprinkled with the rain, not dipped.

Ergo, baptism its antitype, is to be dispenst by sprinkling.

He concludes more then he can possibly squeeze out from those premises, and
another thing then what is asserted of the Ark in his minor: whereas in right
form it should run thus.

The Ark typified baptism.

But the Ark was rained on, baptized or wetted by infusion only.

Ergo baptism must be rained on, baptized or wetted by infusion only.

But then what simple stuff were this? what a logical lump of artificial
nonsense?

Besides, if it would follow that because the Ark which was a type of baptism
was sprinkled, therefore the way of baptism is sprinkling, it would more truly
follow that because the Ark was half dipped and half sprinkled, one part of it
being under the water, another sprinkled with rain above the water, therefore
the way of baptism is to dip one half of the person, and to sprinkle the other
half: but alas the Ark was a type of baptism, as it was the way and outward
means of salvation, but not in this respect as it was rained on: nullum simile
currit Quatuor.

Fourthly, which washings, purgings, sprinklings of Christ's blood, and clean
water typified of old, and foreshadowed by the blood of calves and goats, with
water and scarlet wool, and hysop, wherewith Moses and the high priests after
him sprinkled the old Israel, so that they were typically and ceremonially
counted holy, and clean thereupon in a fleshly sense only, are all expressions
spoken not with such allusion to baptism (as Mr. Cook imagines) nor are so near
a kin to it as he lays claim to: for if they are all to be resembled and
respected by us in our baptism, as things some way or other signified to us
therein, yet are they not at all the main, or principal things, or such as are
immediately, or primarily, but only remotely, and secondarily signified to us
therein, and so not necessarily to be either all, or at all so much resembled
as something else: But the death, burial and resurrection of Christ, which is
the rise and root, the original and meritorious cause of all the rest, being
that which (though you would shut it out altogether from its interest and right
of being represented in baptism of all the rest) is mainly and most immediately
signified, and primarily to be eyed, and respected. and all the rest but
consequently, and through that, therefore its necessary that this should be
resembled most lively, that it may take the deeper impression upon us.

Yea these matters of Christ's death, burial, and resurrection are such
cardinal things to be considered, as quibus non mediantibus, without the
mediation of which we cannot conceive clearly, nor lay claim to any of the
other as ours.

For as in the supper remotely heaven it self, and all spiritual excellencies
are signified to us to be ours, yet all the things signified cannot be
represented to the eye, but only such as are the more immediate significations
of it, and are the rise and proper cause of all the rest, viz. Christ
crucified, and our feeding on him by faith, theseare, and are to be lively set
forth unto us, and resembled before our eyes in bread and wine broken, and
powered out and received and applied to us, but not all the fruits of his death
and our faith. even so it is likewise in baptism; and indeed the main
signification in both is Christ's person crucified, dead, buried, and raised,
and that is to be resembled in both, and other things viz. the benefits of his
death as remission of sins, and purging, etc. to be consequentially gathered
from that, neither can, nor are, nor need all those to be resembled:

But as for Mr. Co^k he pleads stiffly to have all these resembled viz. washing,
purging, pouring, sprinkling of the spirit and blood of Christ, but excludes
the main thing altogether viz. Christ's death and resurrection, which are the
very rise and ground of all those: And yet if he will needs have all those to
be resembled, are they not as much, and much more resembled by dipping and
plunging a person in water, then by pouring and sprinkling a little water upon
him? and is not swilling under water a more effectual way of washing and
clensing then sprinkling? which though it be a Diminutive way of wetting, yet
in truth is no way of washing at all: If therefore he will have washing, and
such a washing as well deserves the name of clensing to be resembled in
baptism, can he have even that done in a better way then by dipping, or
dousing? for verily plunging, is a washing, and a more eminent way of washing,
and purifying, and so more lively resembling ablutione^ peccatorum the purging
away our sins by the blood of Christ, then aspersion, or bare infusion,
either of which without some after rubbing is a way of washing and clensing
seldom used by men or women, unless it be among slatternes that are minded to
leave things as foul well nigh as they find them: and I am sure there is no
rubbing succedaneous to your sprinkling, which is any ingredient to your
dispensation, for what the priest drops on the midwife rubs indeed, not on, but
off, and so as that is no washing, so (if it were) I hope you do not allow the
midwife to give equal influence with the priest unto the dispensation of
baptism.

Besides, both sprinkling and pouring are vertualy implied in plunging, and
burying in water, but these are not at all supposed in the other, every lesser
wetting being contained, and included in the greater, not so the greater in the
less.

Fifthly, which quirk of his concerning a necessity of abiding 3. days under
water answerable to Christ's 3 days burial, if we will needs urge an necessity
of resembling him in his death, burial and resurrection, is so fond, that a
fool may find enough wherewith to refel it, for Mr. Cook knows that nullum
simile currit quatuor, no similitude answers in all things, besides it is the
truth and substance of the thing, not the circumstance, or quantity of time of
abode, which is to be respected here, for a burial is as true a burial, when a
person abides but 3. minutes wholly under the element, wherein he is buried, as
if he abode 3. days, and a burial is as truly represented by being once under
water, as if one continued under altogether, and the resurrection a little
better by being brought up again alive, then if one lay till he were altogether
dead.

Sixthly and lastly, which assertion of his, uttered in favor of his assertion
viz. that the Scripture no where requires the washing of the whole body, is so
much the more favoring of either ignorance, or forgetfulness in him, or both,
by how much one of the very Scriptures, that are quoted by himself, as speaking
in reference to baptism, does require it, for its said Heb. 10. 22. let us draw
near with a true heart etc. and having our bodies washed with pure water, which
clause (if meant of baptism as undoubtedly it is) requires not a sprinkling,
but a washing (and that's more then your sprinkling is) and this too not of the
face only, which is the only part you sprinkle, but of our bodies; which word
whether we shall take properly to signify the whole body indeed, or run to
figurative acceptations, when we need not, and take the body by a Synechdoche
of the whole for a part to signify so small a part as the face only, I need
not wish a wise man to determine, for every unprejudiced man that has but
common sense will see cause enough to take it plainly as it lies.

Rantist.
But all this while me thinks you make it appear so plainly as you not must,
before I believe or receive it, that it is so needful as you would make it that
there should be a resemblance of the thing signified in that sign of baptism at
all, that's the thing I wait to see proved; for let Mr. Cook make what
suppositions and grants he will of a resemblance, yet I see no reason at all to
urge a necessity of such a thing, nor will I speak so much as ex hypothesi, if
there must be, for none need be for ought I know.

What I hope there are an hundred signs of things, which have not any analogy
at all with those things they signify.

Baptist.
Having thus blown away the strange mist, whereby Mr. Cook endeavored to
thicken the air, so that men might not discern clearly the true intent of those
Scriptures Romans 6. Col. 2. nor the truth at all in this point of total dipping,
I come now in answer to his and your, and Mr. Blakes flat denial of any word or
warrant for any representation, and also to his demand p. 27. to show how we
gather from reason, and your own authors, and those very Sciptures you oppose,
the diping of the whole man over the head, and under the water, and that a
similitude of Christ's death, burial and rising again to be represented by
dipping into the water is signified there.

But first I must tell you I observe you know not greatly what to say among you
against our urgings of a resemblance of Christ's death, and burial, and
resurrection from these Scriptures: for some of you stand it out, as much as
you well can, that there is not to be any representation of a death and
resurrection, as Dr. Featley and Mr. Cook both do, the Dr. keeping at such a
distance from it, that to fence it far enough from him he denies any such
thing to be so much as signified, Mr. Cook yielding that that very thing among
others is signified, and that the spiritual grace or thing signified is to be
represented too, only you must excuse him as to that piece of the spiritual
grace, all the rest but that he will give way to have resembled, but fearing
least it can hardly be so clearly evaded, but that it will needs be proved against
them that a death, burial and resurrection must be represented, they fall a
proving it that there may be, and is a death burial and resurrection reselmbled
in their way of sprinkling, and infusion, as much (if not more then in our way
of dipping) but either of them shift for themselves in several ways, the Drs
way wherein he proves there is a resemblance of death and resurrection in the
manner of baptism, as it is administered in the Church of England is this,
though the child be not dipped in water himself (says he) yet the minister
dippeth his hand in water und plucketh it out again when he baptizeth the
infant, where note, that the Doctor does conceive that though sprinkling may
serve to represent a death and resurrection, as well as our dipping, yet it is
upon this absurd account viz. in that there is a certain dipping accompanies
their sprinkling, whereby that resemblance is made viz. the divping the hand of
the Administrator: but Mr. Cook though he be not so gross as to imagine with
the Dr. that the burying of the ministers hand will serve instead of burying
the persons body, which is, if any burial be at all, to be buried in baptism,
yet he is as gross in his conception another way, while he goes about to prove
sprinkling, or infusion it self to resemble a death burial and resurrection as
sufficiently as dipping, and this too by such a coined Chymaera, such a crude
and im mature imagination as is ridiculous, viz. of the old worlds being
drowned and buried by no more then sprinkling, and the fall of rain, for verily
neither was the rain a resemblance of a death, burial and resurrection, or any
thing like thereto: nor yet was it the rain but the overflowing of waters by
reason of the rain that drowned them, and though that orewhelming was a lively
emblem of death and burial, as baptism is to be, yet there was nothing that
resembled a resurrection, as in baptism there must be, since they never rose
from under it any more.

This crooked come off therefore of Mr. Cooks is far more ridiculous then
rational, and yet I know more men of his mind in this particular, I mean so far
as to agree to it, with less ado then he does, that a death, burial and
resurrection is to be resembled in baptism, and yet to think that the
sprinkling or casting water upon the party does sufficiently make that
resemblance, but I testify to him that this his way is his foily, and theirs
also that apptove his sayings, and I advise both him and them that adhere to
him to be heartily ashamed of two opinions of his, so equally odd and absurd
that I can scarce tell well which of thetwo are more absurd then the other.

The one is his supposition that the spiritual grace to be represented and
resembled in the manner of administration of that ordinance of baptism is
sprinkling, besprinkling with the blood of Christ, whence in order thereto he
as unworthily argues, that baptism must be dispensed by sprinkling, which
indeed nullifies it from being baptism, if he consider the inconsistency that
is proved to be between them.

The other is the thing in hand, viz. his supposition that sprinkling may well
not only signify, but resemble a death, burial and resurrection as well as
dipping, and is as well required, for so he hints p. 19. to be used in this
Sacrament as the other.

If those, who own these things, and whose own they are, will not be ashamed of
them, for my part I am, for to think that the wisdom of the spirit, that in
condescension to our dull capacities did leave visible signs to be not only
true remembrances, but also lively resemblances of spiritual things, should
order things so unsuitably to sense, as to require and appoint matters utterly
unlike one another, and between which there is no Analogy at all to answer one
the other by way of resemblance, viz. such a thing as ran^sm to resemble a
death, burial and resurrection, which are to be, and are truly resembled all in
true baptism, i. e. in dipping, or appoint such an ordinance as baptism, which
in plain English is dipping, to resemble rantism only, or sprinkling with
Christ's blood is no less the absurdity in the abstract.

But as for you your self, you are it seems of Mr. Blakes mind, i. e. resolved
to own no necessity at all of any resemblance of any thing, not of any ceremony
to be in the sign of baptism, representing the things signified in it, I shall
therefore show that as in true baptism, i. e. dipping, there is de^to, and that
Mr Bl^ke confesses, so there ought to be de^re a proportion and resemblance of
the death and resurrection of Christ, and of ours with him in that ordinance:
whereas therefore you say that all signs do not represent the thing signified
thereby, it is true who questions that? but twill not therefore follow, but that
there are some signs that both do, and may and by institution must not only
signify, but also resemble at least the main things that are signified, of
which sort baptism is without question one.

We must here thefore distinguish concerning signs, among which some are
natural, which by nature signify the things, whereof they are signs, as smoke
signifies that there is fire, as we say there is no smoke but its a sign there
is some fire, a red and ^ouring morning a sign of a foul day.

Others Praeter-natural and institutive, which by institution signify the
things whereof they are signs, and this either by humane appointment, as the
Ivy-bush is a sign among men that wine is to be sold, where it hangs; or
divine, as the Rainbow is a sign by divine appointment to signify that the
world shall never be wholly drowned again by water: and these signs by divine
institution are either such as are simpliciter signantia, merely and simply
significative of the things they signify without any Analogy, or likeness to
them at all, as the Rainbow, which signifies, but resembles not the worlds
deliverance from drowning, and the dew, and drought that were by turns on
Gideons fleece, which were signs to him of it, but not resemblances of his
victory, and the shadows going back upon the dial of Ahaz, which was a sign to
Hezekiah, but not a resemblance of his recovery, and such like.

Or else such as are sign (...) similantia si^, having in them the
signification and similitude of the things signified together: and of this sort
are all those signs which you commonly, but not properly call seals also viz.
the sacraments, whether those of the old, or those of the New Testament, viz.
Circumcision, and the Passover, baptism and the Supper, from the manner of the
administration of the two first of which you use to argue to the manner of the
administration of the two last, which so far, but no further then serves your
turns you say came in the room of the other; for though by way of Analagy with
Circumcision, as coming in the room thereof, you would have baptism dispensed
to infants, yet neither Anallogically to males only, nor on the 8th day only,
nor to male servants also, nor yet by way of analogy with the passover, which
admitted of every circumcisied soul, will you admit baptized infants to the
supper, which came by institution more truly, and immediately in the room of
the Passover, even when it was moriturum, if not plane mortuum? for it was no
more to be meddied with for ever, whereas circumcision was in use de jure after
baptism was begun,

But I pray Sirs be not pickers and chusers thus at your own pleasure, but if
you will have an analogy to be held, let it be in such things, wherein it
should be held between the old testament sacraments and the new.

An argument however ad hominem i. e. sufficient to confute you out of your own
mouths, who plead so for analogy between those two administrations of the old
testament, and these two of the new arises naturally from your own opinions,
for if a proportion must needs be kept between circumcision and baptism in
point of administration otherwise, why not in the manner of the administration
of these signs, as they stand in reference to the things thereby signified, so
as that the one of these signs viz. baptism, may stand in some proportion to
its signatum, as well as the other i. e. circumcision?

The Pascal lamb without blemish, a bone of which was not to be broken, did not
only signify, but lively resemble also Agnum immaculatum exhibendum, that
lamb Christ Jesus, which was once to be offered without spot to God, and not a
bone of him to be broken, also the supper that came after it does not only
signify, but resemble also Agnum exhibitum, Christ crucified, that immaculate
lamb now offered, whose body was broken and blood shed, by bread broken and
wine powered forth.

Circumcision or cutting off the superfluous foreskin of the flesh did not only
signify, but lively represent the signatum, the Circumcision of the heart, i.
e. sanctification, the paring off, and putting away the fleshly superfluities
of the heart, and can you give us think you, or give your selves either any
good account, why baptism only of all the rest should be exempted in this
case, from bearing with the rest an Analogy, proportion and similitude to its
signatum, i. e. the thing mainly notifyed therein? which originally is the
death, burial and resurrection of Christ, and our communion therewith, and
plantation into the likeness thereof: is not the manner of administration of
that to be such also, as may resemble (and so only the way of dipping does) a
Death, Burial, and Resurrection?

Rouse up and reckon but with your consciences a little, and see if they will
tell you otherwise, if they do they give the ly (and that you who deify your
Orthodox Divines will be loath to do) to all divines both ancient and modern,
who so far as I find (except only Mr. Blake) do teach us that the end of all
the institutions of the Old and New Testament, to which you allow the name of
Sacraments, are ex instituto, to resemble as well as signify their signified
objects.

Kekerman referres all the Sacraments to the signs of that sort that do
signify cum Analogia, i. e. that bear a likeness to the things signified,
System. log. p. 12. 13.

Calvin and Ursin, that are men of much note in your Account, are thus
opinioned both, as you may see in the institutions of the one, and the
Catechism of the other, whether we are directed by you for sufficient furniture
for infants baptism. Calvin says thus of the Sacraments: Institutionum lib.
4. cap. 14. sect. 20.

In eundem in quem nostra nunc intendunt Scopum, et vetera illa spectarunt,
nempe, ut ad Christum dirigerent, and pene manu ducerent, aut ipsum potius ceu
imagines representarent, ac cognoscendum proferrent,
The Sacraments of the old Testament, did tend to the very same end, and
purpose, as ours now do, namely that they might direct and lead us, as it were,
by the hand to Christ, or rather that they might represent him as certain
images or pictures, and set him forth to us to be known.

Ursins Catechism says no less, but much more, and that much more plainly to
this purpose, and what is spoken there too is not spoken as the opinion of
Pareus or Ursin only, but as the mind of one, that may be more taking with you
then any of these, viz. Saint Austin, who is styled Malleus Hereticorum, one
that ma^ld the Heretics in his days, who also is sainted up in so many pages
of your Ashford Pamphlet, that you cannot for shame unsaint him so far, as not
to believe him, but to rehearse a little what is there said, in the 358. 359.
pages of that book: after mention made of the promise of the Gospel you may
find these words, viz.

Eam promionem in evangelio datam per sacramenta nobis magis declarat Deus,
nempe per analogiam signorum cum rebus, quae per ea significantur, sicut
similitudo declarat id, cujus est similitudo, haec enim quando intelligitur,
etiam id cujus est similitudo fit perspicuum, et quidem magis quam fine
similitudine, et ut vera similitudo non intelligitur, nisi analogia
similitudinis intellegatur, ita nec sacramenta nisi Analogia signorum et rerum
intellegatur: hoc sensu Apologia Augustanae confessionis aliquoties sa cramenta
vocat picturas.
That promise that is given us in the word God does more plainly declare to us
by the sacraments, namely by that likeness which is between the signs and
those things which are signified; as a picture or image declares that of which
it is the image, for when the picture is understood, that even that of which it
is the picture is made clear, and verily far more clear then without a
picture: and as a true picture is not well understood, if the likeness or
lively resemblance of the picture be not observed, so neither are the
sacraments, unless the likeness of the outward signs, and things thereby
signified be understood: in this sense the Appollogy of the Augustinian
confession, does diverse times call the sacraments by the name of pictures.

And again p. 363. showing wherein the sacramental union between the sign and
the thing signified consists, it stands (says he) in (...) vel similitudine
signorum cum rebus signatis, in the analogy and likeness that is between the
signs and things signified.

And then he goes on quoting Austin thus.

De qua Agustinus, Si inquit sacramenta quandam similitudinem earum rerum
quarum sacramenta sunt, non haberent, omnino sacramenta non essent, and then
again p. 365. speaking of those sacramental locutions (as you call them)
whereby the sign is often called by the name of the thing signified, and said to
do, and be that, which only the thing signified is, and does in truth,

This (says he) is by a sacramental metonimy, and the meaning of it is not
that one is changed really into the other, but because the sign does so lively
resemble the thing signified:

Next to which he cites again the very same sentence out of Austin, which is
rehearsed in latin just above, together with somewhat more, all which I English
thus viz.

If the sacraments should not have in them some likeness to the things,
whereof they are sacraments they could not be sacraments at all, but by reason
of this likeness, it comes often to pass that they bear the very names of the
things they resemble.

By the way I cannot but take notice what an argument here is against infants
baptism, as well as against the form of Rantism, fot if true baptism must
resemble, as well as signify, to the very eyes, and so mediante oculo to the
understanding and minds of persons, to whom its dispensed, is it possible for
that baptism that was dispenst in Infancy to represent lively and clearly to my
sense and reason, when I am at years, the things therein signified? for to call
that a sign, much more a lively resemblance of a thing before our eyes (so
Buchau says of baptism, ante oculos objicit) which we never saw at all, or if
we did, it was when we could not apprehend it, and so long since that we
necessarily, and universally forget it, and that so far that our fancy can
never possibly recollect that outward appearance of those inward things, is no
better then mere childishness, and very vanity to me.

Rantist.
This shows indeed that it was the opinion of these Reverend men, that there
ought to be of necessity as clear a resemblance as may be of the thing
signified in the administration of the outward, and visible sign in all
sacraments, or else they are no sacraments, but that is nothing binding to us
without some good ground out of Scriptures to believe it, therefore lets see it
appear from thence, and if you will from the Scriptures you began upon Romans 6.
Col. 2. in which I see nothing on which you can ground, that in baptism there
must be visibly, and representatively a death, burial and resurrection, though
I grant all these are signified thereby.

Baptist.
I rejoice much to see you renounce that implicit faith, whereby you have
formerly lived, it may be more upon the mouth of Calvin, Ursin, Austin, and
other Authors, then on the mouth of Peter and Paul, or the mouth of Christ
himself in his word; neither do I urge any thing out of these Authors to be
taken upon trust without trial, yet prove what they say however in this point,
and hold it fast too, if by the word you find it to be good.

I come therefore to consider that which first occasioned all this discourse,
and to see if such a matter as a death, burial and resurection of Christ, be
not here expressed, or at least employed, neither of which yet is granted by Mr.
Cook or Mr. Blake as things to which true baptism is to bear some resemblance,
and here let me tell you though you and the rest are engaged to make the best
of your rantism, now you see it questioned, and have begun in the face of the
world to defend it, will sooth men up, and tell them there is none but the
Anabaptists gather that there must be a representation of death, burial and
resurrection from those places, and such like, yet we are not alone in our
assertions even from those places, that these are to be resembled: for some
that wrote impartially upon the places, Romans 6. Col. 2. even of your own way
before the matter came so much in question, have showed their sense thereof to
be the same with ours, as concerning the representation of all these; witness
one Mr. Thomas Wilson, who in an exposition of his upon Romans 6. declares from
the 3 and 4 verses thereof in this manner.

That baptism is a pledge of our sanctification in all the parts of it thus,
the death of sin (says he) is effectually represented by the water cast on us
at our baptism (though by his favor, who was I perceive of Mr. Cooks conceit
that infusion might serve turn, not half so effectually as by the water
overwhelming us) the burial of sin by our being under the water, and by our
coming out of the water our arising out of our sins to a better life through
the power of the holy spirit applying Christ's death and burial for the b^ating
down of our corrupt nature, and his Resurrection for our quickening to
godliness of living.

Thus he, Neither is he alone in this sense upon these places, but most, if not
all modern writers, that do purposely, or but occasionally touch upon these
places, as Calvin, Ursin, Paraeus, Ti^enus, Zanky, etc. do fully agree with him
in this particular, viz. that the lively resemblance of Christ's death, burial
and resurrection, and of ours with him, that is to be held forth in the
administration of Baptism, is among other things signified in those Scriptures,
and do with him expound the words baptized in his death, buried with him in
baptism into death, wherein ye are also risen with him etc. not of the things
signified only, viz. our Mortification of sin and rising to holiness in a way
of likeness to Christ's death and resurrection, but also of the outward right
and form of administration of the sign it self, to be done in a way of
likeness to them both, so that we by that (as by an image or lively
resemblance) may not only be kept in a lively remembrance of the matter of
them, but may beat the manner of those matters also in our minds.

Thus Calvin l. 4. c. 15. s. 5. Alterum sructum affert baptisnius qui nostram
in Christo Mortificationem ostendit, etc. id est, another fruit of baptism is
this, it sets forth our death to sin in Christ and our new life in him, fitly,
as the Gosspel says Romans 6. 3. we are baptized into his death, and buried with
him in baptism into death that we might walk in a new life.

By which words he does exhort us to an imitation of him, as if he should say
we are admonished by baptism, that by a resemblance of Christ's death, we should
die to our lusts, and by the example of his resurrection, we should rise to
righteousness etc.

Also l. 4. c. 16. s. 16. speaking against such as say (no more then truth
though) Baptismum esse sepulturam, in quam nulli nisi jam mortui tradendi sunt,
id est, That Baptism is a form or way of burial with which none, but such as
are i. e. appear to be already dead to sin, or to have repented from their dead
works are to be buried.

And that he might vindicate infants who yet in infancy cannot die to sin, or
repent from dead works, tells us (but believe him who will in that.)

Nos jam ante Mortuos per baptismum sepeliri, id est, That persons are to be
buried in baptism, before they be dead, before they repent, or appear to have
died to sin, and to prove that, he cotes this very place Rom 6. 4. which the
scripture (says he) Deserte reclamet, nos ea condition in mortem sepeliri, ut
emoriamur ac mortificationem istam exinde meditemur, i. e. very elegantly
proclaims the contrary, namely, that we are buried in baptism into death, on
this very condition, that we may die to sin, and may even by that outward
visible burial we have in baptism be minded of the duty of mortification.

Which Exposition is the truth, yet not the whole truth, nor yet so much as
serves the turn Mr. Calvin brings it for: it is true we are baptized into death,
or buried in baptism in token that we must, and on this condition that we shall
die to sin, yet not only so, but also in token, and on condition that we are
dead in a measure, or have repented already; nor does it follow because we are
buried in baptism, that we may, and in token that we must die more, and more to
sin, that therefore we are to be buried in baptism before we die to sin, for we
are to repent before baptism and after it also.

But however the truth that is in it is enough to serve our turn at present, i.
e. to prove his Judgment and ours to jump together, as to the true intent and
meaning of those phrases in the text, viz. buried with him in baptism into
death, which both he and we take to express the outward ri^e of baptism, and
that that outward rite be performed answerably to the name here given it in
manner and form of a burial, which cannot be without submersion, and this too
in token, and as a resemblance of our death to sin and burial with Christ, the
signatum or thing signified and resembled, which whether it go before or come
with or after the sign is not material.

And though Mr. Calvin and we are twain and cannot agree whether we are to be
baptized, i. e. buried in baptism before we are dead to sin or after, yet
herein we meet in one with all other Expositors on this place so far as I find
(Mr Cook and Mr. Blake only excepted) viz. that whether Mortui or Morituri we
ought to be buried in baptism according to this place, not spiritually only,
for that is the inward thing signified into which, i. e in token and
resemblance of which we are outwardly buried, but visibly and representatively
also in the ceremony.

Much what to the same purpose speaks Calvin again about three or four pages
after, 'where coting both the places we are now in hand with, viz. Romans 6. 4.
Col. 2. 12. He Expounds the words buried with Christ in baptism of the verity
of the outward rite it self, representing and betokening the spiritual death to
sin that ought to follow it.

Paraeus also upon Vrsin p. 375. speaking how baptism is a token not only of
remission of sin, but regeneration also, which he makes so synonimous with our
death and burial with Christ that he cotes these these two places Romans 6. 4,
Col. 2. 12. to prove regeneration to be signified in it, (for we are said
(says he) to die and to be buried with Christ in baptism) gives this as one
reason why we are said to be regenerated that is, in his sense, dead and buried
with Christ in baptism, because of the likeness that is between baptism and
those things: so that he also takes the phrase buried with Christ in that place
to sound forth Sepelitionem externam internae simulacrum, that external act of
being buried in water by baptism, that is the lively emblem of the internal.

Zanchy also upon Col. 2. 12. writes thus viz. Regenerationis duae sunt parts
etc. of Regeneration there are two parts Mortification and vivisication, that
is called burial with Christ, this resurrection with Christ, the sacrament of
both these is baptism, in which we are overwhelmed or buried, and after that do
come forth and rise again; it may be said truly but sacramentally of all that
are baptized that they are buried with Christ and raised with him, yet really
only of such as have true faith.

Now I appeal to all men whether he do not here expound Paul in the words
buried with him in baptism and therein risen with him as speaking of the
outward rite of baptism whereby the spiritual death and resurrection is
resembled, yea and so lively resembled that even such as have no more then the
bare outward sign of water in baptism without the thing signified may be said,
though Sacramentally, i. e. and analogically and in respect of near resemblance
yet truly to be buried and raised with Christ, this cannot be said of them that
are but ran^ized only, for if in respect of any Mortification and vivisication
they may be denominated buried and raised with Christ, yet that outward rite
and ceremony cannot of it self denominate them so much as Sacramentally buried
and raised with Christ, for there is not so much as any likeness of such
things in it, but he that has the true outward rite of baptism, i. e. dipping
dispensed to him may be truly said to be buried and raised with Christ, though
he have no more, for he has the same visible overwhelming, and burying in
water and raising again in baptism, which in the bare ordinance of baptism
Christ himself had.

Bucan also that famous professor of Theology though he were so far benighted,
by being no doubt accustomed to sprinkling, that he saw not the difference that
is between it and dipping so far, but that he supposed one might serve as well
as the other, yet co^es this six^ of the Romans 3. and 4. to prove the Analogy
that is between the sign and the thing signified in baptism in his 24 question
in page 668. quae est analogia and conventen^a sig^ et rei signatae in
Baptismo? optima, etc. says he. What is that Analogy and Agreement which is
between the sign and the thing signified in baptism? Most ap^, forasmuch as in
the same Manner as the water washes the body, and clenses it from bodily
impurities, so the blood of Christ by its merits washes away our sins and
spiritual impurities, and his spirit sanctifyes us. Moreover that immersion
into water or aspersion does most clearly denote Rantismon the sprinkling of
the blood of Christ in order to remission of Sins, and imputation of
righteousness; but the abode (Quantumvis Momentanea, quantula cunque says
Tilenus) though never so small (so that both these confute Mr Cooks fancy of a
necessity of 3 days abode under water; if we will have Christ's burial
represented) lively denotes the death and burial of our corruption by virtue of
the death and burial of Christ, that is, the mortification of the old man, but
the rising out of the water does most analogically as it were object unto our
eyes ^he resurrection of the new man or our vivisication, and newness of life
and also our resurrection at the last day:

See how this man, saving that he shuffles in aspe^sion and immersion as
nothing differing, does own immersion into water, abode under it, rising out of
it as the most admirable way of analogy to signify and resemble what ev^r was
to be resembled in baptism; again in his 53 question p. 692. he quotes Romans 6.
4. saying with allusion to that Scripture that Predicatione sacramentali we are
said in baptism to die, to be buried, to be raised with Christ, and that
baptism confirms our faith in these things, because it does pingere mortem
etc. plainly paint out the death, burial and resurrection of Christ, and
therein is documentum etc. a certain lesson of our renovation, and resurrection.

Now the reason of all such sacramental locutio^* whereby the things signified
are said to be done in the outward sign, is (says Paraeus) analogia signi et
re^ signatae, tale enim quiddam est res significata in suo genere, quale
quiddam est signum in suo genere etc.

The likeness that is between the outward sign and the thing signified, for
such as the thing signified is in its kind, just such a thing the sign is in
its kind for as the water washes away the filth of the flesh, so Christ's blood
our sins, and in such a manner as the sign is outwardly dispensed, so
inwardly the thing signified, as the minister acts without, so God within etc.

As therefore God within by the power of Christ's death and resurrection
mortifies, buries to sin, and raises us to righteousness, so must not the
administrator without semblably bury the person in water in baptism unto death
and raise him again unto life? or in token of his resurrection to a new life?
if not where is then the analogy? and if no analogy why are we said
sacramentally in baptism to be buried, and raised? since the cause of all such
sacramental locution is because the sacraments are (as Austin says) pictures
of the things signified in them? or is aspersion an action as answerable to a
burial and resurrection, and painting it out as lively as submersion and
emersion do? hic murus ahaeneus esto,

This I know (as sorry a shif^ as it is) must be your most inmost shelter, when
all is done for it can never be with any color of reason, nor is it by any
reasonable men, that I know, save Mr. Cook and Mr. Blake, denied but that
baptism must (...), according to the word, yea that word Romans 6, ^ol. 2. bear
analogy to, and the image of the thing signified, yea and that very thing of
all the rest, which are represented therein viz. a death, burial and
resurrection by being under water, and brought out of it again, though by all
that sprinkle it is mo^ heedlessely thought, and therefore as senselessely taught
that rantism, i. e. aspersion sets forth those to the life, as much as baptism
i. e. immersion or overwhelming.

Among the rest that write of baptism with any allusion to those Scriptures we
are yet in hand with, what learned Tilenus says is worth your* animadversion,
I confess the man, though in his judgment he seem clear for our manner of
baptizing by immersion, submersion, and emersion, as that which was the only
primitive action, and institution, yet is so far benighted by the mist and
black vail of implicit faith which has covered all Christendom, as to suppose
that aspersion may now serve the turn, and that for sundry reasons some of
which are apparently fa^se, and never a one of them worth a ^raw, which i will
repeat and answer as I go; for says he Ritus in baptismo est triplex, immersio
in aquam, (...) sub aqua, et emersio ex aqua, quam vis autem immersio us^atior
olim fuerit presertim in Judea, etc.

The outward ceremony to be used in baptism is threefold, dipping into the
water, abode under the water, and rising out of the water, but howbeit this
immersion was the usual way in former times, especially in Judea, and other
warmer Countries, rather then aspersion [where note that he grants (and who
does ^ot but Mr. Cook, Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Blake, that having once denied it do
strenuously resist it?) that the primitive way in Judea, and those* Regions was
total dipping;] yet (says he) the circumstance pertaines not to the substance
of baptism, [which is false, for I have proved that to be no baptism that is
but sprinkling.]

Secondly, and since the analogy of the Sacrament may be held out no less in
aspersion, then immersion [which is as false and fond a fan^asm as the other,
for sprinkling has no more likeness in it to a death, a burial and a
resurrection (which though Mr. Cook and Mr. Blake deny it, yet Tilenus himself
abundantly pleads, as I shall show, and that ex instituto from these Scriptures
Romans 6. Col. 2. ought to be represented in baptism) then it has likeness to
immersion, submersion, and emersion, and that's not so much, as is between an
apple and a nut.]

Thirdly, and since in legal purifications sufficieba^t (...) sprinklings did
suffice [which if they did, it was because these sprinklings with blood of the
sacrafices, which were as well on the mercy seat as on the people in token of
oneness or atonement between God and them, were instituted directly, and
solely to point out the spiritual sprinkling of Christ's blood on the mercy seat
in heaven, and on us here on earth in token of atonement, which is not the
thing only, mainly, originally, or immediately signified, neither so as that
it only is to be remembered and resembled in baptism, but the truth of the
death, burial and resurrection of Christ, as the root whence all the other
flows, and therefore that reason, though true, yet is nothing to the purpose.]

Fourthly, since immersion [quoth he] may endanger the health, specially of such
tender infants as are wont to be baptized now a daie^, [which shows that of
old such were not baptized, and that Christ never instituted this ordinance for
infants, who cannot bear the dispensation of it to them, as it should be by
right, without danger of death, but must of necessity, and in charity, and in
humane prudence taking upon it to correct the divine wisdom of Christ, and
modle his ordinances more to their own ease, have another thing i. e. Rantism
universally dispensed to them instead of it.]

Fifthly, since both these rites viz. sprinkling and dipping are expressed by the
name of baptism Mat. 3. 26. Luke ^1. 38. Mark the 7. 4. [then which nothing is
more contrary to truth, for though it is true that dipping is styled baptism in
Mat. 3. 16. the place he brings to prove that (where note again that Christ
himself was baptized by submersion) yet that's not true that Rantism is any
where called by the name of baptism; yea in the very places he uses to prove
that viz. Luke 11. Mark. 7. it is most evident that it was more then sprinkling,
yea and no less then a dipping, that is there called baptism, for it was washing
of hands, which if ever any body living saw any, but slovens, wash, when foul,
by no more then sprinkling two or three drops of water on them, they have seen
more then ever I saw to my remembrance since ever I were born and christened.]

For these for^named reasons says Tilenus we suppose the Church by the law of
charity, an^ ne^essity may use which of these rites she pleases.

By all which it appears that though speculatively he saw submersion to be the
way by institution, unless out of necessity, and charity the Church forbid it,
yet practically he was as you are for aspersion, and this makes the more
against you in this matter, in that a man that retained sprinkling as you do,
since it is the fashion in these colder climates, should yet be constrained to
confess so much institution as he does for that way of truth, I mean
submersion, which we contend for; for seriously take away the wretched reasons,
which flattered him in to speak favorably of sprinkling, he was, as to the true
way of total dipping, caetera orthodox^s, as orthodox as we desire him to be.

I^e bestow the pains of rehearsing what he writes so far as concerns our
purpose, in very elogan* Latin p. 884. 886. 889. 890. of his disputations in
as plain English as I am able.

Baptism (says he) is the first sacrament of the New Testament instituted by
Christ, in which with a most pa^, and exact Analogy between the sign and the
thing signified, those that are in Covenant are by the Minister washed in
water, the outward rite of baptism is three fold immersion into the water,
abiding under the water, and resurrection out of the water: the form of
baptism, to wit, internal and essential, is no other then that Analogicall
proportion which the signs keep with the things signified thereby, for as the
properties of the water in washing away the (...) of the body do in a most
suitable similitude set forth the effi^acy of Christ's blood in blotting out of
sins, so dipping into the water does in a most lively similitude ^et forth the
mortification of the old man, and rising out of the water the vivification of
the New: although that Levitica^ rite of sprinkling of blood Exodus 24. 8. did
more grossly resem^e the blood of Christ, yet that was not so exact a
similitude as is in the water of our baptism. That same plunging into the water
holds forth to us that horrible gulf of of divine Justice, in which Christ for
our sins sake, which he took upon him, was for a while in a manner swallowed
up. Abode under the water how little a while soever (yet says Mr. Cook it must
be three days, answerable to Christ three days burial, or else it answers it
not as a true resemblance of it at all) denotes his descent into hell, even the
very deepest degree of lifelessenesse, while lying in the sealed and guarded
sepulcher, he was accounted as one truly dead: rising out of water holds out to
us a lively simitude of that conquest, which this dead man got over death,
which he vanquished in his own den, as it were, that is the grave, in like
manner therefore it is meet, that we being baptized into his death, and buried
with him, should rise also with him, and so go on in a new life Romans 6. 3. 4.
Col. 2. 12. that these things are signified unto us in baptism the very outward
rites themselves do teach, for immersion shadows out to us the pravity of our
nature, dying in us, in which our old man dies and is buried with Christ, the
progress of which benefit, putting forth its power in us by a little abode
under the water points out, even as rising out of the water sers forth a new
life, corruption being done away: hence it is that baptism is called the
washing of Regeneration, and that whereby we are saved ^us 3. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 21.
namely because what is done outwardly by the body in the sign, the same is
truly performed, and confirmed to believers in the soul; and even therefore
both the names, and properties of the sign and the thing signified are very
often interchangeably attributed to each other by a Sacramentally metonimy.

Thus says Tilenus in the forecited pages, and some of this he repeats ore
again page. 1078. whereby you may guess that in this his thoughts were well
digested.

Forma Baptismi est (...) says he sive Relatio, etc. The Form of baptism is
that Analogicall relation of the external and earthly, which are the signs,
with the heavenly things, or things signified: this relation and most lively
similitude, that is between them, is the cause why both the names, and the
properties of the signs and things signified are frequently given to one
another by a familiar metonimy of the holy Scriptures, wherein baptism is
called the washing of regeneration, and is said to save us, says he, and in
this respect also (say I) we are said to be buried and raised in baptism in
those places, because of that lively resemblance of and likeness to a burial
and resurrection that ought by institution to be in the dispensation of
baptism, and that is in that institution, if practiced as ordained by Christ.

Now who would think by all this but that this man had been baptized indeed, i.
e. dipped into, buried under, and brought out of the water in his baptism, in
remembrance and resemblance of Christ's death, resurrection and his own with
him? for how does he speak, and that out of these Scriptures we are upon, that
we ought thus to be baptized? and these things are exactly exemplified to us
says he, as if he had the lively Essigies of all that was done to him in his
baptism dwelling indelably in his mind, as if he had been truly buried, and
raised visibly in baptism indeed? and yet behold I believe I may be so bold as
to guess by what he says in favor of infants sprinkling, and by one thing or
other, that he was not baptized all this while, but merely a Rantist, and none
of us in practice, though so much for the way of dipping in his discourses.

Rantist.
But quorsum haec? what mean you by all this quotation of Authors.

Baptist.
Because Damnati lingua vocem habet, vim non habet, the words and constructions
of a condemned man, that is prejudged to be a heretic before he is heard, are
like to sway but little among his Accusers, and therefore I rather chose to
convince Mr. ^ook and Mr. Blake who deny these Scriptures either to express or
imply a representation of death, burial and resurrection to be held forth in
baptism by immersion, submersion, emersion by the judgments of their own
approved orthodox Authors, then by my own, judging within my self that those
words of Paul Act. the 17. 28. viz. as certain of your own poets have said, was
ad hominem an argument of more weight, then an Argument of ten times more
weight then it self, and that if the joint harmony of Modern Divines, holding
forth from Romans 6. Col. 2. a necessity of resemblance of burial and
resurrection to be made in baptism by immersion, submersion, emersion, be not
considered, the never so well grounded Testimony of my single silly self must
needs be slighted.

Nevertheless whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear I shall leave
a word or two upon record, whereby either to inlighten you, that there is a
resemblance of a burial and resurrection necessarily to be held forth in
baptism, and that no less is necessarily employed at least in these two places,
Romans 6. and Coloss. 2. or else to leave you without excuse in your disownings
of it: For

First, this will appear plainly; if it be considered that by the word baptized
in the texts is undoubtedly meant the outward rite, ceremony, sign and form of
the administration of baptism.

Secondly, if it be considered that the phrase buried with him and risen with
him, i. e. Christ, does expressly relate immediately and specially (if not
only) in those texts to that outward sign it self, as that in which, taken
distinctly from the mystery and inward grace. we are said to be buried and
risen, not only in signification, but in lively representation of the inward
and spritual burial and resurrection with Christ, and not to the spiritual,
internal death and resurrection it self, as that which is to be understood by
those phrases at all, muchlesse only, or altogether, or abstractively, and
apart from any outward and bodily burial and resurrection in baptism, as Mr.
Cook and Mr. Blake, seem too impishly to imagine.

Thirdly, this appears yet further insomuch as there are other phrases in that
6 of the Romans that do intimate, and express that spiritual death and
resurrection that is signified by the an alogical, and representative burial of
the body in water, and raising it again in baptism viz. dead to sin, alive to
God, newness of life, etc.

Here is mention made of the things signified: And as for that that is spoken
of und^ this expression buried in baptism it is delievered as a medium whereby,
as a motive whereupon, as a reason wherefore, as an image and representative
wherein we are both to read, and remember, and also to practice, and perform
that other: for do but mark, how shall we (says he) that are dead to sin i.
e. should be so, live any longer therein? know you not that as many of you as
were baptized into Christ i. e. into or in token of an interest in him of a
oneness, and fellowship with him by faith, are baptized into his death, i. e.
in token of such a communion with the power of his death, as kills sin, and
crucifies the old man, So that henceforth we should not serve sin? therefore,
or hence it is, says he, that in baptism i. e. the outward ordinance, we are
buried with him i. e. outwardly, visibly bodily in water into death i. e. in
token and resemblance of our dying to sin by virtue of his death, that we
should be ever practically mindful of this, that like as Christ rose again
after he was dead, so we should rise to a new life: for if we have bin planted
together in the likeness of his death i. e. signally in outward baptism,
spiritually, and really in the inward work, and washing, performed by the
spirit upon the soul, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection i.
e. we should be de jure, and shall de facto as we believe.

Fourthly, this burial and resurrection that is immediately expressed by the
words buried with him in baptism wherein you are also risen with him, is made a
motive, argument, and incitement to the spiritual death, and resurrection, for
therefore are we persuaded to die to sin, and live righteously, because in
baptism we are buried in water; and raised again in token that we ought so to
do, and on this cond^on are we baptized and buried and raised therein, and so
interessed into all the other benefits of Christ's death, remission of sins and
salvation viz. that we should die to sin, and live holily; and to this end also
that we may be minded thereby to do so.

Nos ea condition in mortem sepeliri in baptismo Scriptura reclamet, ut
emoriamur, ac mortificationem istam exinde meditemer, Says Calvin l. 4. c. 16.
S. 16.

Now if this death and burial, that we are buried with in baptism, be to this
end to teach us, and show us that, and how we must die to sin, then the burial
in baptism there spoken of is not the death to sin it self, for the motive and
things we are moved to are two, and so are the sign and thing signified. now

Fifthly it is not only such as is made a motive to the other, therefore is not
the other, but such a death and resurrection as is performed, accomplished,
transacted (...) baptism i. e. in the very time and juncture of our baptizing,
therefore cannot be meant of our spiritual death and resurection immediately,
but o^ that burial and resurrection which the outward man in a figure, or
resemblance passes through both at, and in the administration of the ordinance,
for the spiritual death and resurection is that, which though it be signified
and resembled in baptism, yet it is seldom, if ever, transacted in a person in
that juncture of time wherein he is baptizing, but for the most part before or
after, yea ever either before or after, and never in the very nick and act of
baptism, no neither of your baptism nor of ours, for you who profess to
baptize infants have a subject, of whom you hope that he will die to sin, when
he lives to years, but you look not on him as one that is mortu^s, but
moriturus, and that not in baptism but long after it, unless you suppose
baptism confers the inward grace viz. death to sin ex opere operato still; but
we baptiz^ng believers baptize such as repent from dead works, and in fieri,
though not insa^o ess^, are dead to sin before we baptize them, as well as
oblige them to die more to sin after it, yet you say your subjects for all that
are buried in baptism too, and so say we of ours, therefore the burial in
baptism there meant is no other then that of the sign, for the thing signified
viz. the death to sin is not done in baptism, whether it be before or after it,
and one of the two it is, for Calvin says truly that we hold baptismum esse
sepulturam in quam nulli nisi jam mortui already dead i. e. dying to sin are to
be buried, but of himself and others that are baptized in infancy he ^aies
quoting Romans the 6. 4. nos jam ante mortuos per baptismum sepeliri i. e. before
we are dead to sin, we are buried by baptism l. 4. c. 16. S. 16. the burial
therefore is not the signatum, but the signum i. e. their putting under water
in baptism, which sacramentally is called a burial, even therefore because of
the analogy and likeness it bears to such a thing, even to Christ's burial, and
ours with him, which are the things analogized and lively resembled thereby i.
e. by immersion, for by aspersion they are not.

And so I have proved by three arguments hitherto that Christ's ordinance of
baptism is a total dipping viz.

First by the prime signification of the word baptize which is to overwhelm or
wash by swilling, or dipping, but never to sprinkle, as Rantize never to dipp^
wash.

Secondly by the practice of the primitive times, which was totally to dip, as
I have made appear many ways.

Thirdly by the name of a burial and resurrection, that's there given to the
outward sign by a sacramental Metonimy i. e. in this respect as in its
dispensation it must bear analogy and likeness, as spirinkling does not, to
the death burial and resurrection of Christ, and ours in him, which are the
things immediately signified in baptism, and therefore mainly, and as lively as
may be to exemplified thereby. If there be yet any more to say against dipping,
and for sprinkling, let us hear it, and as I find it true upon trial, or false
and feigned, so accordingly I shall eit er answer it, or yield, for I know that
he, who is not as desirous to hear all that can be said against what he holds,
as what is to be said for it can never be so solidly settled in it as he should
be: for nil tam certum quam quod ex dubio certum est,

Nothing more sure to a man then that which he sees as well on what ground some
doubt and disown it, as one what himself owns and embraces it, and though I
profess my self to be beyond all doubt that Rantism is no ordinance of Christ,
but a mere figment of men meaning to serve Christ by the halves, nor infant
baptism neither, (howbeit I have disputed for them both, and thought I did God
service in it too) yet he that knows my heart, knows that I have so
unsatiable a thirst after the knowledge of truth, that if I could think those
things to be the truth of God, as I once did, upon the same rotten, and
reasonlesse principles you now think so on, I should re-entertain them with
rejoicing in my flesh, which would find much ease, and honor by it, and in the
spirit much more, which would have that ease, and honor, with peace of
conscience, which I was once constrained to deny my self of, because it was
once inconsistent in me with such peace, but welcome that disgraced truth of
dipping disciples, since it is that truth, which I am certain (howbeit they have
trampled it for a time) the gates of hell shall never prevail against, nor the
ablest man on earth so as to disprove it by all that is to be said to the
contrary from the word of Christ.

Rantist.
There Is more to be said yet to the contrary, and more then ever was answered
yet, or ever will be to any purpose by you, or any one else of your gang, and
that ^t only in way of exception against much of that you have alleged about
the childishness, vanity, and insufficiency of infants sprinkling, but also
against that dipping fancy you are fallen into, which is some new motion, or
renewed notion at the best, having (for all you have said) neither good ground,
nor example from the word, only the old greek word may be so construed, and
that's all the ground I could ever learn for that fluid practice, and I am
confident that you and that party are wholly in the wrong, for I have seriously
studied that controversy, and besought the Lord to guide me, and his good
spirit by principles from his word of truth sealed upon my conscience does
assure me that way of dipping is groundless, irrational, and more uncivilly
foolish, then infant baptism can be called childish, and I desire you to tell
me what commission he had that baptized you, who may possibly be an unbaptized
person, or if he was not yet if you look but some few removes backward, and
inquire who baptized him? and who him? and who him? etc. you must come at least
to unbaptized persons, I mean even in your own account, who deny sprinkling to
be baptism, and such I hope you do not count fit administrators of baptism, and
yet such must begin it, for your way was not in use very long agon, also what
commission has Christ given you to baptize, you being no minister of the
Gospel? and also what commission he has given you or any else to baptize in
that manner, which is without Scripture, against reason, and common sense and
discretion? yea I may say against all principles of modesty and common honesty,
and charity to men's lives, and so against both the sixth and seventh
commandment that many judicious men have judged it to be little less then
murder, and adultery, and I could easily prove it to be as bad as I say of it,
but that its super^uous so to do, since sundry of our worthy Mr. Baxter Divines
viz. Dr. Featley, Mr. Blake, Mr. Cook, and especially have some of them in one
particular, and some of them in another, done it so sufficiently already that
i will rather refer you unto them.

Baptist.
I have been so much innured to such hot-shots since I owned the truth, that I
can well walk in the midst of them now without amazemeut: much of this sort
of matter I have under my hands in private letters to my self, and others, and
what of it is not there is legible I confess, as it were in text letters in
the printed Polemicals of your Champions, whose sharp censures, and heavy
charges of the way of truth, which we walk in, how judicious they are shall
(God willing) be anon examined, since you send us to them: at present you shall
have a short word to your quaeries, and such other passages which may occure,
and intervene either from your self, or their writings in way of contradiction
or obstruction to any thing that has been said before.

Your first is grounded upon a simple supposition, that an unbaptized person
may in no case baptize, or make a fit administrator of baptism, whereas there
is nothing in the world more clear then this, that when it is to be done, and
cannot be well done otherwise it may be done (as well as by one that was) by
one that never was baptized at all: yea why not in case of innitiation after
intermission as well as at the innitiation of the Gospel it self? I wonder who
baptized John the Baptist, that was the greatest administrator that ever was?
for either he was baptized surely, or else he was not, if he was ever baptized
at all, who baptized him? but if he was never baptized the matter amounts still
to be the same, i. e. to evince no less then we assert that at the innitiation
of the dispensation, whether at first, or after a long unlawful cessation, an
unbaptized person may baptize: for if John the Baptist himself was not baptized
himself, or if he was, either by one that was unbaptized, or else by one that
was first baptized by himself, he talks in his sleep that says an unbaptized
person may not in such a pressing case baptize.

Your second querie is as unsolidly grounded as the other, and supposes your
opinion to be this, that no man, though baptized himself, unless he be a
Minister, i. e. an ordained officer may baptize, for say you what commission
have you to baptize you being no Minister of the Gospel? whereas if by Minister
you mean one officiating as a pastor over a people, there is nothing more clear
in the world or in the word either, then that others besides the Ministers may
baptize, viz. not any she, for which there is no president, but rather precept to
the contrary 1 Cor. 14. 2 Timothy 2. but any prophet i. e. any he gifted disciple,
especially who by the improvement of his gifts he proves, as not seldom such
do, isntrumental of the parties convertion: Ananias baptized Paul himself, yet
was he but a certain disciple Acts the 9. if you say that he was sent by God
himself, to that service, it serves to show this however, which we affirm that
God limited not that dispensation to the Ministry, for if he had he would have
sent Peter, or at least some other officer to that work.

Did not Philip baptize the Samaritans and the Eunuch? yet he did it in the
capacity of a disciple, and howbeit it is true he was ordained to be a Deacon,
and Deacons were by the Bishops babishly authorized to baptize, yet that was no
part of his office as a Deacon, for his Deaconship designed him to no more then
barely to have a care of the poor, and if you say he was an Evangelist also, so
is every one that is gifted to preach the Gospel, and does it, whether he be in
any office or no, for Evangelist is nothing but a preacher of the Gospel, and
such are they that occasionally preach it, as well as such as preach it
constantly by way of office: therefore all the disciples that were scattered
together with Philip its said went every where (...) Act. 8. 5. (...), Act. 11.
20. and Philip that was one of those disciples (...) Acts 8. 40. preached or
did the work of an Evangelist, whence Philip was called Evangelista, that being
the very thing made him an Evangelist, and not his Deaconship, besides which he
had no other office, because he did Evangelizare: no man can give a reason why
the scattered disciples that did Evangelizare, or preach the Gospel with him
should not be denominated Evangelists as well as he, and indeed (...), and
(...) differ no more then a Preacher and he that preaches, and though every
Pastor be both an Evangelist and a Prophet; yet he that saie^ every Evangelist,
and Prophet is a Pastor or an ordained officer qua sic, or that either of these
are nomen off^cii, or sounding forth more then a person thus or thus gifted
viz. the Evangelist to preach the Gospel for the conversion of such as are yet
without, the Prophet to speak to the exhortation, edification and comfort of
the Church, and people already converted, and both these occasionally only, and
not as by virtue of an ordination to an office, may say it ten times over,
before the Scripture, rightly understood, will furnish him to make proof of it
once.

And as these ordinary disciples, for the Apostles abode still at Jerusalem
Act. 8. 1. went every where as well as Philip, pro suo modulo Evangelizantes
preaching Christ according to their abilities, so the hand of the Lord was with
those occasional preachers, that a great number believed, and turned to the
Lord by their means, and were baptized also undoubtedly by their hands; yea the
famous Church of Ant ioch had its foundation from this, and grew into a Church,
which they could not do without baptism, before any actual officer came near
them: for though Paul and Barnabas walked with them for a year and improved
their gifts for their edification, yet neither of these, were yet actually any
more then Evangelists, and Prophets, though before by God intended, and not
long after by the Church visibly ordained to their Apostleship, i. e. men of
excellent gifts, and this will appear Act. 11. from verse 19. to the end, with
Act. 13. v. 4. and backward to the beginning: you do therefore greatly err not
knowing the Scriptures, which tell you also plainly that though Paul converted
all the Corinthians, yet his own hands baptized but a few, committing that
dispensation, as an inferior work to his preaching, to the hands of inferior
disciples, as Mr. Baxter himself also confesses to your confutation, asserting
it from 1 Cor. 1 17. so though Peter converted the company in Cornelius house,
yet surely he baptized them not all, if any at all, with his own hands, but
left the administration to the hands of others, some one or more of the
brethren that came with him; And the manner of speech implies plainly no less,
for he commanded that they should all be baptized in the name of the Lord: yea
so far is the word from tying up the dispensation of baptism to an office, that
we have much more president and proof after Christ's ascension of common
disciples, then you have of officers baptizing.

You therefore make much more a do in this then needs, you strain indeed at a
g^at, and swallow a camel, and busy your self so about the truth of
administrators, that you have lost the truth, and substance of the
administration it self; were your baptism true baptism indeed, there is no
necessity that ordained Ministers must administer it, but unless it were ^ruer
then (...) it is, no matter if it were never administered at all.

Know therefore Sirs I beseech you that the verity worth, weight and efficacy
of baptism depends not upon the quality of the person administering, but upon
the truth of the subject to whom, and the true form wherein it is administered;
the Scripture prescribes plainly who they are that shall, and in what manner
these shall, but not at all by whom they shall be baptized: it is the duty of
them ^at believe to be baptized, and his duty that baptizes to baptize indeed,
not rantize only, and to baptize such as, being taught the Gospel, do believe
it, but who they must be that are to baptize those is neither here nor there to
the baptism for ought I find in the word^, so they be but Masculine disciples:
nay though the person baptizing be not only no officer (but in the case above
named as yet) unbaptized himself, yet if the person baptized be not only a
believing disciple, but also baptized really, and indeed his baptism is never
the worse for the other:

Experience tells me, and I believe many more, that have been baptized
according to truth, that it was drawing near to Christ with true hearts in his
true ordinance that made us accepted in his sight, not the qualifications of
the baptizers, whose baptism and ministerial functions (were they invested with
both) could add never the more validity nor verity to our baptism, as neither
could the nonentity of either of those in them have possibly made the baptism
so sincerely submitted to, be in any measure void, and of no effect; the
placing so much in persons administering as to think our selves ere the better
for that, was that fantastical fopery of the Corinthians for a while, one
saying I am of Paul, another I of Apollo, another I of Caep^as i. e. I was
baptized by such or such, which made the Apostle Paul, who with his own hands
baptized but some of them, well ^igh wish he had baptized none of them at all,
when he saw their carnal glories in the persons administering, and bless God
that he baptizd no more, least they should have thougt the better of
themselves, and of their baptism for its dispensation of it by his hands.

The administrators therefore being baptized or not baptized, minister or no
minister makes the baptism, if elsewise warrantable, neither better nor worse
of it self: all this I speak all this while, not as granting that our baptism
is by unbaptized persons, and that my self am no minister of the Gospel, for
neither of these shall be yielded by any means, unless you were more able
then you are to prove them, I speak it suppositively that if these were both
so, yet both my baptizing and being baptized may be warrantable enough
notwithstanding or else if we deemed it worth while to seek out what succession
our baptism has had from the Apostles, in a series without interruption, it is
possible there were some disciples in all ages that owned the truth, though so
few and despised, that their generation can scarcely be declared, for who can
declare his generation, whose life in himself, and his was still cut off from
the earth? but we go by the word that is above all Church and Ministry in our
account of our baptism and ministry, and not by succession in either: and as
for your selves, that hold so much on succession, and boast of a lineal descent
of your ministry and Rantism from the Apostles, twill pussle you no less to
prove that, if we put you to it, then twill if we put you to it to disprove a
lineal succession of our baptism, for if we cannot name the particular persons
that baptized one another in this way, wherein we do it, successively from the
persons of the Apostles in answer to this question who baptized you? and who
him? and who him? and so upwards till we come thither, are you able if we ask
you who sprinkled you? and who him? and who him? and who him? etc. to
particularize more punctually then we? are you able to assign who began our way
of baptism first of all in the world, unless you begin as high as John the
baptist? nay verily though Dr. Featley would fain father it upon Stock, yet its
most manifest unto you all that infants sprinkling was denied by some ever
since it was known to have a being, for it was controverted in the days of the
fathers, and that it would not have been had there been none that had then
denied it, and denied it could not be by any but such as pleaded the baptism of
believers, in those times, and were the right way baptized themselves.

You have not one president of one infant sprinkled, nor proof that such a
thing was so much as talked on, for at least an hundred years after Christ, but
we are most certain, and your selves cannon deny it, that the bapti^m of
believers began at John the baptist, and the Apostles, and if we could prove a
succession of it de facto no further downwards then so, yet it is enough to us
that we find it then was so, whereby to prove that it ought to have been so in
all ages since, and is to be de jure at this day.

One word more and then we have done with this, if none at all save such as are
baptized themselves may in any case dispense baptism to others, save such also
as are by ordination true ministers of the Gospel; then your selves, who
pretend solely to the title of baptizing, are no right administrators, as being
in truth neither baptized, nor ordained in such wise as the Scripture requires:
that your baptism is null I have cleared it enough already, and that your
ministry is no less is apparent, since whilst you endeavor to derive it from
the Apostles, you can derive it thence no other wise then the Pope does his,
for if a line of succession be a proof of true ministry, you may indeed derive
it as well, but not one jot better then he, he can show you his line of
succession, if not from Peter, yet at least from Linus himself, that lived in
the days of the Apostles, and you can show us the line, wherein you came from
the Pope, and so through his loins from the other: there is no other way for
your ministry to prove its pedigree from the Primitive times but this, no way
for you to climb up to the Apostles as the fathers, and founders of your
function but by a chain of many linkes, whereof if one happen to prove unsound,
and it is a chance but a flaw may be found in some of them, that have been
trailed for many hundreds of years together through the hands of that
Apostaticall harlot, the intaile is clear cut of, your pedigree and descent
from the Apostles, as a ministry, perishes, is spilt upon the ground, and can
never be tact on again any more for ever: you have hitherto owned your
ordination as handed by an uninterrupted lineal succession from the Pope to the
present Presbytery, and if we put the question to the veriest novice or
youngling among you, who ordained you? and who ordained those that ordained
you? and who them? and who them? and who them? you can find your function
flowing in a continual stream from the Primitive fountain no other way, but
through that stinking sink and corrupt channel of the holy chair; Pope Gregory
the great gave power of ordination to Austin the Monk, when he sent him over
into England about a thousand years since, he to the Popish Bishops, they to
the Protestant Bishops, they to the Presbyters, and the Presbyters to their
present Preachers: thus what Ministerial power you have ^angs upon the
Protestant Bishops, theirs upon Austin, Austins upon the Pope, the Popes upon
Peter: you came i. e. descended from the Pope, the Pope came i. e. departed
from the Apostles, and thus from the Apostles you came all, but thither you
must go again, letting go your sweet succession, and from their words, which
are the same now as then, begin your business again before you can be ^ight,
or know any thing clearly where you are, for if he whom your selves call
Antichrist, made you a ministry of Christ, you may be the Ministry of the
Church of England if you will, which if it be vere Ecclesia a true Church at
all, yet is such a one as had its parochial posture from whence you had your
power, and therefore fit enough each for the other, but of the Church in
England, which is vera Ecclesia the true Church indeed, you shall never be the
Ministry for me, till you repent and be baptized.

As for my self whom you deem to be no Minister of the Gospel, I must not lead
you so far from the other work in hand as to stand upon the proof of that now,
having transgressed (as some will think) too far already, though else it were
no impossible thing to prove it, and therefore I say this only in short that
whether I am now a true Minister of the Gospel or no, it is now my utmost aim to
preach and promote the truth of it as it is in Jesus, but as for the time in,
which I was owned a Minister of the Gospel, I was at that time no true one at
all, yea though I have obtained mercy, and such mercy as to be made a Minister
thereof since, because I did what I did ignorantly, yet so far was I then from
a Minister of the Gospel that I rather rejected the counsel of God against my
self, being not baptized of them that preached it, and disputed much against it
as well as you.

And now as unto your third quaery, viz. what Commission have any to baptize in
that manner? that is, by dipping, which you style such an irrational, and
undiscreet way, it is that which I have resolved you in so satisfactorily before,
that unless you have more to say against it then to miscal it, as you do,
before you have proved it to be so base as you are pleased to style it, I shall
rejoice in Christ Jesus that has chosen such foolish and base things as
dipping in water is, in the account of men however excellent in it self, and in
proof of its warrantableness, unles it be occasionally, add no more.

Rantist.
I have referred you already where you shall find exception against all you
have said before, as concerning the truth of the way of baptism, and I desire
that you would find your self work a little therewith, I mean the forenamed
books that are extant, specially that of Mr. Baxter whom I know to be a very
able and godly man, who has in mine, and I think in all discerning men's
Apprehensions so sollidly disproved, and clearly confuted your way of dipping,
that few or none of those, that see what he says in that point, will be of
your mind, and follow your fashion therein, for whereas you say that dipping
was the custom in the first times, and therefore go about to seduce men into
the belief of it, because its said that the Eunuch went down into the water,
and that John baptized in Aenon because there was much water there, he replies
that is a thing never proved by any, and that the Jailer was baptized in the
night in his own house, and therefore not likely over head in that Country,
where water was so scarce, and that the Eunuch might well be said to go down
into the water, for the Country was mountanous, and the brooks in the bottoms,
and that even the River Aenon it self where John baptized because there was
much water, is found by Travelers to be a small brook, which a man might
almost step over, and much more, that gainsaies much of what you have said, is
in the 135. page of his book, which I shall expect your answer to, but if you
please lets see what you can say to this first.

Baptist.
I shall very freely speak to any thing which has not yet been spoken to in
particular, and to Mr. Baxters exceptions in that particular rather then any
other, because he is most noted in those parts were he lives, and also in the
examination of his Exceptions, I shall have the more hint to take notice of
such relics, and broken pieces as remain yet unspoken to, as the gainsayings
of the rest in this point, for he seems to me to have gathered them up there,
and to have epitomized those men's matter as i^ were into a fardel of fewer
words: excepting the two last grand Arguments of Mr. Cook against dipping, one
of which Doctor Featley affronts us with in the title page, and both of which
are more sparingly spoke to yet, covertly touched, and tacitly touched upon by
Mr. Cook, and those Mr. Baxter rather comments on at large, and makes (I cannot
say a fairer, but a fouler, a falser, and far more miserable improvement of
then any of the rest do: This he professes to be the business of his book p.
13. viz.

To use the proofs that others make use of in some newer kind of way,
confessing that few have improved their Arguments as they might have done, nor
managed them in the most forcible way, and not to meddle much with those
arguments that others have fully managed.

Yet (by his leave) he meddles so much with the Arguments that others almost
every one makes use of, that he makes some of them the worse again, he ^ars
many a one with his mendall Mannagement.

It is not to use many Arguments (says he) but to drive home a few.

Yet he uses many more then any one else, viz. three capital ones to prove
infants to be disciples, twenty cardinal ones, to prove them members, to which
(Nos numeri ^umus) a number of others are subservient, and subordinate two more
in proof of babisme, besides eight in proof of no body knows what, all these in
his Disputative piece of book, so that for ought I find Etsinon prosint
singula, multa juvant, his genius stood more to numerositie, than dextery in
handling a few, unless by few he mean only the three main Mediums as Capital,
and Cardinal to the rest, the first of which, but especially the second, in tot
ramos, ramulos and ramusculosse ipsum Rantizavit, has stragled it self into so
many small branches, that indeed it hangs not handsomely together within it
self, and indeed the whole is but a certain three legged stool, which he has
made for people to sit at rest upon in their vain Worships, and servings of
God, after the Precepts of men, which if they never be broken by any hand,
writing responsibly to them, yet are so rotten, that they will wear out within
a while of themselves: but be they few or many he might well say he would drive
home a few, for verily above all the rest, those two I speak of, viz. wherein
dipping is called Murder, and adultery, he drives on beyond the bounds of
modesty, truth, sense and reason, as far, I dare say to the full, as God would
suffer the Devil to direct, and drive him.

For my part I never saw Mr. Baxters face that I know of, but I see too much of
his spirit in his latest labor, in which, if the spirit of God had been his
leader, he would not have led him into that confident utterance of such utter
untruths, not only in point of doctrine, but matter of fact too now and then:
let his parts, let his piety you talk on, be more then his parts if it will,
God once left as honest as holy, as worthy a one as he can be, in punishment of
a people whom he had a mind to plague for their dotage on him, to be stirred up
by Satan to do things inconvenient, and unseemly 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. and so it
seems to me he has left Mr. Baxter, as Godly as he is, or else there could
never have issued from him such inconsiderate crudities, such rank venomous,
viperous, ulcerous fluxes of folly, flesh, fierceness, fiction, falseness,
firery invectives, to the madding of the very magistracy, if it would be any
longer blinded by the bawlings of a mistaken ministry, against many a dear
Saint of God, against a people precious to God, though base in his eyes,
against thousands that are as intimate with God, and more privy to his will in
point of baptism then himself, that thus he does shall appear by and by, at
present see what little verity and less validity is in that first viz. that it
is not yet proved by any that dipping was the primitive custom, when yet its
proved, if not by many, yet at least by two of our way viz. A. R. and Mr.
Blackwood, and that so sufficiently that if Dr. Featley, and Mr. Baxter, Mr.
Cook, and Mr. Blake did not decline them, and if they had been minded to mark
and seriously to search the Scriptures, and not to dazzle men's eyes with all the
fiddle-faddles they could find to fling before them, and to satisfy themselves
at slender rates in the present custom, rather then cry out for a change, since
it is the present custom, the Scriptures they hint on are so plain, taking the
words thereof, not in feigned, forced, figurative and foreign, but in their
own prime, direct, native, ordinary, proper, and rational sense and
signification, that he who runs may read no less then this, that dipping, yea
total, was the way wherein baptism was then dispensed: but if we had not such
proof of it extant from our own party, yet it is so clear of it self that men
famous, even of your own way that have not thrust their fingers too far into
the fire of this controversy, concerning the primitive form of baptizing (as
these men have done, and therefore will on in what they have once asserted, and
get through by hook or crook, rather then recede with that shame (I should say
honor) which is the right of every recantant, when he sees he has
misreckoned) do not only confess, but also teach us the very same that we
stand for.

Witness Tilenus, who tells us that Immersio usitatior olim fuerit praesert im
in Judea et aliis regionibus etc. p. 886. dipping, yea total dipping (for in
the very line before he defines the right of baptism to be tripple, Immersio in
aquam, mora sub aqua, emersio ex aqua, plunging into the water, abode under it,
resurrection out of it) was rather used heretofore specially in Judea, and
other warmer countries then sprinkling.

Yea Dr. Featley, that is as ^were the fronteer or fileleader in doing all the
disgrace he could to dipping, did yet find occasion to acknowledge little less
p. 69. notwithstanding says he, I grant that Christ and the Eunuch were
baptized in the River, and that such baptism of men, i. e. in rivers, specially
in the hotter climates, has been, is and may lawfully be used: though I
confess he gives this a pull in again, and very cleanly contradicts himself in
the very next words, saying that there is no proof at all of dipping or
plunging, but only of washing in the River.

O gross, First, as if the word (...) did signify only to wash in some other
way, and not at all to wash by dipping.

Secondly, as if ever any things, or persons, that are washed in Rivers are
washed ordinarily otherwise then by dipping or plunging.

Thirdly, as if he could properly be said to be washed in a river that was
never in it, but was only scrubd a little by the side of it.

Or Fourthly as if wise persons would go into a river for no more then a little
fourbishing their faces.

Rantist.
You talk of in the river, and into the River, but you heed not what Mr. Baxter
says in the present section that you are desired to speak to, he tells you the
word into is not to be taken as if either John and Christ, or Philip and the
Eunuch were at all in the water or descended into it, but unto it only, it
being below in the bottoms, and the country being montanous, in which respect
they might well be said to go down into it: Mr. Cook also and Mr. Blake do both
very elegantly answer your observation in that particular Mr. C. thus to A. R.
viz. your collection from Philips going down into the water with the Eunuch,
therefore they used dipping is as vain, must they not go down to the water
where it was if they would use it? would the water have come up to them in the
chariot any sooner for sprinkling then for dipping? of the same stamp is your
inference from Mat. 3. 16. Mark 1. 10. from Christ's ascending from the water,
for as Christ was pleased to be baptized with water, so he was pleased to go
where the water was viz. in the channel, where there was a descent, and from
which there was an ascent, so that he must go down to, and come up from the
water.

Nay rather your conceit is here confuted, for if our blessed Savior had been
plunged of John into the water then it would rather have been said that John
cast or plunged Christ into the water, and took him out of the water, but it is
only employed that Christ went down to the water, and came up again from it.

Mr. Blake thus to Mr. Blackwood viz. for your criticism of the ascending and
descending, if you compare Acts 24. 1. 25. 1. also with your places quoted, you
will see it nothing for your purpose, those phrases are used when men go to a
place, or from a place, when they neither ascend upwards, neither descend
downwards, Bishop Usher will furnish you with ten several Scriptures, where
the word (...) in the Acts of the Apostles is used for no descent from a higher
place to a lower, but only a removing from place to place, though in this
place we may believe there was some ascent and descent, waters being lower
places, and when they went to the place of waters the channel in which the
waters had their current, they may be fitly said to go into the water,
howsoever one or two examples serve not your purpose, but a General concurrence
of all examples:

We have examples giving full evidence of a different practice, and nothing can
be concluded from those examples.

Baptist.
O the wondrous ways of wretchedness, if not of wilful wiliness that the
wits of these men work in whereby to wave of the way of God from taking place
among them! how do they strive to keep it off as ^were at staves end, not
yielding it an inch lest it should get an ell, one brings one kind of
furniture, wherewith to fight it, another another, yet altogether are but a
bullrush, a flag, that shows like sword and Rapier, but will scarce hold a
push if put to it to the purpose: Mr. Blake he fetches furniture from Bishop
Usher that says there are ten Scriptures in the acts where the words ascend
and descend express no more then removing from one place to another, of which
if those he alleges be two of the ten, or supernumerary it matters not, for if
there were 10000 it would do him no right, and truth no wrong in this place,
where it is believed by every of the three both himself and his two Colleagues,
that here was going up and down from higher places to lower, therefore he may
set that cipher some where else, or send it home again to the book whence he
had it, and where perhaps it was of use, for here it stands void and serves for
nothing.

And as for their joint sneaping the words they went down into the water, and
came out of the water into such a short sense as may serve your own curtaild,
and cloudy conceptions of the matter, and exclude our construction that is most
clear, and congruous, perverting and mincing it thus, viz. that they went down
to the water, i. e. the channel where the water was, to which there was a
descent, and ascended from the water; or if it be allowed to be read (as it is
most properly rendered by the Translators) into the water, yet the meaning of
that word into must be no other then unto, I admire how men of such professed
piety can convince their consciences to content with such homespun coverings,
such grievous glosses, pitiful put ofs, as they do in this case, I profess
they might almost as good say that the heard of Swine, that Mat. 8. 32. are
said to run down into the Sea, did but run down to the Sea, and no further, as
to limit these Scriptures that relate the baptism of Christ and of the Eunuch,
so as to force them to no further signification then this to, and unto, and
from the water as if they went not into it at all.

Rantist.
Nay not so neither by your leave, for the words that follow, which relate that
the Swine were choked in the waters show plain enough that the word (...),
though we will not allow it the sense of into Mark 1 9. must needs be Englished
into here, and that the English word into, though we allow it to signisie no
more then to or unto, Acts the 8. verse 38. yet signifyes that the Swine were
really not at only but in the waters, for how else, could they be choked
there?

Baptist.
How? why man it is as possible a creature may be choked with water pouring down
his throat, yea and a little more possible then it is for any Creature to be said
truly, not Synechdochically, to be baptized by sprinkling, or pouring water
only upon his face, and yet it is sure enough that this choking of the Swine was
otherwise then so, and no other then by an overwhelming in water, forasmuch as
it is said they ran down INTO the Lake and were choked Luke 8. 33. choked IN
the Waters Matthew. 8. 32. IN the Sea Mark 5. 13. and yet it is as sure to me, who
dare not suppose the spirit to speak nonsense, as they do in my mind, who say
that this baptizing Act. 8. 38, 39. Matthew. 3. 16. Mark 1. 9, 10. was, though
with water also as their choking was, (and therefore Dr. Featley will get
nothing by pleading for (...) to signify with) yet not as truly inthe water
also, i. e. by an overwhelming therewith, forasmuch as it is said Act. 8, 38, 39.
they went down both into the water both Philip and the Eunuch and he baptized
[Angli^e dippt or overwhelmed] or (if you will have washed) washed him by
dipping, for as dipping and swilling is a true washing, so by washing, as (...)
is Englished by it, is meant neither infusing nor sprinkling, but that washing
only that is by the way of dipping, and I testify to their faces, that would
fain make a baptizm of rantism, that it is more easy to choke then to baptize a
man without overwhelming

But Mr. Cook foreseeing no doubt what absurdity must needs be committed in
granting the words to be read as they be translated, viz. they went down into
the water and ascended out of the water, and yet denying that they were at all
in the water, and being sensible also surely how it might be noted as a piece
of paultry and partiallity, to allow the sense of into to the preposition (...)
in Acts 8. 38. and yet so deeply to disown and deny that sense of into to the
same preposition in Mark 1. 9. as he does, he is more wary then either Mr.
Blake or Mr Baxter in that particular, and will not by any means read it as
the other do viz. they went down into the water, nor yet as it is in the text
they came up out of the water, but runs it over more smoothly in a phrase
suitable to his own purpose, viz. they went down to the water, and came up from
the water, but I hope he'el condescend freely to be corrected for the same
fault, and with the same rod of reproof with which himself has corrected
others, or else his partiallity will so appear as to deny him to have any of
that wisdom, which is from above James 3 the last: wherefore as he checks A.
R. most sharply for offering to alter, and vary from the wisdom of
interpreters, so as to English the preposition (...) by in, which they thought
good to English with p. 12, in these words, viz.

I would demand of you whether you think that our Translators, and most or all
others, who have englished it with knew not how to render the original in its
proper signification as well as your self.

So I must take the boldness, since our Translators, and most or all others,
but himself, do read Act. 8. 38. thus they went down both into the water and
ascended out of the water, to demand of him in his own words to A. R. whether
he think that our Translators, and most or all others, who english those
passages by into the water, knew not how to render the original in its proper
signification as well as himself?

As for the other two, viz. Mr. Blake and Mr. Baxter they foreseeing no doubt
it would be no safe, handsome, acceptable, nor advantageous way to take upon
them, as they saw Mr. Cook did, to correct the Translators, and mend their
constructions, they are more wary then Mr. Cook in that particular, and so
(thus incidit in Scillam, qui vult, etc.) to decline the Rock of insolence,
they drop into the gulf of nonsense, owning the original to be rightly rendered,
and reading them according to that rendition, viz. into the water, and up out
of the water, yet denying those phrases they descended into the water, and came
up out of the water,, to sound out any more then Mr. Cook says the Greek words
do viz. to and from the water.

But I must entreat those two Parallels in that opinion, to consider what
imparalleld improprietie it is to express no more then going to the water
side, and coming from it again by these phrases, viz. going down into the
water, and coming out of the water for they imply necessarily a being in the
water, and not only at it: he descended into hell is more then being at the
brinks of hell, he descended into the lower parts of the Earth, is more then
bare being on the superficies of the Earth, and so he descended into the water,
is necessarily more then being at the side: the situation of the water below in
the bottoms will not salve the absurdity of such expression, concerning being
at the water only, and returning, for he descended to it, and ascended from it
is enough for that, but to express that only by into it and out of it, is
superfluous and superlative simplicity: whatsoever element, or place in any
element we are said to go down into, and come up out of we were once in or else
we are fowlly belied: had it been said of Philip and the Eunuch they went down
both to the water, or into the bottoms, they descended into the valleys, where
the water was, as Mr. Cook prates by a Periphrasis, and when they came up out
of the valley, or bottom from the water, then it had showed somewhat like the
sense these men like best and long to have it in, but into the water, and out
of the water express not only a bare being in the bottomes, where the water
was but in the water also; for whatsoever place or element is put after the
prepositions into and out of is a place or element that the persons denominated
to go into and out of were once really and truly in.

Daniel was thrown into and taken up out of the Lions den, does not that show
plainly enough that he was in it? the Swine ran into the sea, were they not
then in it? I threw it into the fire (says Aaron of the molten image he made)
and there came out this calf, will any say that the metals he made it of were
only warmed at the fire side? they went down both into the water, both Philip
and the Eunuch and came up out of the water, Jesus was baptized of John into
Jordan, Mark 1. 9. and when he was baptized went straitway out of the water,
Math. 3. 16. can any man say that these two persons Jesus and the Eunuch, of
whom also Dr. Featley grants that they were baptized in the River, were never
in it at all, but only wetted at the water side?

But that Philip and the Eunuch went into and were in the water, and not unto
it and at it only, is evident by what I have hinted once already, viz. in that
it is said they were come unto the water before, and therefore this mustneeds
be into it, or else either the Spirit Tautologized, or they tautopoiized, and
came unto the water twice over, but never into it at all.

Two more odd conceits, and emblemes of the emptiness of their apprehension in
this point, two a piece I mean in Mr. Cook and Mr. Blake, I shall take notice
of briefly in their forecited shuffles, and so pass on to the rest.

First, how peartly does Mr. Cook squitch up A. R. with a question or two as if
he would catechize him in that which he has yet need to be further chatechisd
himself?

Must they not go down to the water (says he) if they would use it? would the
water come up to them in the Chariot any sooner for sprinkling then for dipping?

In answer to which question, I entreat Mr. Cook to ask his conscience this
question, whether if they had used the water only for sprinkling, there was
such necessity of going down to it as he seems to intimate, would not the
water have come up to them in the Chariot sooner by far for sprinkling then for
dipping? yea verily both Philip and the Eunuch might have sat still in the
Chariot and commanded water enough for sprinkling to be brought up to them
thither in the hollow of the Chariot drivers hand, if there were no bigger a
vessel to bear it in, but for dipping enough could never possibly be brought up
into the Chariot at all.

Secondly, he must, says he of Christ, go down and come up from the water, but
here is not the least hint that John doused Christ over head, or under water,
nay rather that conceit of yours, says he to A. R. is here confuted, for if
our blessed Savior had been plunged of John into the water, then it would
rather have been said that John cast or plunged Christ into the water, and took
him out of the water, but it is only implied that Christ went down unto the
water and came up again from it.

O how egregiously, how shamefully does this man forget, and utter himself as
if his senses were sodden into Trapizuntius his temper! I would therefore ask
him one or two questions viz.

First: whether (...) does at all signify to douse over head, or under water,
or to plunge into water yea or no? if not (but I suppose he will not deny it so
to do, though he denies it to signify only plunging) then I would have him to
go to school again to the Lexicons which will teach him that it mainly
signifies mergo, immergo, submergo, and if lavo, a bluo it is such an ablu^ion
as is made immergendo, but if it does signify to plunge dip or douse under
water, or overwhelm at all, and I dare say he and every one else shall find it
for all lavo, quod fit immergendo, to signify a swilling in water altogether,
then I advise him to be think himself, for I think he was asleep when he wrote
this passage, that there is at least some little hint that John plunged Christ
into the water, when its said Christ was baptized alias, plunged, dipped of John
into Jordan, or washed in Jordan, since that pleases himself, unless he put a
difference between the active and the passive and will not yield it to be all
one, that John baptized Christ, and Christ was baptized of John, but though it
be said Christ was baptized i. e. plunged of John into Jordan, overwhelmed in
Jordan, and that he came out of the water, which is a shrewd sign that John did
not keep him there, yet this is not plain and significant enough for him it
seems unless he may have the framing of the spirits speech another way, that
is no whit plainer then the other neither, viz. that John cast or plunged
Christ into the water, and took him out of the water, unless it may be said
just so all that is said, which yet is the same with that he would have to be
said, implies no more then that Christ went down unto the water and and came up
again from it, without being baptized, so belike: how A. R^. opinion that John
doused Christ under water, which is also mine, and the very plainest expression
the original can be read in, is confuted by those texts Mat. 3. 16. Mark. 1. 9.
10. I can no more conceive, then I can conceive that this expression viz.
Philip and the Eunuch went down both into the water, and he baptized him, is a
confutation of him that supposes the Eunuch to be baptized at all, (...) are
Mr. Cooks marginals whereby he would have us learn it is like from the word (...),
that their ascension was but from the water, but I muse why he would not set
down the words of the other Scripture, Act. the 8. 39. which expounds this, and
where it is (...), which (...) is in latin ex, and englished most naturally out
of.

The second thing more observable in Mr. Blakes business runs thus, First,
says he, howsoever one or two examples serve not your purpose, but a general
concurren ce of all examples.

See how Mr. Bls. heart misgives him; and well nigh wavers within, whether he
had not best yield us these two examples, for all his tugging for them before,
into our cause, and therefore now falls, for fear these two will side against
him, to serve himself against them another way, i. e. by denying that the
te^mony of the spirit in these two examples, is of any validity to us without a
concurrence of all examples:

To which I say, had Mr. Blake but one half inch of an example in the new
testament of baby baptism how much he would make of it we may see by his
cunning counterfeit examples for that thing out of scriptures, that in truth
are not only far from exemplifying such a thing, as the households he makes use
of are, but also clear examples to the contrary, as the non-baptizing of those
very infants that were brought to Christ, and the non-baptizing of those very
infants with their parents Act. the 2. to whose parents, and their children to,
on the same terms of repentance when at years, the promise is there made: both
which Scriptures he wrests into his turn, yea verily, and had he but one true
single example of any one infant baptized in all that word, we should lay down
to him, and never open our mouths more against infant baptism: yet if these
two examples do prove for us, it seems they shall not be heeded, whilst
against them, unless there be a general concurrence of all examples.

Wherefore secondly, I tell him of a truth that though me thinks the single
example of the Lord Jesus might content him, and of the Eunuch, for can he show
a better example then these? yet there is as general a concurrence of all
examples in this particular, as there is of the example of any one thing, that
is exemplified in the Scriptures: all Jerusalem, all Judea, and the Region
about Jordan were baptized i. e. dipped of John in Jordan confessing their sins,
Christ dipped of John into Jordan, the Eunuch going into the water and there
baptized, baptizing in Aenon because much water, and indeed the very word
baptize makes them all examples of our practice, while it signifies obruo,
submergo.

Secondly says he, we have examples giving full evidence of a different
practice, and nothing can be concluded for you from these examples of yours.

Mr. Bls. examples it seems for his different practice must conclude for him,
but our examples though never so clear must conclude nothing for us, ipse dixit
Mr. Bl. has forbidden them so to do, and therefore we must sign ne plus ul^ra
here, and urge our examples no more, wherefore i will cease.

Only secondly, I hope he will give me leave to ask him what different
practice it is he means, of which he has examples giving full evidence
against ours, and if it be either baptism of infants, o^ Rantism of infants, or
pouring water on infants, or washing infants any other way, or dispensig
Christ's ordinance of baptism to men or women in any other way then in the way
of dipping, or washing by dipping, which baptizo signifies, i will promise him
faithfully that upon his giving us any one example that gives full evidence of
it, or any other kind of full evidence of it besides that of example, any of
which he is far from giving in any thing that was ever penned by him yet, I
shall yield and become his disciple, and follow him as far as I find him
following Christ in that or any thing else, and that for ever: till then he
must excuse me if in love to his soul I seriously beseech him to search and try
his ways and turn in truth to that truth of the Lord Jesus he yet tramples on.

Rantist.
There is example given you enough against your way by Mr. Blake, Mr. Baxter
and Mr. Cook too of baptizing otherwise then by dipping, in the Iailor, whom
they all instance in either expressly, or implicitly, First Mr. Baxter says
in that section of his which you have not yet fully spoke to, that the Iailor
was baptized in the night in his house, and therefore not likely over head in
that Country where water was so scarce, and to this agree some words of Mr.
Blake and Mr. Cook concurrent in matter though different in form: we read says
Mr. Cook p. 16. of multitudes baptized ^ven 3000 in Jerusalem without mention
of going to the Rivers, and of whole families without mention of going to the
waters, or fetching store of waters, it is like the waters they had within
doors at midnight sufficed Acts 2. 41. Acts 16. 15. 33. and says Mr. Blake p.
10. sometimes baptism was administered where water for dipping was not to be
had, and though the Eunuch coming to a river says here is water, what hindered
that I should be dipped? yet there is little probabili^y that Paul could say so
in Judas's house in straight street in Damascus, nor the Iailor in his prison
in Philippi: you say that baptism was ordinarily in rivers, where there were
many waters, but sure there were neither many waters, nor rivers in these men's
dwellings, and as sure they went not out in the night unto any such places, yet
were they baptized.

Baptist.
Are these your Examples of baptizing otherways then by dipping? certainly
unless these three men were every one of them either shamefully slighthy in
their searches, or willingly ignorant, or smitten with blindness, and given up
in some measure at least, for their not embracing this plain easy truth of
dipp^ng, in the love thereof, to deep dotage and strong delusion, they could
never believe, much less print such palpable untruths, absolute absurdities,
and clear self confutations, as are unavoidably to be seen by him that reads
with understanding these parcells they have published to the eye of all men.

See first how Mr. Cook contradicts himself in that clause, we read of great
multitudes baptized even three thousand in Jerusalem without mention of going
to the Rivers.

To say nothing of the invalidity of this piece to his purpose, nor
needlessenesse of the Scriptures mentioning the particular place where every
one was baptized, for what if that be not specified every where where baptism
is talked on, least the volume should swell, is it not as much as to say they
were dipped in that it is said they were baptized, i. e. submersi, obruti,
abluti immergendo, for (...) signifies mainly, I suppose I may safely say only
such washing as is by dousing, dipping or swilling, specially since in places
enough it is said they were baptized in Rivers, and places of much water: but
to say nothing I say of that, mark how this clause of Mr. Cook clashes with
another of his within a matter of ten lines upwards from it, for there giving
other reasons, then that of dipping, why John chose to baptize in Rivers and
running waters, among others he gives this as a special one, viz.

Because of the multitudes that were baptized, especially says he, seeing
there came such huge multitudes to him to be baptized, and yet here were great
multitudes baptized even no less then 3000 and yet since there is no mention of
the place where, which by Mr. Cooks own reason, if it be a reason, must be a
place of running waters, and streams that many might be employed at once in
baptizing along the river, for the more speedy dispatch, with so great
multitudes, therefore these belike went not out to the rivers, though yet
there is no more mentioned that they did not, then that they did.

There were thousands of converts Act. the 4. the 4. of the matter of whose
baptism there is no more mentioned then of the manner of it, and yet there is
ground enough to believe they were all baptized, as well as the rest, yea Mr.
Blake believes it, and in the same way as the rest whose baptism with the
manner of it is expressed, for why should others be baptized in rivers because
they were multitudes, and yet these multitudes be exempted from that and be
dispached with so small a matter as sprinkling? therefore the not mentioning
it was done, is an argument as good as nothing; and whereas he says there is no
mentioning of fetching in great store of waters, it is true, that we never read
at all of water fetched to the persons, but of persons going to the water we do,
though he says we do not, for even Lydia her self and her family, which is no
other then his own instance, were gone out to a river side to hear Paul preach,
where being converted they were baptized, that being the wonted place of
preaching and praying no doubt in order to the convenience of baptizing, before
ever the Apostles were so much as invited to her house.

Secondly, of this stamp also is Mr. Blakes conceit concerning the baptism of
Paul, who because the particular place or sourse of water wherein he was
baptized is not expressed, imagins that he must needs be baptized within doors,
and no where else, and so consequently not by dipping, but some other way,
whereas there is neither necessity nor probability of his being so, but rather
evidence if not from the very place, yet at least from what Mr. Blake says
that it was otherwise; For

First, it seems to me that Paul was not to be baptized within, but to go some
where or other to the dispatching of that business, wherefore else should
Ananias rub him up to it as he does in such wise as this, and now why tariest
thou? arise and be baptized and wash away thy sins etc. Which as it Argues it
was a service Paul was tardy to, and I know no man's flesh forward to it further
then by faith it is overpowred, specially in such a weak case as Paul it seems
was in at that present, so it was as who should say, why art thou so undisposed
to thy duty in that particular, make have, and linger not longer about it, but
come away and be baptized: now had aspersion or infusion been only the work,
Paul could not have bin so backward as to need such sharp exsuscitation, when
once convinced, for there is no such great unpleasantness to the flesh, as to
engender any averseness unto that, but that Paul was more tardy then he should
have been (and why he should be so I know not if among the other impediments,
at least he was not sensible of some tediousness in the service) was uttered
in a public exercise once from that very text Acts. 22. 16. by a friend of
yours, and mine now deceased, at his sprinkling one of mine own children, in
which Sermon the doctrine was this (and a good doctrine it was, and very truly
grounded upon the Example of Paul's dullness in that Scripture, and further
cleared by Lots loitering in Sodom) viz. That by reason partly of the remainder
of corruption in the best, presenting evil when they should do Good, and
partly the great grand enemy of our salvation Satan, opposing himself to all
good, the best that have even renounced their vile life, have an indisposition
to holy duties, and have need of excitation and stirring up.

Again had he not either been to be baptized within by dipping or been to
receive within an aspersion or infusion upon his face only he need not to have
bin bid to arise, or stand up in order to either of these, so much as from the
present posture he was in, for if he were then sitting, face rantism might have
been done as well, and if he were lying down (which in his then case is the
more likely of the two) much better then in a standing posture, in which it is
not so easy to dispense a pouring upon the face, least pouring so little as
you do it prove rather a Rantism then a baptism, or pouring so much as the
baptizer should do on the disciple, if he will needs do it by pouring i. e.
till he has buried him in baptism, or wholly covered him with water, in
resemblance of the spiritual, he make way for his bodily burial in the earth
also.

Whereas therefore Mr. Blake says thus, viz. that though the Eunuch coming to
the River might say here is wa^er what hinders why I should not be dipped, yet
there is little probability that Paul could say so in Judas his house in
straight street in Damascus, or the Iaylor at his Prison in Phillippi, I say it
is very likely it was so indeed, that they had not any Ponds or Rivers in their
houses, to dip in, but will it follow therefore that they were baptized in the
house without dipping? no such matter by Mr. Bls. favor, but rather that since
there was not water enough for their dipping within doors, as there was for the
Eunuchs dipping without, therefore they went out to some water or other that
they might be baptized, i. e. dipped conveniently, as the Eunuch was, and that
may possibly not be far, for many a one that has not brooks nor ponds in
their houses, yet have them often not far from their doors, and that Judas had
not so who can tell? but whether he had or no, the matter is not great, since he
lived not far from much water however whilst he was living in Damascus, for
were not Abana and Parphar Rivers of Damascus though not for Namans disease,
yet for dipping full as good as Jordan it self, and all other waters of Israel.

Thirdly, See how miserably Mr. Baxter is mistaken, he would make men believe,
if they would be such Idiots, as to take his single word for it, against the
express word of God, that in the Country of the Iaylor water was so scarce
that he could not be dipped over head, whereas (oh that Mr. Baxter would see
how the Lord has left him to discover his too hasty galloping over the
Sripture) it is related that a River ran just by the same City of Phillippi
where he dwelt, even that, by the side of which Paul preached, and prayer was
wont to be made, where also Lidya, and her household were converted and
baptized, and all this no further off then in the very same chapter, where the
Iaylors baptism is spoken of viz. Acts 16. 13, 14, 15.

I perceive this scarcity of water is made a mighty Argument among you against
dipping, some saying that water for dipping was not to be had in the houses of
the disciples that were baptized, therefore they received no more then some
aspersion, or infusion within, some speaking as though water for dipping were
not to be had in whole Cities and Countries where the disciples dwelt, thus
does not only Mr. Baxter, who denies a sufficiency of water for dipping over
head to be in that Country where the Jailer dwelt, but also Senior Mr. Simpson
one of you my Ashford opposers, who in a letter under his hand to a neighbor of
his (much of which is partim direct and verbatim partim oblique and
collateraliter, out of Mr. Blake, so that it stands or falls in him, and of the
rest that is not translated thence into his turn, some already is, and some
that is not yet, is to be spoken to as I go along) tells us that there was not
any water in Jerusalem wherein so many as were there baptized, in so short a
time, at that time of the year when water was more scanty, could possibly have
been dipped.

What a strange conceit is this? what not water enough in nor yet about all
Jerusalem to dipp a man over head in? for since he says not so many, the same
water course I hope that one can be dipped in, may also serve to dipp a
thousand; shall we think that in the greatest drought that could happen all
those brooks the Scriptures mentions viz. Cedron and Siloam, and the fountain
of Gyhon, and the Conduit of the upper pool, which ran with several streams,
and were at one place all coincident with Cedron, were dried up so that not a
place could be found of any competent depth for men to dip in?

But perhaps what Mr. Baxter says concerning Aenon upon the report of
travelers viz. that even the River Aenon it self where John baptized because
there was much water, is found to be a small brook, that a man may almost step
over, or as I find it expressed to me in a letter to a near and deer friend of
mine, upon the credit of eye witness historians, Aenon was but a small purl
scarcely knee deep at the deepest, so Mr. Simpson may say, but it is on his own
head if he do, concerning these brooks, that were about Jerusalem, to all which
I shall for brevities sake dispatch this answer here now I am about it.

And first I entreat Mr. Simpson to consider that this serves not his turn
howeever, if Cedron and Siloam, and the rest that were without the City, and
the stream also that ran through the City, from the fountain of the old pool
into Cedron, should be all such as Aenon is supposed to be, since the fishpool
Bethesda, at which lay a great multitude of impotents, and into which one
amongst the rest desired to be put, or cast (for the word is (...)) but could
not, was both deeper and broader then so, and convenient for many to dip in at
once, for if we may credit Bethesda it self, the very name instructs us in no
less (...) being in english no other then the house of flowing down, so called
for the concurrence, and confluence of many waters thereinto, see Calvin upon
the place, who tells you that it was a pool he thinks, into which water did
flow down continually, through either channels or pipes, that the Priests (for
it was near the Temple) might as well be furnished with water for their
sacrifices, as the people were with sacrifices themselves in the sheep market
wherein it was; others think, and as I take it Beza in his Anotations, that it
was a pool at which cattle drank, and in which they used to be plunged; whereof
says he there could not but be great store in Jerusalem: so much may well
serve without any more to salve the sore eyes of Mr. Simpson.

As for Mr. Baxter i will bate him his almost. and yet he will not get much by the
matter, for as I have seen others baptized by total dipping in the like, so
was I seen to be baptized my self in a place of so little latitude, that an
active man might make shift to step over, not almost but altogether, in which
yet there is water enough left behind to baptize a thousand, if not a million
more in the same manner, and so, not to say how possible it is, if not a
thousand to one that Aenons eye witnesses never sounded Aenons depth in all
places, nor secondly how possibly a brook might be much swerved up since then,
and somewhat shallowed in so many Generations, nor thirdly how possible it is to
deepen the shallowest stream that is very easily in order to such a purpose,
for I have seen ancle deep streams so ordered as I speak of, more then once or
twice for a need, though that Aenon had need to be made deeper in those places,
where John did baptize, may be twenty times told by some Travelers, that love
to hear themselves talk, before I shall believe it once;

Not to say any thing I say of these, let Aenon be but knee deep if you will,
experience has so taught the expedience of knee deep to dip in to my self, and
other Baptizers that I know, that as we have dipped persons often where it has not
bin so deep, so, except in such a channel where we cannot well avoid it, we
choose now not to go in much deeper.

See Fourthly how all your three Worthies Mr. Blake, Mr. Baxter and Mr. Cook do
deceive you, as being indeed deceived themselves, and that in a manner so plain
that none but Blind Seers can look beside it, for though each of the three were
alone in each of those other errors, which they severally utter in your last
joint quotation, and confident commendation of them, yet (woe is me may England
say that my leaders are so misled) the whole Trinity of them is at unity, but
against all verity in this, even in the very thing in which principally you
would have us mind them, for whereas, as an instance that baptism was not by
dipping, they all allege that the Iailor was baptized at midnight in his
house, and therefore probably not in such a way as dipping, that he was
baptized about midnight is true enough, but that he was baptized in his house,
is so contrary to truth, that a very child may find the falsenesse of that
assertion, for howbeit Mr. Cook says plain-ly, its like the waters they had
within doors at midnight sufficed, and Mr. Baxter more plain-ly, that the
Iailor was baptized in the nightin his house, and Mr. Blake most plain-ly, it is
sure there was not many waters nor rivers in the Iailors dwelling, and it is as
sure that they i. e. the Iailor and the Apostles went not out in the night to
any such places as were fit to dip in, yet what says the word in plain truth?
no less then this, that the Iailor after he was baptized brought them into his
house and set meat before them, and rejoiced: for it is said first, that upon
the earthquake, and Paul's crying out to him, that he should do himself no
harm, the Iailor hasted into Paul and Silas and brought them out, secondly that
they upon his then inquiry told him what he should do to be saved, and preached
the word to him and all his, whereupon in this intertime, i. e. between the
time of the Iailors bringing them out, and his bringing them in again, he took
them and washed their stripes, and was baptized he and all his straightway.
Thirdly, that when he had brought them into his house, which words compared
with verse the 30. where it is said he brought them out, show clearly that he,
and his were with them still without hearing the word, washing them, and
submitting to be baptized i. e. immergendo washed of them, he made them eat,
and rejoiced: now what man, but one minded to overlook what likes him not, can
choose but see this to the confutation of these three men's opinions? which I
doubt because it is theirs more then any thing else, may be the opinion of
3000: that the Iailor first brought them out, and then washed their stripes,
and was baptized, and then brought them in, and rejoiced with them is clear.

Rantist.
You have spoke long enough to little purpose to this, for I am not yet of your
mind; pray let us see what you will say to those worthy men's writings, in
disproof of the proofs that you have brought.

Baptist.
I come then to consider what is said by either any, or all of these three
repugnants in exception against what is said by us for the way of dipping,
having spoken already to the first as you desire in its several parts:

The next exception I find Mr. Baxter makes against what we say is this, the
word signifies says he, to wash as well as to dip, and so is taken when
applied to other things as Mar. the 7. 4. 8. and herein he sums up in short the
whole mind of Mr. Cook and Mr. Blake also in this matter, who say viz. Mr.
Blake p. the 4. 5. to Mr. Blackwood, that Scapula says (...) signifies to dip,
to drown, and sometimes to wash, the Septuagint use the words baptizing, and
washing promiscuously; Mr. Cook p. 11. to A. R. much what the very same viz.
that baptism signifies washing, and p. 13. quoting the same Scripture Mark the
7. here you have says he, the word (...) to wash.

To all which I answer, but briefly, having touched at this before, who doubts
of this that the word (...) signifies to wash? how is it possible that it
should not signify washing so long as it signifies dipping, dipping being no
other then a kind of washing? what ever word signifies properly, and primarily
(as (...) does) to dip, drown, plunge in, overwhelm with, put under water, must
needs be supposed secondarily, consequently, and even thereupon to signify
^shing, neither does it signify sometimes only to wash, as Mr. Blake observes
out of Scapula, but it always signifies to wash, there being no dipping, but
signifies a washing, dipping being not a dipping only, but necessarily a
washing also; wherefore very often baptizing and washing are, and well may be;
promiscuously used each for the other, but what will the men make of all this,
that because baptism signifies a kind of washing viz. the washing of its own
kind, or such a washing as dipping, x See legh. crit. sac, p. 76. 77. where he
ore and ore again confesses, (...) signifies to dip plunge under water etc.
primarily, and properly, p. 76. it signifi eth primarily such a kind of washing
as is used in Bucks, where linen is plunged or dipped. Beza neque vero (...)
significat lavare, nisi a co^sequenti, nam proprie declarat tingendi causa
mergere, also p. 77. the native and proper signification o^ it is to dip into
water or plunge under water, Joh, 3. 22, 23. Mat. 3. 16. tanquam ad tingendu^
mergo Causab. immer go, intingo, abluo, Bucan. mergo, et tingo Bullinger,
proprie significat immergo, submergo, obruo aqua Zanchius, videtur copiam,
abundantiam, perfectam quandam perfusionem denotate Aret.
plunging, or swilling is, therefore it signifies all manner of washing: a kind
of washing it ever did, but all kind of washing it never did yet signify since
the world stood: a washing by immersion and submersion is the sense out, a
washing by infusion is not, but as for your washing by bare aspersion so far is
it from being the true sense of (...) that it is no kind of washing at all, yea
if you will go critically to work (as Mr. Blake would have us) about (...) and
(...), between which yet there is no such difference, as he imagines, and keep
close to the signification of the words, both your petty pouring, and your
spoil-all sprinkling will be discarded so far from the name of baptizing, that
they will not be found to meet it half way, nor on a true account to amount to
so much as the name of washing, for that (...) signifies originally to dip,
plunge or overwhelm, and therefore consequenly to wash, we deny not, that being
indeed not only a way, but also the most effectual and usual way of washing:
therefore (...) is sometimes promiscuously used with (...) and (...), both
which originally signify washing, of what kind soever, whether that which is
by dipping in water, or rubbing water upon the subject, when they are each
applied unto the other, but as for (...), and (...) the one signifies to power
out only, the other to sprinkle only, but neither this nor that alone, and
abstract from some other concurrent action, as rubbing the water on that's so
applied (which was never done at any Rantizing that ever I saw) does yet
signify so much as any kind of washing whatsoever: therefore though (...) is
rendered not only by mergo, submergo to dip or plunge over head and ears, but
also by lavo, abluo to wash cleanse or wash away, and very fitly since baptizing
or dipping is really and truly such a washing, yet'^ (...) is rendered effundo
to power out and (...) by aspergo^ perfundo, irroro, to sprinkle or moisten, as
it were with a small dew, but neither of them by lavo, abluo, nor do they
signify such a thing as to wash, nor are they such a thing as washing in any
wise, so far are they therefore from bearing the name of baptism, that you may
as well render baptizing by rantizing, and say to baptize is to sprinkle, which
is a thing that all men in the world cannot show to be so much as a remote
sense of the greek word baptize, as render rantizing by baptizing, that is to
say that to sprinkle is to baptize, which likewise can never be shown to be so
much as a remote sense of the word Rantize: if therefore (...) come not so near
(...) as to be idem with it in tertio to be latind with it into lavo, or to be
englisht with it so much as by the name of washing, which is but a secondary
sense of the word (...), how will you ever reach your rantism into the name of
baptism it self, whose prime signification is submergo i. e. to overwhelm, out
of which prime signification that it should be used continually, as you say the
spirit uses it in Scripture, where all along you strain a point to have it
englisht washing, and never overwhelming at all (for pray where shall it be
englisht by the term of overwhelming? just no where by your good will) is a
piece of simple slipslop to utter.

Rantist.
But Mr. Blake tells you another tale that I believe will make you eat these
words you last declared, for whereas you talk so much of dippings being the
prime signification of (...) what then? he p. 2. says in way of answer to
that, that there is nothing more ordinary then to have words used out of their
prime signification.

Baptist.
Nothing more ordinary then to have words out of their prime signification?
what a strange extraordinary expression is that? I dare undertake to show him
something more ordinary then that, and venture to avouch that it is more
ordinary to have words used in their prime signification, then out of it, or
else I know not how we should handsomely understand one another in any tongue:
for howbeit there is now and then a word figuratized besides its proper
meaning, yet that a secondary, borrowed, bastard, foreign sense should carry
words so quite away from their own proper, direct, prime, proxime, native
signification that we must take them in no sense, no not in their genuine sense
more ordinarily, then in those secondary senses, is such a piece of senseless,
as will hardly enter into the center of my understanding while I have one, yet
so do you dote upon the far fetched senses of words, when they only, though
never so untowardly too, may be wrested in o serve your turn, that nothing is
more ordinary among your selves indeed in such a case, then to shut out the
aptest, the amplest acceptions altogether, and force the first senses from
having to do at all with those words whose own, whose plainest, whose nearest,
whose likeliest, whose chiefest, properest senses they are: and on this wise do
you deal with the truest sense and signification of this word (...) which
because it signifies sometimes only, as Mr. Blake observes (which is however
argumentum ad ho^m) though I grant it signifies ever, yet only secondarily to
wish, therefore, if you may have the vote of it, it must never sigaifie any
thing else, and never be interpreted by its prime signification at all, it
signifies i. e. usually, and for the most part and primarily (for who can take
Mr Blake as meaning otherwise) to dip or drown etc. and sometimes, quoth he out
of Scapula, to wash, but if I should ask Mr. Blake how often he would give it
leave throughout the whole new testament to be taken in that sense, which his
word sometimes annexed to the sense of washing shows he takes to be the most
usual and common sense of (...) viz. to dip, plunge, or overwhelm, I am afraid
he will change his note, and say it signifies alvvayes to vvash, and not allow
the sense of it to dip, or plunge so much as sometimes, no not yet so much as
once throughout the gospel: yea I demand of him where he dare give way to
(...) to be construed in its prime sense, i. e. to dip, overvvhelm, or in what
one place he will be pleased to let us give it any other then the secondary,
that only sometime signification of washing? I doubt it must be contented for
him, and all the Rantists to be without its nearest, to be stripped of its
plainest, to be banished and forct for ever from bearing its truest sense, in
all places of the book of God unless they may be forced once to be without
their wills, for in all the Scripture that I know of, where the word (...)
is placed, it is thus displaced from its principal signification by them, so
that all our desires to them on its behalf that it may sometimes at least be
granted the sense of dipping shall in no wise prevail for its own sense to be
allowed it: I remember but these places at present where the word (...) is
used, where water baptism of persons is spoken of viz. Mat. 3. 6. 11. 13. 14.
16. 28. 19. Mark 14. 5. 8. 9. 10. and the 16. 26. Luke 3. 7. 12. 16. 21. L^e 7.
29. 30. John 1. 25. 26. 28. and the 3. 22. 23. 26. and the 4. 1. 2. A^t. 1. 5.
and the 2. 38. 41. and the 8. 12. 13 16. 36. 38. 39. and the 9. 18. and the 16.
15. 33. and the 18. 8. and the 22. 16. Romans 6. 3. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 13. 14. 15. 16.
17. Gal. 3: 27. Col. 2. 12. in which of all these places dare they allow us
the prime signification of the word? not so much as one I dare say, yet
Scapula quotes but two places viz. Mark 7. Luke 11. wherein it is taken to
vvash, we would be contented to allow them that not sometimes only, as they
talk of, but that alvvayes it shall signify to vvash, for dipping indeed
being, a chief kind of washing it cannot be rationally gainsayed, only (proh
dolor) we must not once english it dipping or overvvhelming, no not by any
means in the world.

But Sirs, though you are so accustomed to that trick, so that it is to be
feared you will be hardly brought off it viz. to have nothing more ordinary
among you, then to carry words, and specially the word (...) clearly, and
that not sometimes only, but continually besides its prime sense of dipping,
into its far off sense of washing, and into its nonsense of sprinkling (for
it signifies no such thing as that) yet we have no such custom, nor the
Churches of God, but to take words ordinarily in the sense which they most
properly bear.

Rantist.
But Mr. Blake denies dousing over head to be the prime signification of (...)
and tells you p. 3. that the great Critics in the Greek tongue will not allow
you your sense to douse over head and years, to be the prime, distingishing
between (...) and (...), making the Latter to bear your sense, the former to be
a dipping more light and overly, as Luke the 16. and the 24. it is evidently
used.

Baptist.
O that's another matter he should have said so then at first, for because he
talked that words are used out of their prime signification, and among the rest
this word (...), for the sake of which he says the other, out of its prime
signification of dipping, I took it for granted (and so I might well, for he
allows it to signify washing in Scripture, and what sense is it that he
pleads against by that speech, viz. that words are often used out of their prime
significations?) I took it I say for granted, and seriously a grant it is if he
well examine it, that he took dipping, or overwhelming to be the prime sense of
baptism, unless almost a page of of his be pennd in vain, and dares he now
deny it? that is worse then all the rest: but I wonder what is if that be not
the prime? for I am sure the prime is not to wash: it is (quoth he) a dipping
more light and overly then so.

To which I say let the persons baptizing dip the persons baptized as lightly
and overly as they will so they dipp them, and not some of them barely, for
then I know they must do it underly also, for what man is truly to be baptized,
that man is to be put under water, not a part of him only, as also what part of
a man less or greater, yea if it be but the tip of the finger, that he
instances in as an overt dipping, is truly to be dipped, must not be dipped so
overly as that it is not dipped underly, I mean put truly under water, for else
it is not properly a dipping of that part: but I would I could hear some of
those Critics (for he mentions not one of them) that distinguish him so
besides the way of God by their fair false glosses upon the words (...), and
(...), making (...) only to signify that we stand for i. e. a total
overwhelming, and baptizing no more then some dribling kind of darting some
part of the subject under water, for verily they are but cracked braind Critics
to me, if the Lexicons be at all to be heeded: for howbeit (...) does signify
the same that we say (...) signifies, viz. dipping or being under water, and
it may be more deeply then (...), for that is as it were Imum petere to go down
to the very bottom, yet neither does (...) signify any less then we say, and
that primarily also, viz. at least to put under and overwhelm with water, which
is enough for us, or else it would never be rendered by obruo and submergo,
which words if they do not as truly express as total a covering with water as
subco, ingredior, which are the senses by which (...) is rendered then I have as
much sense in my heel as my head; but if those Cricticks think this no right
rendition, let them do the world that right as to take upon them to correct
those Errata's in the Lexicons that are extant, and to turn Lexicographers
themselves.

The third exception of Mr. Baxter against what has been before said in proof
of dippping is this, viz.

The thing signified is set forth by the phrase of washing or sprinkling and
the sign need not exceed the thing signified.

And in this fashion argue both Mr. Blake, and Mr. Cook especially, out of
whose larger drivings home of this head, a man that has but half an eye may
see Mr. Baxter borrowed most of that little he says in exception against what
we say for dipping; abridging two or three pages of Mr. Cook, viz. page 19, 20,
21. into these two or three lines of his, and coting the same Scriptures, and
no other, and that in the self same order, and no other, then Mr. Cook does,
viz. the 1 Cor. 6. 11. Tit. 3. 5. Heb. 10. 22. Isa. 44. 3. Joel 2. 28. Ezekiel.
36. 26. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Heb. 12. 24.

To which I say it is true, some but not all the things signified, nor yet that
which is most immediately signified, and therefore mainly to be resembled, are
set forth by the phrase of washing, pouring and sprinkling, and it is as true
that the sign need not exceed the thing signified, but the sign need be
adaequate to the thing signified, and so is not any kind of washing, but that
of dipping under water, nor does that exceed the thing signified, for that
which is the main matter, the signandum or the radical matter to all the rest,
is the death, burial and resurrection of Christ, and ours spiritually with him,
which things are no way Analogized in sprinkling and pouring, but only by a
burial under water, and bringing up again, which yet are the only things that
these three men plead to have left unsignifyed, and unrepresented in the sign,
but we must have them all not only signified, but also, as much as may be,
lively pictured out in the sign of baptism, this cannot be by infufion or
aspersion, for they are too narrow to resemble all, but they may be and are in
submersion and immersion, for these are neither too narrow, nor too wide, but
just adaequately resembling the signata, there must be a sufficiency in the
sign to the end says Mr. Cook p. 20. namely to represent the spiritual grace,
though yet p. 17. he knew not any word of God, wherein this representation is
necessarily either expressed or implied.

Now the whole spiritual grace being the death, burial and resurrection of
Christ, together with all the benefits thereof, viz. the washing of our souls
from guilt as to justification, from filth as to sanctification, as by the
blood of Christ sprinkled and his spirit poured, respect must be had that, as
near as can be, all these must be represented, and that the Elements and
actions be neither so overmuch, as may take off the heart from the spiritual to
the Corporal thing, as we might easily do if we should do more then dipp under,
and raise up, or should hold so long under water as almost to suffocate the
subject, nor yet so little, as Mr. Cook says well, as not clearly to represent
the spiritual grace the whole spiritual gracebeing therefore all these things
forenamed, care must be had that they be all Analogized, as far as it is
possible, and especially the main, which is fundamental to all the rest, viz.
Christ's death, burial and resurrection; for this however ought to be done, nor
ought the other altogether to be left undone, but it sprinkling be the way then
the main thing is left undone, for there is no representation of Christ's death,
burial and resurrection.

Rantist.
And if Total Dipping be the way, then many things are left undone, for there
is no representation of the blood of sprinkling, and the Spirits pouring.

Baptist.
Not so neither with your leave, for howbeit in bare infusion, and aspersion
death, burial and resurrection are excluded, yet in submersion and emersion,
both pouring and sprinkling are concluded, the greater wettings containing in,
and under them the less, but the less no way reaching to the other.

Moreover that remission of sins by the blood of Christ sprinkled is
represented sufficiently in emersion, as well as in aspersion, not so the
death, burial and resurrection in Aspersion consult a learned Author for this,
that was for asspersion as well as your selves, though I believe he saw
submersion to be the better way, i. e. Bucan, who in page 668. as I have hinted
above says thus, viz.

Illa in aquam Mersio, sive aspersio perspicue denotat Rantismon, id est,
aspersionem sanguinis Christi in peccatorum remissionem, and justitiae
imputationem; mora autem etc.

So that we see he counted submersion, though it exceed that one part of the
thing signified, viz Christ's blood sprinkled, yet to signify, and represent
that vertually as well as other things; I conclude therefore notwithstanding
any exceptions that Either Mr Ba. Mr. Cook, or Mr. Blake has put in hitherto
against what has been said by us in proof that baptism was by dipping in the
primitive time, that that was the way of baptism then.

Rantist.
But Mr. Blake has many more Arguments then those you have yet spoken to
whereby he clearly evinces it, that baptism was not only by dipping then: I
hope we shall have your answer to them too, and the rather because they are of
some weight, and therefore you are the more willing to slip by them: First
(says he) if the way of baptism were only dipping, then the Baptizer must put
the baptized over head in the water, and after a space receive them up again,
otherwise he could not say in your sense I baptize thee, but we read of no such
thing any where in Scripture, we find Christ and the Eunuch going to the water
and coming thence, but neither John nor Philip putting them into the water or
taking them from thence p. 8.

Baptist.
I strange that Mr. Blake should grant as he does above p. 6. that Philip and
the Eunuch are fitly said to go into the water, and yet say so shortly after,
we find no more then their going to the water, and from it again; how fitly can
they be said to go into the water and out of it, that go but to and from it I
have showed already, but it is more strange to me that he should so far forget
himself, as to say we read of no such thing in Scripture as of John and
Phillips putting Christ and the Eunuch into the water, or taking them from
thence, for we read plainly that Christ was baptized of John into Jordan, and
in Jordan, and we read that Philip and the Eunuch went down both into the
water, and Philip baptized him, and that Christ came up out of the water, and
that Philip and the Eunuch came up out of the water, if all this be not partly
an expression, partly an implication of the same thing that Mr. Blake says we
no where read of, then I shall never trust my spectacles more, for what shall
we think was done to Christ by John when it is said he was baptized by him into
Jordan, if he was not dipped, overwhelmed put under the water? was he sprinkled
into Jordan? and what shall we think Philip did to the Eunuch when it is said
he baptized him, after they were both gone down into the water, if he did not
put him under it? did he no more then sprinkle, or pour a few drops of water on
him? either of those might have been done as easily, and more if they had never
gone into the water, yea ^f they had never went so much as to the water at all;
and when it is said of Christ and the Eunuch that they came up out of the
water, is it not necessarily employed (and therefore what need it be expressed)
that John and Philip, who put them under the water did take them up again after
a space, and not hold them always under it? for if they had, how they could
have come up out of it I know not.

Had Mr. Blake therefore more believed the Scripture, then he did Mr. Cook,
from whom he borrowed this Argument (and lent it again to Mr. Simpson of
Bethersden, or else Mr. Simpson stole it, for without any cotation of Mr. Blake
he has it word for word in that forenamed Letter of his, which he desired
should be communicated) he would not have transpenn'd Mr. Cooks matter, who
says p. 16. of his there is not the lest hint that John doused, cast or
plunged Christ into the water, and took him out of the water, into another
phrase viz. we read of no such thing any where in Scripture that John and
Philip put Christ and the Eunuch into the water, and took them up again, but it
is your fashion to follow by implicit faith, and to take up things at a venture
by tradition one from another as the people do from you.

Rantist.
Now you talk of dipping under water, and taking up thence again, I pray tell
me how it is possible for the baptizer to dip the whole baptized under water,
and to lift him up again above the water? since for this the strength of more
men then one is necessary: perhaps you will say the person to be baptized may
be an assistant, and an agent in the business so far himself as to go into the
water, and stand there up to the middle, and then to yield the rest of his body
to be put under ^y the administrator; but this is for a man for the most part
to dip himself, and divinity does not admit of se-baptism, and permits not the
baptized to be agents, but in this act will have them to be patients, and
baptized by others; is there any command for them to go into the water?

Baptist.
I think Mr. Simpson of Bethersden, and you have laid your heads together, you
jump so right in one mind in this matter, for in this manner, and almost in the
very same words does he speak in that letter of his I spoke of above, divinity
admits not say you of se-baptism etc. what your sinodical divinity admits of as
good baptism I weigh not, and what you call se-baptism I know not, but if you
call that self-baptizing for the baptized to go with the baptizer into the
water, and there submit himself to be overwhelmed in the water by the hands of
the administrator putting him under, the Scripture admits of such a se-baptism
as this, and if we had no command for acting so far in order to our own
baptism, yet we have president so plain as is equivalent, witness the Eunuch
that went down with Philip into the water, and yet (saving your ignorance,
which permits not the baptized to be agents) Paul had command to be so far an
agent in order to his baptism as to do more then barely sit still viz. to
arise, and put himself in a posture suitable to that purpose, neither can you
totally deny him to be truly baptized and overwhelmed in water according to the
will of Christ (and that is sufficient) that betakes himself not only to the
water, but also so far into it, that the dispenser may conveniently put him
under it, unless you suppose that the dispenser of old did carry the disciple
in upon his back, and then dash him in against his will, and that were in the
disciple the part of a proper patient indeed; besides does the condemned man's
being agent, and assistant so far toward the cutting off of his head, as toly
down, and fit his neck to the block make him a se-slayer, or accessory so far
to his own death that you can properly call him a murderer of himself? what
dribling Divinity is this?

Rantist.
Mr. Blake says surther that if the Scripture way of baptizing were thus to
dip or drown them, the baptizer and baptized must both put off their garments,
and lay them aside for that business, but we find no such thing mentioned, we
find says he, one in the new testament stoned, and the laying aside of the
garments of the witnesses is more then once mentioned, but among all the
multitudes that were baptized there is not one word of un lothing for that end,
nor yet of the putting on of garments after baptism, when yet sometimes there
had been all reason for the mention of it, as in the case of Paul, of whom
after he was baptized, it is said he received meat, and was strengthened, but
not that apparel was put on him, nor dry and warm clothes applied to him,
which we should sure have heard of, if he had bin dipped over head in water.

Baptist.
If by putting off of clothes Mr. Blake mean, as it appears he does by his talk
of naked dipping in the same place, such a putting them off as is in order to
putting on others fit for such a purpose in their stead, I know not only no
necessity, but no modesty also in such a divestment; nor yet does Mr. Tombs I
dare say, though in his expressions viz. that informer days it was thought no
immodesty, and that there is no necessity that persons be dipped naked, Mr.
Baxter is so abominably uningenuous as to wrest his words into such base and
sinister senses, and to abuse him to the world as if he had meant it was no
immodesty in old time to be dipped naked, and as if he held it lawful to be dipped
naked, though not necessary, when ingenuity of judgment, and such love as he
pretends to Mr. Tombs would have construed his meaning to be this, viz. that
it was counted no immodesty in former times, though it be now by Mr. Baxter, to
be dipped in that way, wherein we are dipped, which is not naked, as Mr. Baxter
bruits it, and that it is not necessary to be dipped naked, as Mr. Blake Mr.
Baxter and Mr. Cook think it is, if persons be baptized by a total dipping;
and as for the Scriptures mentioning of the putting off, and on of their
clothes in their addresses to, and dresses after baptism, there was not only
no necessity, but at all no expediency in the mention of such a matter: yea
both reason and nature it self suggesting how needful that was to be done, it
would have been very vain and superfluous to have talked on it: as for the
double mention that is made viz. by Luke Acts 7. 58. of the witnesses that
stoned Stephen laying aside their garments at the feet of a young man, whose
name was Saul, who is said Acts 8. 1. to be consenting to his death, and also
by Paul himself Act. the 22. 20. confessing to God his persecutions, and how
when the blood of the Martyr Stephen was shed he was standing by and consenting
to his death, and kept the raiment of them that show him, Mr. Blake cannot be
so silly as to think that that clause concerning those men's clothes was put in
as a piece remarkable, or worth recording of it self, or in any other respect
in the world, save for this end only as it was an expression of the malice,
that Saul, who was afterward converted and called Paul, did at that time bear
against the truth, for surely had there not been that good reason wherefore,
the laying aside of their clothes had not been worth our notice, nor should it
ever have been mentioned simply for it self sake; but now there was no such
weighty end as this nor any end, or purpose at all in order to which it was
needful to mention the circumstance of their clothing, and unclothing about
the administration of baptism, it is enough that we have recorded of the thing
in the (...), and (...) viz. that, and how, and why it was done, but it would
have been frustraneous, and even every way endless to have minded us of such
impertinent appertenances to baptism as the dressing and undressing of the
disciples: if any one tell me a story that such and such infants were sprinkled
at such places, is not that relation sufficient, and complete unless he tell
me how the infants were dressed in their blankets, and what a fidling was made by
the midwife, and the minister about the unpinning and turning up of their face
clothes? is not the story of Naamans washing himself seven times in Jordan full
enough to our use, because there is no mention of his putting off and on?
Christ washed his disciples feet, and wiped them, it may well be supposed they
put off their shoes first, and put them on again, yet there is no mention of
that: Mr. Blake thinks that among all the multitudes that were baptized there
must have been some words about their unclothings, and clothings, and specially
that there was reason that we should have heard that Paul had dry and warm
clothes put on him after his baptism, as well as mention of meat given him, if
he had been baptized by immersion, because he had been weak; but what crude
conceits are all these? it was related that he was weak through fasting three
days, and that was but proper, and answering to the other to tell how after he
eat his meat, and gathered strength, but the other must have come in (for ought
I see) without either sense or reason: and since he stranges that among so many
baptized, no mention should be made of their preparations viz. the seponing,
and resuming their garments, I wonder what mention he finds of the
accommodations that those multitudes had that were circumcised in Ahrahams
family in one day, and in the City of the Shechemits, and those thousands in
the wilderness, after the long cessation, both before and after circumcision?
and yet that was such a tedious bloody, sore, and painful piece of service, as
required (no question) ten times more attendance with clothes and other
accomplishments till it was whole, then this of baptism, even in that so
troublesome way to you wherein we dispense it.

Rantist.
But pray give me leave a little: Now we talk of their Clothes, I remember that
no sooner was Christ come out of the water, but immediately the spirit drove
him into the wilderness, the spirit of the Lord caught away Philip and the
Eunuch went on his way rejoicing, Act. 8. whence I argue thus, viz. if they put
off their Clothes they did not stay to put them on, but went away naked, (...)
they had them on, then being as you say, dipped over head and ears, they must
have worn them wet, but the first had been unseemly, the later prejudicial to
their health.

Baptist.
Well argued Mr. Simpson again: as sure as can be you have got his Arguments by
root of heart, for these also are Mr. Simpsons very words in that letter of his
above mentioned.

Rantist.
Whose Argument this is it matters not, I suppose it is past your answer, and
here is reason enough in it to disprove Christ and the Eunuchs total dipping,
as a mere groundless and reasonlesse conjecture, and crotch^t of your own
coining, or if you have any thing to say to it I pray let us have it out of
hand.

Baptist.
Reason say you? it were well if there were so much as common sense in it, for
my part I suppose it a senseless fancy, but I am sure there is so little truth
in the ground of it, that its stark rotten at the very roo^: it is a dispute Ex
falso su^posit is, it is taken by you for granted as necessary, when it shall
never be yielded to by us for so much as probable, that Christ and the Eunuch
were baptized either naked or else in the clothes they ware immediately both
before or after either: for both Christ (coming purposely to be baptized) and
the Eunuch though not thinking of baptism till Philip met him, yet returning
homeward from Jerusalem, where he had been for some time, were undoubtedly
accomodated otherwise, and with change suitable enough to such a business.

Secondly, it supposes that both Christ, Philip and the Eunuch, posted all so
immediately several ways from the water, that they stayed not so much as to
cover themselves with other Clothes, then those they went with into, and came
up with out of the water: whereas, as nature it self ^orbids us to believe they
went in, much more that they went away naked, for common sense forbids us to
take the word immediately in so strict a sense, as to think they departed in
such extremity of have as was no way consistent with the shifting, and so
fitting of themselves for departure: Immediately does seldom sound forth such
a suddenness as admits of no intertime, nor invening action at all: yea
sometimes it signifies no sooner then some hours, some days, some years
after, according to the nature of the matter asserted in the sentence wherein
it has its use, as Matthew. 24. 29. nor does it express any other in Mark 1.
13. where it is said Immediately the spirit drove Christ into the Wilderness,
then within a while after his baptism, as appears not only by Matthew. 4. 1.
where it is not (...), but (...) which wo^d is there [per act is praedict is]
ordinative of another story, but specially by Luke 4. 1. where i^s said plainly
that he was returned from Jordan, before it is said he was led into the
wilderness: and had you or Mr. Simpson, compared Scripture with Scripture, or
heeded the harmony of the Evangelists, you had saved your selves the labor of
all those lines, and lost nothing by it but what is worth nothing, viz. the
Argument it self, for as if I should say immediately after the child was
sprinkled the Gossips and friends went along with it home, it were absurd to
understand me so, as if I meant that they did not stay so long after, as to
wipe the child's face, and put the face clothes over it, and lap it up again in
the loose blanket to keep it warm: so no less absurdity is it to understand
that speech, viz. And immediately the spirit caught away Philip, and
immediately after Christ was baptized he went into the wilderness, so strictly
as if there was not staying so much as to reassume any garments they had laid
aside, in order to the more convenience of their baptizing.

One thing more I cannot but take notice of in this clause as it is Mr. Simpsons
and that is what little proportion, if not contradiction, it holds with the
words of Mr. Simpson (or rather of Mr. Blake used by Mr. Simpson) immediately
precedent to these in his letter, for he will not give way to it at any hand
that Christ and the Eunuch went into the water, or at least that they were put
into the water by John and Philip, or taken thence, but only in the phrase of
Mr. Blake, at the third hand of Mr. Cook, that they went to the wa^er, and came
thence, and yet here he forgets himself so far as to the confutation of himself
and them to speak in the phrase o^ Scripture concerning Christ and the Eunuch,
viz. that they came out of the water, which if they could do, and neither went
into it, nor were put into it, then I know not how to understand plain English.

Rantist.
Well this is all but by the business, let us go on and consider what more Mr.
Bl. brings to disprove dipping to be the primitive custom, he tells you
further p. 9. it was the Apostles way to baptize disciples as soon as they were
become Converts the same day, rather sometimes the same hour, as we see in the
Eunuch, the Jailer, and Lydia, and multitudes of others; but conversion of
Disciples necessarily happened when there was no season for dipping, the
Element of water being over Cold for that service.

If any object that in those Conntreyes there was no danger in the coldest
times.

He answers, the commission being for all Nations disciples were made in all
Countries; how soon says he came the word to this Nation? etc. sometimes
therefore says he the water and weather was too cold for dipping.

Secondly, the Number of Converts were so numerous 3000, 5000. in one day that
there was no possibility of baptizing in that Manner, Acts 2. 41. and the 44.

Thirdly, Sometimes the Baptizers were in that condition that they were unable
for that work in that way, as Paul and Silas men newly taken out of the stocks
in the Inner Prison, with such stripes that their Convert was fain forthwith to
wash them, in this case they were unfit to wade into the water for that work,
and had they made any such adventure the Scripture would not have been silent.

Fourthly, Sometimes the baptized have not been in case for dipping and
plunging, which was Paul's case upon the Aparition of the vision he was lead
into Damascus, where he continues without meat or drink three days, and upon
Ananias his coming in, and instructing of him he is baptized, and when he had
received meat, says the text, he was strengthened, will any believe he went out
in this case with Ananias into the water, over head in water before the taking
of any sustenance?

Baptist.
That persons were baptized as soon as ever they became Converts, and could be
discerned to be disciples, even the same hour commonly without delay is an
undeniable truth, for that and no other was the very period of time at which,
what ever their parents were, they were deemed to have true title to baptism:
for neither if their parents were wicked were such excluded as were, nor if the
parents were godly, were such admitted as were not converted upon the Account
of the fathers goodness or badnesse, but as they believed or not themselves,
and this makes me the more amazed at it, that it is come to pass since that
the faith of the father can now entitle the child to baptism, though the child
have no faith at all of his own, and yet I muse more since you all count
infants, at least of believers, to be disciples from the womb, why yet you
delay their baptism so long, and do it not at the same hour of their birth:
for whether they be Discipulinati, or discipuli facti if they be disciples (as
you falsely suppose they are) if the primitive rule were to baptize persons as
soon as ever they appeared to be disciples, then (unless you have any special
instinct, whereby you know them to begin to be disciples, and in the faith, as
many of you count them, about that very hour you baptize them in, and not
before) you will appear to be a little tardy in your dispensations by your own
rule, though in truth you are too hasty for all this.

Now as to Mr. Blakes terrible conceit, concerning the coldness of the water,
specially in some weather, when yet, if dipping were the way, there would by
means of men's conversion, occasion be ministered to dip in, since I see occasion
will be ministered to discourse more of winter dipping, when I come to Mr.
Baxters grand Arguments, with one of which this is coincident, I shall say
nothing to it here, but there speak to both under one, save only that I must
here tell Mr. Blake that conversion of disciples necessarily happened when
there was no season for dipping without danger, the Climate being, by reason of
persecutions that rose against that way, much more over hot then the Element of
water can at any time be over cold, for the owning of that service, must it
therefore be forborne for fear of hazarding our lives? if no exemption from a
hotter service, why from a colder for the life's sake? which whoever will save
shall loose, but whoever will loose for Christ's name sake, and the Gospels
shall preserve it to life eternal: as for the rest under that head I fully
agree with it viz. that whatever that is, there is commission but for one
manner of baptism for all nations.

As to the multitude of Converts three thousand, five thousand converted in one
day, which shift word for word Mr. Simpson covers his nakedness with, adding
thus much the^eunto, viz. could Peter and those few with him the dispensers of
this ordinance have stayed so long in the water, or by dipping every one dipped
so many in so short a time?

I answer how many and in how short a time does the man mean? as for the 5000
it is doubtful whether they were all converted in that one day, or whether he
speaks not rather o^ the whole multitude that believed before, which were 3000
together with those that afterward were added, which might be some 2000 and so
5000 in all; but if there were fully 5000 that then believed, and that they
were all at the same time baptized too, which is not said, and it is more
probable (for done it must be) that it was done at another time, or else by other
hands then by Peter and John's, for they were laid hold on in the Temple as they
were speaking, but suppose I say that there be at any time full five thousand
newly believing in so short a time as one day, if they could not be baptized
all in one day they must necessarily, they might lawfully for ought I know stay
till the next, but yet 3000 we read were baptized in one day, neither is it
such an impossible thing as you, who stumble at every straw, are slugg'd by
every rub, and look on duty with such difficulty, as if a Lion were in the way,
would seem to make it, for 5000 to be baptized in one day;

Multorum manibus Grande levatur Opus, Multorum manibus Grande levatur Onus,
Many hands of them that have love to Christ may both lessen, and lighten that
service, and suffering that is sustained for him, and make but then some
performances, (and such I perceive it is to you tenderlings, that make
provision for the flesh to fulfill it in the ease thereof, to dipp many, or be
dipped your selves in cold water, or weather) possible, easy, and pleasant,
and how many hands there might be at work at once at the dipping of the 3000
besides the hands of the 12. who as occasion was made use of others to dispense
the ordinance, it being an inferior work to their preaching, see Act. the 9.
Act. 10. 1 Cor. 1. may be conjectured, when the number of disciples were a
hundred and twenty, where if there were but forty dispensers, with what ease
might they baptize a 100 a piece, and do themselves no more wrong neither with
abiding in the water, knee deep, or a little more for half an hour together,
then he that stands deeper for almost a day together, and washes many a hundred
sheep, as I have known some do, and that not by plunging only, but longer
padling with each of them by far then need be in only dipping persons, and
so letting them go again; besides when once 3000 were baptized, how many hands
there were ready to baptize not 5000 only, but 5 times 5000 if occasion were,
and that quickly too, is evident to any rational man that reckons it; for it is
a work which when it is once ready to be done, is done in lesser time, then I
have seen taken up by the Parish Priest in his dropping, and crossings, and
other font fidlings about an infants face: and if you suppose it may ask so
much hand for so many persons in so short a time as one day to make themselves
ready for such a work, I hope the same time that serves one to undresse and
dress in, which may be some a quarter, or at most not above half an hour, may
as easily serve ten thousand, for as if all set at once to sweep every one his
own door, a whole City may be cleansed in an instant, so every one that is
willing addressing himself to the work, a thousand may be ready as soon as one.

And as for that other conceit of Mr. Blake, which Mr. Simpson transcribes out
of his book into his own letter in these words viz. that Paul when he was
baptized by Ananias was not in case by reason of his weakness to be plunged in
water over head and ears, as he was not by reason of his stripes to have gone
in a deep river or pond, when he baptized the Iaylor, it is as wisdomlesse as
any of the rest, for what if he were taken out of the stocks in the inner
prison and had such stripes that his convert was fain to wash them, was he
therefore so unfit, or was it such a strange adventure (as Mr. Blake proclaims
it) to wade in the water for such a work as the dipping a few persons? could
that water that touched his legs while he waded, be more mischievous to him,
then the water that washed the blood of his stripes? and when he was baptized
himself, what though he had fasted three days from food in that sudden ecstasy
of his mind, which time its like he spent in fasting and prayer to the Lord,
for behold he prays says the text, yet I trow, as dainty of danger as our
Clergy men are, that dare dip their fingers, but not their feet in cold water
for Christ, that voluntary keeping under of his body did rather fit, then unfit
him for burial with Christ in baptism, which his proud flesh would else not
have stoopt to.

Surely Sirs you are men that make so much of every little for Christ's sake,
that Crosses and diseases your flesh, that you will hardly ever commend your
selves as the ministers of Christ did of old 2 Cor. 6. 5. 6. etc. 2 Cor. 11.
26. 27. in much patience, in afflictions, yea in necessities, in stripes and
imprisonments, in tumults, in crossings, in labors, in perils of waters, in
weariness, in painfulnesse, in watchings often, in hunger and in thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness, in indurance of hardship as good
soldiers of Christ 2 Timothy 2. which since you decline with all the might you
can, rather then expose your selves freely to for truths sake, therefore (the
Lord have mercy upon your persons) your ministerial capacity will be cashiered.

Rantist.
Well what if it was so in the primitive times, that total dipping was the
custom, must it therefore needs be so now? will it follow that we must follow
their fashion in that particular? there may be sundry reasons, whereupon they
might baptize in such a manner then, and yet no reason at all why we should tie
our selves to the same:

Baptist.
If it was so? what do you speak suppositively of it still? nay verily I hope
you will not be so obstinate as to deny, for all your gainsaying it hitherto,
but that it was so then, for sure enough it was otherwise then in that way of
sprinkling, or pouring, nose dripping or face dipping either, which are in use
amongst you; and, keep it out at swords point as long as you can, yet you will
be forct to yield to it in the end, when you consider, that your own par^y are
fain to flag so far in this case, as to confess it, for not only Tilenus
reaches us, that heretofore submersion was the way of baptizing, rather then
aspersion, but Dr. Featley also furnishes us (as I have showed above) with as
much as we desire, and if it be once granted (as it is in a manner already by
not a few, if not all but Mr. Blake, why else do they trouble themselves, and
the world to render reasons why it might be by submersion in the primitive ages
and places of baptizing, but not so now?) I know no reason worth a rush, on
which we can be held excused from baptizing by submersion as they did:

Rantist.
It Is true it is confessed by some, and if it were granted by all that baptism was
then by dipping it were not so material to your cause, nor would you get so
much ground by it, since both such as flatly agree to it, and such as see not
cause to agree to it so fully as some do, are all agreed in the grand reason
why it was so then, and why it may not be so now at any hand viz. the different
temper of those climates, wherein baptism first began, and of ours, wherein it
now is practiced, theirs being so hot, that there could be no danger by dipping
in the coldest times, ours so cold, that it cannot but be very dangerous, if
not destructive to life and health.

I grant says Dr. Featly that Christ and the Eunuch were baptized in the
river, and that such baptism of men especially in the Hotter Climates has
been, is, and may lawfully be used, but the question is whether no other
baptizing is lawful? or whether dipping in Rivers be so necessary to baptism,
that none are accounted baptized, but those that are dipped after such a
manner? usitatior olim fuit etc. submersion was more usual in Judea and other
warmer Countries says Tilenus then aspersion, notwithstanding since submersion
may prove prejudicious to the health, specially of such tender infants, as for
the most part are baptized now a days, we suppose the Church may use which she
pleases, and says Mr. Baxter, if it were otherwise in the primitive times, it
would be proved but occasional from a reason proper to those Hot Countries;
and says Mr. Cook though it were granted that in those Hot Countries they
commonly washed by going down into the water, and being dipped there, whether
in ordinary, or ceremonial, or sacramental washing, that will no moee enforce
on us a necessity of observing the same in baptism now, then the example of
Christ, and the Apostles gesture in the sacrament of the supper, ties us to the
same; which was leaning, and partly lying, which was their usual table gesture
then, now the ordinary table gesture which is usual among us, is most fit, so
the usual manner of washing among us is most fit to be observed in baptism, and
that is by pouring as well as by dipping: so you see these men are all of a
mind, that is was, or at least might be so possibly in the primitive times, but
if it were, yet not so in ours, in regard of the coldness of our climate.

Baptist.
Then it seems we shall have it amongst you pro confesso that in the Apostles
days the way was dipping, for though Mr. Cook keeps a loof off in his
hypotheticals, saying, though it were granted, and Mr. Baxter, who borrowes
well nigh all he says against dipping from Mr. Cook, Cooks it out but
conditionally, saying, if it were otherwise, yet Tilenus takes our part
plainly, and the Dr. draws nearer to us then so, giving it for gone that in
those Hot Countries baptism in rivers was then used, only whether such manner
of dipping in rivers be so necessary to baptism in all countries, this we say
says he is false, and so for ought I see you say all.

But Sirs first, I pray tell me from the very bottom of your consciences,
whether you can conceive that Christ has appointed two sorts of baptism viz.
one kind of baptism for Judea, and those regions round about Jordan, and
another for England, Scotland, France, Spain, Italy, and all the regions round
about of the Romish Christendom? whether he has ordained two baptisms, or
rather two different dispensations, whereof one is not baptism, to be used in
different places, viz. baptism for the Hot Countries; and Rantism for the Cold?
or whether he has not rather wild one only baptism, and that a true one, to
be used throughout the world, Dr Featley, Mr. Cook, Mr. Baxter suppose the
first, but where is Mr. Blake all this while their wonted Co^diutor in the
cause? verily he leaves them a little here, and lends us his hand, who hold
that Christ gave order, and commission for no more then one way of baptism in
all Nations; for howbeit he finds in his heart to let Rantism pass for current
baptism among them that take the liberty to maintain, and use it for fear of
cold p. 4. yet whatever way of baptism the commission was given out for in
those Hotter Countries, whether submersion or infusion, (for a spersion he
ownes not to be it however) the very same way, and no other, he holds the
commission to be for in the coldest Nations under heaven; and this will appear
if what he says in his 9. p. be considered, where after he had used this
argument to prove that total dipping was not the way of the primitive baptism
viz. because the conversion of disciples, and so consequently their baptism
happened sometimes to be, when there was no season for dipping, the element of
water being over cold for that service, he speaks thus in way of answer to an
objection viz. if any object that in those Hotter Countries there was no danger
in the coldest times, I answer says he,

The Commission being for all nations, disciples were made in all Countries:
how soon came the word to this nation? etc.

In which words he is void of common sense that does not discern Mr. Blake
siding with us, saying that the way of baptism should be one in all ages, and
places, and asserting quite contrary to his fellow disputers against dipping,
so far as to confute them to our hands, for whereas they all uno ore with one
consent cry out that the reason why they baptized by dipping in the primitive
time was because Judea and the regions round about were Hot Countries, but
England is a colder climate, and therefore we need not baptize the same way as
they d^d: he Tells them plainly that the heat of those Countries could be no
reason why they should use total dipping then, more then other nations,
because the commission for baptizing was one and the same, to all Nations, and
disciples were then made in all Countries, as well as in Judea, in cold
Countries as well as in hot, yea how soon says he, came the word to England it
self? baptism therefore in his account should be the same in England as in
Judea, not by dipping in Judea more then in England because that was a hot
Country and this a colder, but the commission is a like in all places cold and
hot, this is the sense those words of his sound forth, but if Mr. Blake were
silent in this case, the Scripture speaks loud enough, that there is but one
baptism for all Nations, and no Rantism ordained for any, for then the
commission must include Christ's willingness to dispense with colder climates
in this point, and in our understandings at least run thus viz. go and teach
all nations, baptizing them that live in hotter countries, and rantizing them
that live in colder climates; he that believes, and is baptized, if he live in
Judea, or any Hot^er Country, or is but rantized if he live in England, or any
cold Country shall be saved, in which silly unsound sense to understand those
Scriptures is to be silly indeed, and without either sense or understanding:
and yet thus it may be understood if this be the reason why they in Judea must
be dipped, and we in England must be no more then sprinkled for fear of danger
viz. because Judea was a warm Country, and England a cold one: for either
Christ did ordain the thing to be done in this different manner in different
regions, or he did not, if he did then it must be first some way or other
intimated in the commission, but there it is not, and secondly it must be done
accordingly in this different manner in the execution, or else they are high
transgressors that do but rantize in Iudaea, and they high transgressors (and
so Mr. Blake and Mr. Cook say they are with a witness, but will never prove
it) that baptize by total dipping in England; but if he did not ordain it to be
done in such several ways in several Regions, according as they are hotter or
colder, but in one way only in all places, then that one way is by baptizing,
i. e. dipping only, or else by rantizing only; and if by baptizing only,
then they are high undertakers that take upon them to correct Christ's
comm^ssion saying it is better, and safer to rantize only in some places; if by
rantizing only, then (non tutum est ludere cum sacris) they were vain persons
that made a M^ygame, and matter of pleasure of the ordinances of Christ, that
in Iudaea and the hotter Countries would choose to be baptized for delight and
coolness sake by total dipping, and bathing in water, rather then otherwise,
when Christ ordained no more then sprinkling, or infusion.

Secondly, Sirs you grant so much as to say possibly, probably it might be done
by dipping in Iudaea, and the Hot Regions round about, but may not be in these
colder, pray tell me from the bottom of your consciences without stifling them,
or shuffling with them, so as not to suffer them to speak, what constructions
must be made of those Scriptures, which we have canvast to and fro, which
relate the manner of their baptizings that then were, viz. Matthew. 3. 16. Mark
1. 9. 10. Act. 8. 38. where it is said of the people and Christ, that they were
baptized in Jordan, into Jordan, went down into the water, and came up out of
the water, yea were buried with Christ in baptism Romans 6. Collo. 2. yea and of
all the other Scrip^ures, that tell us of the baptism that was dispensed in
those Hot Countries as John 3. 23. Act. 16. 13. 14. 15. 33. where it is said
John baptized in Aenon because there was much water, and Paul went out to a
Rivers side, and sp^ke the word, at which time Lidya and hers were baptized,
and a while after the Jailer and his, tell me I say what construction all
these, and all the Scriptures that talk of baptism, as dispensed in those Hot
Countries, must consequently bear, if it be once granted that such total
dipping was the manner of baptizing in the primitive times in those Hotter
Countries, must they not then needs have the senses we put upon them, viz. that
Christ and the rest did really descend into the water, were buried under the
water, and raised again, and not those forced senses, into which you would rest
them to your own ends, viz. that they went but to the water, and there were
wetted only by sprinkling, or pouring, and from the water again without going
into it, or being dipped in it? if you give us one for granted, viz. that in
Iudaea and those Hot Countries, as Rome, Phillippi, and Collosse the manner of
baptizing was by going down into the water, and being dipped therein in this
Sacramental washing, you must necessarily give up also all the interest that
you claim in those Scriptures for sprinkling, they being no other then the
relation of what baptism was done in Judea, and those Hot Coun-Countreys, and
not what was done in cold; if then it be supposed that baptism by submersion,
and not aspersion, was the custom in the Scripture times, it must semblably be
supposed that the Scriptures themselves, that story out the baptism of those
times do speak of that Manner of baptism that then was, and not of another,
unless we suppose it must be interpreted as speaking of another thing, then
that it only speaks of, and so consequently this Scripture, this Testament must
be supposed to be wholly on our sides, and to speak only of men's baptism by
submersion, and you must suppose out some New Testament of Christ, if you can
tell where, for the exemplifying of your baby Baptizing. Rantizing.


And further had you chanced to be born, and bred in such Hot Countries where
dipping is the Custom, as you happened to come out in such a cold Climate
where for fear of cold, more then any thing else, that is to warrant such a
practice, the custom is only to sprinkle, I appeal to your own consciences,
whether such a thing as rantizing would once have come into your minds upon the
single search of those Scriptures?

Thirdly, whereas you talk of dipping as the way of baptizing in those Hot
Countries, both Mr. Baxter and Mr. Cook also p. 15. assert that In those Hot
Countries waters for dipping were scarce and rare, and could not be had in some
places in a great distance, and therefore, if sprinkling or pouring only must
be used in some Countries, and dipping in other some, in all reason and
likelihood, if any places may be exempted from dipping, sprinkling should be
dispensed with rather in those Hot Countries to save people the pains of
traveling so far as they must do for dipping, where the waters were at such a
distance from them, and dipping rather appointed to be used in these
Countries, where the Service, as it is not much more tedious then it was in
Iudaea, at least in coldest, and sharpest seasons, so may it be moderated as
touching the tediousness thereof, by being done and dispatched through the
vicinity of waters here not very far off from our own doors.

Fourthly, even those Hot Countries of Iudaea, Rome, and the Regions therabout
were not within the Torrid Zone, nor so hot, but that if cold water would have
quenched love to Christ, and pretense of danger discharged from duty, they
might have been as shy as your selves of being dipped in water, for even there
the waters (says Mr. Blake) was over cold for such a service, and also this
Colder Country (as you count it) of England is under the Tepid Zone, and not
so exceeding cold in summer Seasons, but that dipping may be as well digested
then, as in Iudaea, or as it is by such as then washed themselves in way of
pleasure.

This Hot Country catch therefore is an Argument that flashes fairly in the
p^n and makes a report with a powder, for almost every one lets fly at us out
of this Engine, but verily it is an empty Engine, a piece discharged to keep
Cold Country Christians from killing themselves with Christ's service, but
charged with no great store of truth nor sense, nor reason: wherefore Sirs if
the coldness of this service of total dipping do cause you to stand so coldly
affected toward it as not to submit to it here in England, unless the Climate
were a little hotter, yet at least let us, who by dipping as weak folks as your
selves in winter have experienced how tolerable it is, through Christ
strengthening us, for Christ's sake to be with Paul in cold and perils of
water, (so you suppose it is to be dipped) as well as in other hardship: Let us,
I say, who are willing to venture on the way of dipping, proceed without your
offense, and as for us we shall in order to your good be so far offended at
your neglect of it, as uncessantly to call upon you and yours, to repent and be
so baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus for the remission of
sins, till you can show us (as Iam sure you never will) his letters pattents
for your Exemption.

Rantist.
But Mr. Cook forces this Argument further yet, and tells you that their
custom of being dipped enforces us to the same, no more then the Gesture that
Christ used at Supper binds us to the same, you are willing to overlook that
perhaps having little or nothing to say to it, but I pray take all along with
you as you go, and be not so par^ial as to pick out what is easiest to be
answered, and let the rest alone.

Baptist.
As for that poor piece of sustenance, that Mr. Cook affords beyond all the
rest toward the further improvement of this exception which from the heat of
those Countries you make against the Example of dipping in the primitive times,
it has no substance in it, whereupon your cause can possibly live, for though
he says their going into the water then, and being dipped therein no more
inforces us to observe the same in baptism, then the Example of Christ, and his
Apostles gesture in the Supper, which was leaning and partly lying, ties us to
the same: but as the table Gesture of sitting now in use among us is fittest
for the Supper, so the usual way of washing, which is by pouring as well as
dipping is fittest to be observed in baptism.

Yet I desire Mr. Cook to consider these things,

First, that if the priesthood had but any such clear example of their being
sprinkled in the primitive times, as we have of their going down into the
water, and being dipped there, they would enforce us with more then Arguments to
an observation of the very same, yea how hardly have we escaped being enforced
by them from dipping, though they have not an inch of instance for their
sprinkling?

Secondly, there is a vast difference between an example in point of
circumstance, and mere gesture about a service, and the very substance of the
service it self, variation from Christ's example in the first is naught enough,
but in the other worse then nothing; yet even such is your degeneration from
dipping to sprinkling, from baptism to rantism viz. not a variation from some
certain circumstance in that one matter of baptism, but a variation from the
ordinanance it self, a doing, not what Christ did in another manner, but a
doing of another matter then Christ did: dipping with the face upward, and with
the face downward is the same thing still, though in a different gesture, and
(to satisfy Mr. Simpson, who in his letter scarce thinks it a burial in
baptism, if the face be not upward, and the water powered on, as the earth is on
them, we bury with their faces upward) whether this way or that way is not so
much material if there be a total covering and overwhelming with either earth
or water, it is a true burial still notwithstanding; but dipping and sprinkling
are two such diverse things, that the first is both baptism, and burial in
baptism, but the second neither the one nor yet the other.

Thirdly, and yet the gesture is so far to be heeded in every ordinance, that
if we know any one to be better then another, and more ass^redly to be that
which Christ and his disciples used, I suppose we are bound, if not of
necessity, not to decline it to follow any other men's fashions whatsoever, and
I believe Mr. Cook did think it worth contending for to exchange the Bishops
kneeling at supper, for one more suitable to that Christ used.

Fourthly, the gesture Christ used was the same as ours i. e. sitting not
leaning, nor yet lying, for though Mr. Cook asserts with such confidence that
lying was used by Christ, it is undoubtedly utterly untrue: what ere was the
usual table gesture then is nothing to the point, or if it be it is most
evident it was sitting, as it is now, for if it was in some places the fashion
to lean or ly on beds at great banquets (as some tell us) yet I am sure the
table gesture was not lying nor leaning neither any otherwise then as we do
viz. on one elbowor both when we please: the Scripture says all along that he
sat: Mr. Cook greeking it out in the margent as he does viz. Mat. 26. 20.
(...) Mark 14. 18. (...), Luke 22. 14. (...) Mat. 14. 19. (...) will not help
him in what he says, for if any or all of these words viz. (...) do signify
to lean or lie down, yet they all signify to sit down also, for they are all
rendered by discum^o the plain english of which is to sit down, and therefore
also our translators do so English them, and I would demand of him again as he
does of A. R. p. 12. whether he thinks that our translators, that have englisht
them thus viz. he sat down, and as they sat down, and he commanded the
multitude to sit down on the grass, knevv not how to render the original in
its proper signification as well as he?

Nor yet fifthly is the usual manner of washing among us, which you confess
is most fit to be used in baptism, by povvring as well as dipping, for
povvring is (and yet but in some cases only, as namely the washing the hands,
and in that very case but sometimes and seldom only, for mostly that is by
dipping, and this too, but when the infusion is so large as totally to vvash
the hands so vvashed) a preparative to such a washing, but a complete true
washing it is not of it self, without some subsequent act of rubbing, which
you use not about infants faces; but swilling in water is the most usual way of
washing, and a washing of it self some times, and some times used without any
after rubbing at all, therefore this by Mr. Cooks own rule by right should be
observed in baptism.

Sixthly, whereas he argues from the custom of the present times to an
exemption from the primitive customs and practice, he might as well take upon
him to say thus, if any man contend for that faith, way of worship, way of
baptism, that was in the primitive and purest times. and for a reformation of
all things according to the word; and example of the Churches the word speak
of, it is true those Churches indeed worshipped thus, were congregated thus,
ordered thus, baptized thus viz. by dipping when they believed, but sprinkling
infants is the way, and fashion now adays, and as for what was done of the
Churches of old, we have nothing to do with it, and if any list to be
contentions for it we have no such custom now, nor the Churches of God! of
which sure Mr. Cook cannot but be ashamed, who has covenanted to reform
according to the word fi^ a covenant keeper, and a Custom-monger cannot
possibly be denominated both of one.

Rantist.
Nay stay a little, you will forget your own words I think anon, did you not say
your self even now that we must put difference between examples in substantial
matters, and in matters merely circumstantial? we desire to keep as close as
your selves can do to the primitive custom in things of weight, and that there
may be no variation from it, without a violation of the will of Christ in any
point that is positively commanded, but I hope you will not make such a matter
of moment of the manner of baptizing, as if Chrst had injoined this way or that
way of dispensation of it, viz. dip^ing so strictly as that sprinkling may not
be used, nor yet sprinkling so as that dipping may not be used, nay rather its
a mere ceremony, a prudentiall point, in which the Church may use her
discretion so as to dispense it either way, as convenience and charity may
dispose her, and no less is very well observed by Mr. Baxter p. 135. Christ
says he has not appointed the measure of water nor manner of washing, no more
then he has appointed in the Lords supper what quantity of bread and wine each
must take, and as it would be but folly for any to think, that men must needs
fill themselves with bread and wine, because it best signifies the fulness of
Christ, so it is no better to say, that we must needs be washed all over,
because it best signifies our burial with Christ, etc. Christ told Peter that
the washing of his feet was enough to cleanse all, a little may signisie as well
as much, as a clod of earth does in possession of much lands, and a corn of
pepper fignifies our homage for much, and much to such a purpose are those
words of Mr. Cook p. 20. some of which having been quoted, and spoken to
before, though not so satisfactorily, but that they sway with me still, I am
almost loath to repeat them, yet since they be so among the other, I can hardly
decline the mentioning them once more, by your leave, in answer to the
objection, that a little water does not so fitly and perfectly represent as
dipping and plunging, since in the one the whole body is washed, in the other
the face or head only:

He says first, that the Scripture no where requires the washing of the whole
body in baptism.

Secondly, that with as good reason one may plead thus, that at the supper it.
is most convenient that every Communicant should receive his belly full of
bread and wine, and take as long as stomach, and head will hold, to signify the
full refreshment of the soul with the body and blood of Christ, but who, says
he, would endure such reasoning?

Thirdly, These outward Elements of water, bread and wine are for special use,
and to signify special things, so that, if there be the truth of things, the
quantity is not to be respected further then is sufficient for its end, namely
to represent the spiritual grace, and that it be neither so little as not to
represent, nor so much as to take of the heart from the spiritual to the
corporal thing: not the washing away the filth of the body in baptism, nor the
glutting or satisfying of the natural Appetite in the Lords Supper is to be
looked after, but the washing and refreshing of the Soul, which may well be
represented by the sprinkling of a little water, eating and drinking of a
little bread and wine, In circumcision a little skin was cut of.

You see what these worthy men say you, need not be so hot as you are for the
ceremony, if so be you keep the substance.

Baptist.
I have received as much as all this comes to long since in a loving letter
from a worthy friend of mine, whose words shall sway me, where I see them suit
with the word of truth (where not I must be excused) to the full, as much as
Mr. Cook and Mr. Blake and Mr. Baxters sway you be they right or wrong;

Grant that dipping was always used in those Hot Countries, yet you know says
he, that necessity and charity dispense with Ceremonies even of Gods own
institution, nor is the Nature of the Sacrament altered by this change, viz.
from dipping to sprinkling, for seeing the whole virtue of the Sacrament is in
signification perablutionem, it no more matters Quantum quisque abluatur then
it does in the Supper Quantum quisque comedat.

But verily I am not able to discern either in this, or in that you say above,
or in that you cite out of Mr. Cook and Mr. Baxter the least warrant in the
world for the way of sprinkling, or for waving the old wonted way of dipping,
with all the wisdom I have to weigh it by at this instant: as for what you
take notice of that I said my self above, viz. that there is difference between
matters circumstantial, and substantial, so that we need not be so strict in
the observation of the one, I will not eat any thing I then uttered, but me
thinks you might as well, had you not been partial, have taken notice of what
followed, as of that, which had you done, you would have seen how little
accrues to your purpose out of that grant of mine, for I told you there and now
tell you again, since I see you so quick to catch at things by the halves, and
slow to mind what in them makes against you, that howbeit it is not so material
which way you baptize, so you baptize, yet if you Rantize only, you vary not
only in a circumstance, but in the very substance of the Ordinance, doing
quite another matter then that you should do, and not the matter, i. e.
Baptism, in another manner only; for we will bear with that, as a thing
neither here nor there, whether you baptize, i. e. wash a person by
overwhelming or burying him in water in this gesture, or that, this form, or
that, with his face up or down, yea be it by infusion of water on him, or
immersion, or putting him under it, which of the two is most proper, and easy,
we weigh it not, so you see to it that you bury, and overwhelm him: for all
this while you retain both the true outward sign, which is baptism, or burial
under water in baptism, in its nature, and essential form, in its true Analogy
and proportion to the spiritual things signified, which are primarily the
death, burial and resurrection of Christ, and secondly our being washed from
sin by his blood; but if once you fall from baptizing to rantizing, from
submersion to aspersion, from dipping to dripping, from a total covering to
almost a total keeping him from the water, you vary from the very thing that
is required, not from one manner of baptizing to another, but from baptizing to
another matter: There fore Sirs when you talk of our being hot for a ceremony,
if by the word Ceremony you mean some petty, trivial, immaterial mere
circumstance in baptism, which may indifferenter aut adesse aut abesse sine
baptismi interitu, be or not be, and yet baptism be baptism still, as dipping
backwards or forwards in ponds or Rivers, you are much deceived in us, we
regard not such ceremonies; But a ceremony is a thing, which though it stand
but for a time, yet stands by positive command for that time, wherein it is to
stand, by no less then divine institution, nor know I any man, Church or
Angel that can institute a Ceremony to be observed and imposed; and if by a
Ceremony you mean thus, not the mere manner of baptizing, but the matter, even
baptism it self, which of (...) may altogether with the ordinances of the
Gospel or new Covenant very properly be styled Ceremonies, as well as all the
Ordinances of Divine service under the Law, forasmuch as these last but for
their time, viz. till the second appearing of Christ, as those of the old
covenant Heb. 9. 1. lasted only till his first appearing, then I confess we
are somewhat stiff for the ceremony, nor can you blame us if you consider what
we do, for in so doing we contend for no less then substance, as far as you
can call any ordinance of Christ so that has a tendency, as a sign or
otherwise, unto something yet more substantial; the rite of Circumcision, the
Passover, and all the other Sacrifices of the Law, though shadows in
comparison of what they pointed at, yet were ordinances so substantial, as
instituted of God, and so strictly to be observed, that who so should have
taken upon him to alter, and shape them more to the model of his own mind,
would have heard as ill from God for it as, without his leave, for omitting
them altogether, and how ill that is he cannot be ignorant, that hears how
sharply he speaks to them, that were too short but in tiths and offerings when
in force, saying that a curse had therefore devoured their blessings Mal. 2. and
also that neglected circumcision, saying every soul that is not circumcised,
meaning of whom circumcision is required (but it was not of females then any
more then baptism is of infants now) shall be cut off from among his people,
and I appeal to your own consciencies if any should have said, circumcision is
a painful, a tedious, and dangerous piece of service, and dispensation to
little infants (and so it was indeed much more then dipping in cold water) and
thereupon in charity circumcision being nothing, and uncircumcision nothing,
but a new creature, we will only pare there nails, and make that serve instead
of the other, would the Lord have took it better at their hands? would either
God or good men have held them guiltless, yet whether they had circumcised
thus or thus viz. with a knife, a sharp stone, or a pair of shears, I suppose
that circumcision had been dispenst with, and even thus may we say of baptism
as nothing as it is, it being an ordinance of Gods institution, both they that
omit it to whom it is commanded, and they that in charity take upon them to
alter it, so as to make Rantism serve instead of it, preaching or practicing no
baptism at all, or another thing that is no baptism under the name of it, were
it the Apostles themselves, or an angel from heaven, that should thus alter the
Gospel, shall equally be accepted, or rather equally accursed before God Gal.
1. can you blame us therefore if we contend for the right baptism? for it is
not another manner of the thing then you use, but the very thing it self we
plead against you, who cannot be said to alter the right way of baptizing, but
the rite of baptism it self; it is not a bare circumstance in the ceremony we
differ in, but we differ in the substance i. e. in the ceremony, or rite it
self, which you have changed, having no parts at all of the rite in your wrong
practice, which your own party divide the rite of baptism into.

Ritus in baptismo est triplex says Tilenus the rite or ceremony in baptism is
threefold, immersion, or plunging into the water, continuance for a time under
the water, resurrection out of the water, in resemblance of Christ's death,
burial and resurrection and ours in him.

Which of all these three are to be found in your aspersion? unless you will
all own Featleys fetch for good resemblance viz. the dipping, burial, and
resurrection of the ministers hand, when he sptinkl^ the infants face: since
therefore you have broken the law of Christ the Son, that Lawgiver and
Prophet, whose voice we are to hear in all that he says, and changed the
ordinances so far as to turn his baptism into rantism, you will as they that
despised the Law of Moses the servant, be cut off from his people Acts 3. Heb.
2. Heb. 10. since you make void his plain word under pitiful pretenses viz. the
coldness, the tediousness, the danger of dipping in these climates, as if the
reason for dipping were proper only to Hot Countries, no marvel if such as see
from under the vail of priestly pretense, that has darkened the whole earth,
are hot to have a recovery to the truth, specially since it is a truth not
unknown to us, nor yet so trivial truth as these that inck is made of gum, and
paper made of rags, nor yet such a Scripture truth as is not material to be
known, as that about Paul's cloak and parchments, and that Abiam was the Son of
Sacar as Mr. Baxter bables p. 218. 219. (a sign that paper is made of rags by
his wasting it in such toies) for these we are not so strictly held to reveal,
but a truth of such worth, that it is to be preferred before that truthles
peace he pleads for, the disturbance of which he calls hell p. 2^0, saying,

We are little beholding to those men that would have turned the Church into
hell i. e. privation of peace, rather thensilence their supposed truths.

To whom I say, If that be hell which priests so call,
Then truths true friends are hell hounds all.


But a word to Mr. Baxter out of Mr. Baxter p. 218* in vindication of our
loathnesse to betray this truth by our silence viz.

The Law commands us to do our duty, to preserve truth from being lost, so
that if truth be lost, while I do my duty, it is no sin of mine, if it be not
lost while I neglect my duty, it is yet my sin, God disposes of events, not
we, therefore what consequences may be occasioned, since they are not caused by
preaching the Gospel, I may not, for fear of them, nor shall shun to declare
the whole counsel of God.

I know necessity and charity do dispense with circumstances in ceremonies, and
with ceremonies or ordinances themselves of Gods own institution sometimes,

But first, it is with the omission only, but not with the alteration of them
into other, if a man converted on his death bed, or on the ladder, when ready
to be executed, as the thief was upon the cross, be willing to be baptized, if
it may be, but cannot, in charity he may, and of necessity he must be dispenst
with dying unbaptized in such a case, but no man may dispense another thing to
him i. e. Rantism in its room and stead, no more then he may give other things
then bread and wine in the supper, to a stomach too weak to bear either of
those, for that is to take upon him to make another institution, and Gods leave
man never had so to do.

Secondly it must be by leave from the Lord implicit or express, upon which
only we can ground the lawfulness of omission, and necessity, and charity,
but not charity mistaken, are leave enough no doubt to let a lone, though in no
wise to alter what ever he ordaines, as when it neither can be at all, nor can
be done conveniently, nor possibly without killing men indeed; whereupon we
find no fault found with Israel in the wilderness for forbearing to circumcise
40 years together, it is like least it should hinder them in their warfare, but
sure I am they should have heard of it from the Lord if to forgo the soreness
of that circumcision they had circumcised i. e. cut off only the hair of their
heads.

Let the Ranter therefore show us Gods word for his omission; and the Rantizer
for his mutation of Baptism, and we will fall in with either, as we see it
evidenced therein.

Rantist.
If you do but mind the Testimonies I cited out of Mr. Cook and Mr. Baxter, and
what you hinted your self as w^tten to you in private, you cannot choose but see
word enough for our use of sprinkling, though dipping were used never so in the
primitive times, for they tell you (but me thinks you do not much mind it) that
the Scripture requires not total washing, that Christ appoints not the measure
of water nor manner of washing, more then the measure of bread and wine in the
Supper, he has left it ad libitum, and as they say very well, the whole virtue
of the Sacrament lying in signification per ablutionem, it matters no more
Quantum quisque abluatur, then quantum quisque comedat, and as it is folly to
think that men must eat in the Supper as long as head and stomach will hold,
because it signifyes the souls refreshment, so that in baytism we must be
washed all over, because it best signifies our burial with Christ: a little
signifies as well as much, a clod of earth, a pepper corn, a little skin cut
off in circumcision, so by a little bread and wine eat and drank, and by a
little water sprinkled may the refreshment of the soul be represented.

Baptist.
That which best signifyes is best to be done, and forasmuch as t^ at best
signifies, that both signifies and resembles the quantity of the Element, that
manner of action which best resembles is best and fittest to be used
undoubtedly in baptism, in which Christ has undoubtedly appointed what is
best, whereupon if Mr. Baxter grant (or if he do not he cannot deny) that
overwhelming best resembles, and consequently best signifyes our burial with
Christ, he never will give good reason whilst he breathes upon this earth, why
washing all over (as he calls it) should not be used; as for that reason that
is given against it here by himself at second hand, and by Mr. Cook at first,
of whom he borrowes well nigh every bit of what he says against a total
dipping, save only his fearful, fairfowl flourishes upon it, viz.

First that the measure of water, and manner of washing the whole body is not
appointed,

Secondly, That then in the Supper there must be a eating to the full,

Thirdly, That a little may serve as well as much, there is little weight as far
as I see in any part of it.

The first has so little reason, that it has no truth in it for Christ has
appointed vertually in some measure the measure of water in that his very
appointment of the manner of washing in the way of a total overwhelming, as
appears before in the signification of the word Baptize, which signifies a
dipping or overwhelming of that subject, that is particularly denominated to be
washed by it; whether it be the whole man, or but a part of him; if the tip of
the finger only be said truly to be baptized, then that tip must be totally
washed; if the hands be denominated, without a figure to be baptized, then the
hands at least are totally washed; if the man be the subject properly
predicated to be baptized, then that man also must be totally washed; but in
Scripture the man is required, and appointed to be baptized; to the performance
of which such a measure of water is consequently appointed, as may be at least
sufficient for that end, and required it is that it be neither so little that
it cannot totally wash him, nor yet so much as must necessarily drown him, as
an ocean would, but a proportion suitable to that purpose.

To the second I might answer, that there is not altogether the same reason,
for such a total filling, and swilling in the Supper, as there is for a total
swilling in baptism; since the main and radical matter, that is to be resembled
in baptism is Christ's death, burial and resurrection, but the radical thing,
that is resembled in that action of our eating and drinking in the Supper, is
our faith, whereby we feed upon Christ, and accept him each to our selves as
our Redeemer, without which that he is a Redeemer will do us no good, for faith
is the appropriating of of Christ the bread of life, e^ch to our selves, who is
set before us in common in the whole loaf, and as it will do a man no good to
have bread and wine before him, which are elements most refreshing, unless he
take them, and eat and drink, so neither us to see a Savior set before us,
unless we take of his salvation to our selves.

This is that which is most immediately signified, and particularly represented
in the Supper, which business of bare taking Christ Jesus to our selves by
faith, is represented truly in taking never so little, but a burial and
resurrection not ^n never so little water; a few crumbs of bread and sips of
wine taken do reptesent a taking of Christ in the Supper, but not so a few
drops of water tisfled upon the face Christ's death, burial and resurrection:
and since you say the refreshment of the soul by the fulness is represented in
our eating and drinking in the Supper, and yet that eating and drinking a
little bread and wine not to fullness is enough in the supper to represent that,
and so why not a little water, not deep enough to dip and bury in, applied to
us in baptism, the burial and resurrection of Christ?

I might answer that the refreshment of the soul by Christ is represented
rather in the elements, then in the action of either, eating or drinking in the
supper, by the bread which is a strengthner of man's heart, and wine which is
for them of a sorrowful heart, and therefore there might not be altogether the
need of representing our r^freshing by eating and drinking much, at least so
much as Mr. Cook and Mr. Ba. talks of, viz. to the filling and glutting of our
selves to the top as long as head and stomach will hold, that action would
yield but a small resemblance of a refreshment, and were enough to make a sound
man sick, but there is a reason in all things, and a difference as we say
between staring, and stark mad^ thus I say I might answer, and cut off your
arguing for analogy, and a small portion of the element in baptism, as well as
in the supper, between which there is not fully the same reason.

But verily I am of your mind that a refreshment of the soul by the fullness of
Christ is very fit to be resembled and represented by the quantity of the
elements, as well as by the elements in the supper also; and yet am I not of
your mind that so little, as you ordinarily use, is so very fit as you dream it
is to represent it, but of the mind rather that as you are in your baptism viz.
not out of your element, as you should be if you were baptized in truth by
submersion, or putting clear under water, but out in your element rather i. e.
in the measure of your water, which is not adaequate to the true manner of
washing, so you are also in the supper too poor in your provision of elements,
for that which is the true and full purport of that sacred service; you have
got together many littles to prove that so little element as you use both in
baptism and supper may do as well, if not better, then more, all which are very
little to the purpose, a little may signify as well as much says Mr. Baxter,
a clod of earth, a pepper corn: but what then? we are to signify with
resemblance, or else a sacrament is no sacrament, says Austin, but says Mr.
Cook a little may resemble the washing, and the refreshing of the soul may well
be resembled by a sprinkling of a little water, eating and drinking a little
bread and wine, in circumcision a little skin was cut off; what then?

First it was as much as God required to be cut off.

Secondly it was so much as made it circumcision.

Thirdly, as much as truly and clearly resembled the circumcision of the heart,
which is signified, but such is not (for all Mr. Cooks conceit) that little
water you sprinkle, nor yet that little becad and wine you distribute, it is
neither so much as represents clearly the things signified, which are not only
the clearing of the soul by Christ's dainties in the supper, which should be
resembled by eating and drinking it, but some more chearing and refreshing of
the body, then that which is commonly in your communions;

But alas the burial and resurrection of Christ, in baptism should be resembled
by submersion, and emersion; and therefore to answer Mr. Cook in the words of
Mr. Cook, the outward elements of water bread and wine are for spirritual use,
and to signify spiritual things, so that if there be the truth of things [but
what I wonder if there be not (as I am sure in Rantism there is not) the truth
of baptism] the quantity is not to be respected further then is sufficient for
its end, namely to represent the spiritual grace [so far then it seems it must
be, and that is enough to confute Mr. Cooks Rantism, for it represents not the
spiritual grace] and that it be neither so little as not clearly to represent
it [yet so little is the quantity that you use, not of water only in the one,
but of bread and wine also in the other ordinarily] nor so much as to take off
the heart from the spiritual to the corporal thing] content with all in my
heart that it be not too much on this hand, provided that it be not too little
one the other, so but that it may reach to resemble the things signified, for
the whole virtue of baptism lying in signification per ablutionem i.e. per
submersionem, per sepelitionem in aqua, and the virtue of the supper much what
in signification per recreationem, per representationem plenitudinis: non
multum interest, quantum quisque abluatur, modo obruatur, submergatur,
sepeliatur, nec quantum quisque comedat, modo comedendo repleatur.]

To conclude Sirs you are too short in that point of the outward element in the
supper as well as baptilm, in the Church of Corinth there was so much bread and
wine that if some hungered, others were drunken, as neither of these should have
been, so the latter could not have been, but that the use then was to have more
abundance of the elements, then you have in your parish passeovers, wherein the
people are past over with so poor a pittance, that all may in likelihood be
hungry enough, but none at all very easily drunken, such niggardly ships and
sups; not at Rome only, where the Priests expounding Christ as speaking to
themselves, when of the wine, saying drink ye all this, and not to the people,
saying drink ye all of this, do impropriate the liquor wholly to themselves,
but in England also do the priests supp, I should say dine (for it is done at
noon days with them) their poor patient dependant people at the Lords table.

There Is one thing among Mr. Baxters bedrow which I had almost quite past over
without any answer, which if I had you would have said it is like I willingly
forgot it; Christ told Peter says he that the washing of his foet was enough
to cleanse all; Mr. Blake gives us a touch here too through the persons of a
popish party p. 10. of Peter's mind says he not to be washed in o^ part only,
which say some from the same place also viz. John 13. 9. 10. is as sufficient
as the washof the whole.

As if that Scripture even therefore because it speaks of washing, does speak
of this ordinance of baptism: either it does Sirs in your opinion or it does
not, if not, to what purpose do you quibble upon it here? if you say it does, I
much marvel why youthink so, but more if in earnest you argue from it that a
man need be baptized but in part only, since you all confess practically that
the face and head, but not the feet are the subject of baptism. yea verily you
had as good have said Pilate took water and washed his hands before the
multitude, therefore the ordinance of baptism is no total dipping, for the
story of Christ's washing Peter's feet speaks no more of the ordinance of
baptism, then the other does; yea it is most evident that the washing of the
disciples feet was clear to another end and use viz. not to baptize them, much
less to show how they should baptize others, but merely to teach them humility
one toward another, and to condescend to the lowest offices that could be for
loves sake to each other; this Christ expressed himself to be the direct
meaning of what he did, v. 12. 13. 14. 15. etc. after he had washed their feet
he says to them: know you what I have done to you? you call me Lord and
master, you say well, so I am; if I your Lord and Master have washed your feet,
you also ought to wash one another feet, for I have given you an example that
ye should do as I have done unto you, this was Christ's end therefore to learn
them humility, which was done as well in washing their feet only, as all the
body, yea the feet only indeed, because the feet are the viler parts of the
body, for us to stoop to wash, whereby to express our humility each to other,
in which respect and no other it is that when Peter yet ignorant of what Christ
was about to do, cried out Lord my hands also and my head, Christ replies, that
he that is washed, i. e. not in Baptism, but in this washing he was then about
need not more i. e. ad rem substratam then to wash his feet, but is clean every
whit, i. e. as much as he need be to this intent, for which I now am washing
you: besides that the washing of the feet only is not a sufficient washing to
denominate a man baptized according to Christ's ordinance, is evident by the
Eunuch, that went into the water, and so was washed in his feet, and yet not
baptized for all that according to Christ's will, till Philip had baptized or
dipped him there: it is a sign you are put hard to your shifts, when you use such
impertinencies to help you as these.

Rantist.
Impertinency? I think all is imper^enency with you still, though never so
solid, that is brought in disproof of your id^ dipping: but what say you I trow
to those two last unanswerable Arguments of Mr. Cook against total dipping
viz. that it is against both the sixth and seventh Argument, both which
Arguments Mr. Baxter also takes after him, and bangs you about with them a
little better then Mr. Cook did, and laces your sides so handsomely therewith,
that I believe you selves will be all sick of Mr. Baxter, and your cause scarce
be whole of those two Gashes he has thereby given it, salve it over as long as
you will, for he proves it plain that your plunging practice is no better then
flat Murder, and Adultery.

Baptist.
I say these are knocking Arguments indeed, if they be but as solid as they
show for, but for all that let us see a little for our money before we part
with it, and hear what their Arguments are in words at length, and not in
figures, if it chance to prove as you say they say, and as they say indeed in
this particular, viz. that it is Murder and Adultery to dip as we do, I assure
you in the word of a Minister and a Christian, that hopes to be saved in the
way of innocence, as well as your selves, that dipping, as it is no idol of
mine, for I adore it no otherwise then I ought to do every ordinance of our
only King, Priest and Prophet Christ Jesus, for his sake that ordained it, so
it shall never be adored so much as to be owned more by me, but be abhorred
rather with deeper decestation, then I dispense it with affection to this
hour; but I believe that their proof will fall wondrous short of so high a
charge, as they venture to charge us with, be pleased therefore since you
mention it in gross, to repeat their Arguments more at large, which I dare say
your memory is more tenacious of then of any other, and I shall examine them as
exactly as you shall desire me.

Rantist.
First then let it be well considered what they say to the first thing.

This dousing over head and ears and under water says Mr. Cook, that you plead
for, as essential to baptism, seems directly against the sixth Commandment and
exposes the person baptized to the danger of death.

For first suppose the party be fit for baptism (as you account) in the sharp
winter as now believing, professing etc. he must immediately be taken to the
River as your tenet seems to hold, and there plunged in over head and ears,
though he come forth covered with yoe. But if he escape perishing with cold, how
can he escape being choked and stiffled with the water, if he must be plunged
over head to signify his death to sin?

Secondly be kept under water to signify his burial?

And Thirdly be taken up again as A. R. and you seem to reason? But whatever be
the danger of freezing or suffocation (...) seems, this you hold the only
baptism and therefore must not be swerved from p. 21.

Thus he, but more largely and plainly Mr. Baxer p. 134.

That which is a plain breach of the sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill,
is no Ordinance of God, but a most heinous sin, but the ordinary practice of
baptizing by dipping over head in cold w^er as necessary, is a plain breach of
the sixth Commandment therefore.

And Mr. Craddock in his book of Gospel liberty shows the Magistrate ought to
restrain it, to save the lives of his Subjects etc. that it is flat Murder and
no better, being ordinarily and generally practiced, is undeniable to any
understanding man, for that which directly tends to overthrow men's lives,
being wilfully done is plain Murder, but the ordinary or general dipping of
people over head in cold water does tend directly to the overthrow of their
health, and lives, and therefore it is murder: here several answers are made
says Mr Baxter some vain, some vile.

First Mr. T. says that many are appointed the use of bathing as a remedy
against diseases.

To which I reply says he, 1. though he be no Physician, yet his own reason
should tell him it is no universalremedy.

2. Few diseases have cold baths appointed them, I have cause, says he, to
know a little more then every one in this, and I dare say that in Cities like
London, and amongst Gentlewomen, that have been tenderly brought up, and
Ancient people, and weak people, and shop keepers, especially women that take
but little of the cold air, the dipping them in the cold weather in cold water
in the course of nature would kill hundreds and thousands of them either
suddenly or by casting them into some Chronicle disease; and I know not what
trick a covetous Land lord can find out to get his tenants to die apace, that he
may have new fines and heriots, likelier then to encourage such Preachers, that
he may get them all to turn Anabaptists; I wish that this devise says be not
it that countenanceth these men; and covetous Physicians me thinks, says he,
should not be much against them; Catarrhes and obstrustions, which are the two
great fountains of most mortal dis^ases in man's body, could scarce have a more
notable means to produce them where they are not, or to increase them where
they are, Apoplextes, Lethargies, Palsies and all comatous diseases would be
promoted by it, so would ^phalagies, Hemicranies, Phthises, debility of the
stomach, Crudities, and almost all Fevers, Dissenteries, Diarraeas, Colicks,
Illiack passions, Conv^sions, Spasmes, Tremors, etc. all Hepatick, Splenetick,
Pulmoniack persons and Hipocrandriacks would soon have enough of it, in a word,
says he, it is good for nothing but to dispatch men out of the world, that are
burdensome, and ^o ranken Church yards.

But Mr. T. will salve all this, for he says that there is no necessity that
it be in cold water.

To which I reply, says he, 11. But then he forsakes the generality of his
partners in this opinion, so much as we can learn, who usually baptize in
Rivers and ponds.

2. And his warm bath would be very dangerous also.

3. Where should this bath be prepared? if in private, it will scarce be a
solemn engaging act, if in the meeting place of the Church, then

1. It will take no small room, and require no small stir to have a bat^iag
place, and water to dipp people over head.

2. And if they do not run home quickly before they are well engaged, the hot
bath will be turned to a cold one to them, and make them repent this badge of
repentance, except they will have all things ready and be brought to bed also
in the Church before the people.

3. And it will be long ere Mr. T. can clear out of his reading Antiquity what
Church had such a bathing place in it; but me thinks they that call for
Scripture for infant baptism, should also bring Scripture for their baptizing
in warm water, but some say they may stay till the heat of summer, when the
water will be warm.

To which I reply, says he, where is your Scripture for that? I have proved
the constant rule, and Example of Scripture is clean contrary, and requires
that men be baptized, when they are first made disciples, and not stay till
summer.

But some desperately conclude that if it be Gods way, he will save our lives,
how probable soever the danger may seem.

I answer, says he, that this is to beg the question, nay I have showed, and
am showing that it is not Gods way; God has appointed no ordinances contrary
to his great moral commands.

2. God must not be tempted, this was the devils trick to have drawn Christ
under pretense of Scripture, and trusting God to have cast himself into danger
of death.

3. So you might have said to the disciples, that if it were Gods command to
keep the Sabbath then they might not rub the ears of Corn, for God could
sustain them without.

4. If it were a duty, yet when it is inconsistent with a greater duty it is at
that time a sin, for it is always a sin to prefer a lesser duty before a
greater, for the duty of self preservation is a moral, natural duty, and
baptizing is but positive etc. God has not appointed ordinances in his Church
that will destroy men ex^ept they be preserved by Miracles, for then it were a
tying himself to a constant working of Miracles etc.

So that I conclude says Mr. Baxter, if Murder be a sin then d^ing over head
in cold water in England is a sin, and if those that would make it men's
religion to murder themselves, and urge it on their consciences as their duty,
are not to be suffered in a Commonwealth any more then High way Murderers,
then judge how these Anabaptists, that teach the necessity of such dipping are
to be suffered.

Thus you see what opinion these men are of concerning your total dipping, and
upon what ground; yea though Mr. Tombs, and others make so light of it, and
wash it over as well as they can, yet Mr. Baxter wipes of all their varnish,
and represents it in its proper color to the world, in its own ugly hue, and
maintains it to be no less then mere Murder, and you may prate a while, and
practice to if you please, having your quiet advantages so to do in this
distracted juncture of time, but I hope an order will we taken with you in time
according to your deserts, if the right Kirk Government were once settled,
though hitherto you have the hap to escape Scot-free.

Baptist.
If one were disposed to give no other answers, then Mr. Tombs viz. that
bathing is a remedy against diseases, and that it is not necessary to be in
cold water, as vain as these are with Mr. Baxter, they may serve to salve the
cause sufficiently from any sore that Accrues to it from that much more vain,
and pedling prit^le-prattle in which Mr. Baxter reanswers him, e. g. his
learned conjectures about Coveteous Landlords, Physicians, and his wretched
wishes that they, in hopes to have men die apace, do not divise countenance for
the way of dipping, and the divine verdit he vents on it, as good for nothing
but to dispatch men out of the world, that are burdensome, and to ranken
Churchyards; what Rotten Riff-Raff is all this? if one should answer him
according to his folly, saying, and coveteous Clergy men should, me thinks, be
not much against it, if it ranken Churchyards that the Parsons horse may have
the bigger pasture, I wish they have not a trick to favor it, etc. were it not
as wise a wish as the other? but I spare him, lest I be like him, though if he
be not answered according to his folly, I fear the man may be so wise in his
own conceit as to suppose his folly to be wisdom.

Further what great store of small stir does the man make about a warm bath,
wondering much where it should be prepared in private or in the Church, and
what stir it would require? [as if it were more difficult to build a bath a
little wider, and a great deal lower then a font, then it is to build a steeple
house] and what room it would take? [as if the Church had rather retain her
Rome then be robbed of her room, in removing that Romish relic of infants
sprinkling] and how dangerous this hot bath may prove too, and become such a
cooling card as may soon make men repent of the baptism of repentance, unless
they run home quickly, or be brought to bed before the people [as if it were
more impossible to bath in baptism without danger, difficulty, and immodesty,
then it is to bath (as thousands do) in order to mere health and pleasure.]

What frivolous quibling is all this? what is the man made of brown paper, and
fit for nothing, but to sit by the fire side in a pair of slippers, that his
body may be baptized, neither in cold water nor warm, but it must needs be his
death without more ado?

I speak this not as intending to answer as Mr. Tombs does, but to note Mr.
Baxters fidlings, for whether bathing in cold water be a remedy against
diseases or no, I am not so far a Physician as to know; Mr. Tombs says it is
against some, and Mr. Baxter very wisely confutes him by confessing the same,
saying only,

First it is no universal remedy.

Secondly few diseases have cold bathes appointed them, it should seem
therefore some ^ve, and whether there be necessity to baptize in cold water or
no I say not, Mr. Tombs says no, and indeed I see not how degrees of cold,
and heat in the element can well vary the nature of the ordinance; but this I
say at least, there is no necessity that I know to baptize in warm; for my part
I am one, who, as grievous as Christ's commandment is to Mr. Baxter, do winter,
and summer usually baptize in rivers and ponds, nor shall I go about to escape
his scrape, or Mr. Cooks either, (who as if a man were undone presently if but
dipped in cold water and weather, cries out of freezing, starving, choking,
stifling, death, murder etc.) by balking one bit of the truth in this point, or
disowning the way of dipping in cold water and weather, for which dispensation
since it is, as I have proved, and Mr. B^. cannot disprove, the ordinance of
Christ for all Nations at all times, as people happen to be converted in them,
I know no season unseasonable, no time at all untimely, save when it is
dispensed to one in time of infancy, nor would it be then untimely, as tedious
as it is, any more then circumcision, that was a far more bloody business,
were it strictly injoined to be dispensed to infants as that was, and as this
is to believers at riper years: as for all the pains Mr. Baxter bestows
against it, Improving Mr. Cooks argument with all his might, it is all mere
babble and bawbling, he tells us it is a desperate conclusion, and a vile
answer to say that if it be Gods way he will save our lives, how probable soever
the danger may seem, and that it is to beg the question.

I answer, for my part I beg no question of him, for I have proved the question
already, and can prove to his face that dipping is Gods way, and will not be
beholding to him to grant it, and being so if this be to be vile and desperate,
to conclude that God will save our lives in his own way, I Will be more vile and
desperate yet, and conclude with the three worthies, that for Gods way sake
ventured one a baptism more bitter then this viz. baptismum flaminis not
fluminis with fire, not water, more hot then this is cold, our God is able to
save our lives, but if not, be it known unto Mr. Baxter and all men that we are
willing, when we must, to loose them in, and for his way.

He tells us God has appointed no ordinance contradictory to his great and
moral commands, and that we might as well have said to the disciples if it were
Gods command to keep the Sabbath (he should have said Sabbath, had he either
known the Hebrew, or remembered himself, for saboth is another thing, for
sabbath is rest, but saboth, or sabbath is hosts as we may see in these places
Mat. 12. 8. (...) Romans 9. 26. (...)) they need not have rubbed the ears of Corn,
for God could have sustained them without, if it were a duty, yet when it is
inconsistent with a greater duty, it is at that time a sin, for it is always a
sin to prefer a less duty before a greater, but the duty of self preservation
is a natural, moral duty, and baptizing but positive.

As if circumcision were not as contrary to the duty of self-preservation as
dipping in water, as if the Priests profaning the sabbath by servile work, were
not as conadictory to the moral command (as your very selves call it) of
Sabbath observation, as either of those to self-preservation, and yet when all
is done all these were to be done, and none of these contradictory to the other
neither, for in very deed God never commanded sabbath-observations so strictly,
as that the ordinance of the daily sacrifice should be neglected, yea and the
life not only hazzarded, but utterly lost, and laid down for Christ's name sake
and the Gospels; he tells us that the duty of self-preservation is a moral
natural duty, and baptizing but positive, I tell him again he says as much in
that, as I desire he should say, to the confirming of our tenet, for if
baptizing be a positive duty, so far as it is positive it must take place against
the other, a positive command being to be obeyed rather then self to be
favored in any wise, in any case whatsoever: God gave Abraham a positive
command to slay his son, therefore that being positive, and the favoring and
sparing of himself and his son, though moral and natural, yet but suppositive,
i. e. to be looked at so far only as God lent him leave to enjoy his son, it
must be done, and the other let alone, God must be trusted, and his will
obeyed, and the saving of his son must give way to the slaying of him: the
positive duty of killing him being the greater, and to be preferred before the
other, and the sparing him being inconsistent with this, though elsewise a
duty, yet would have been at that time a sin. In that therefore he yields
baptism to be a positive command, as if self-preservation were not so, he
yields us more then we are willing to take of him, for how beit for the most
part it is positive, and therefore, so far as such, to be observed, without
respect to the ill consequences of it to the lifeward, yet verily I question my
self, though I find no express exemption from baptism in any case, whether
there be not (yea it is certain there are) some cases, wherein the forbearance
of the dispensation may, yea and must be dispenst with, but those a^e not the
coldness of the water and weather, but the utter impossibility of the persons
submitting to it, of whom else it is required, or his being bard from it,
either as the thief on the cross was, or by imprisonment, or by some such
absolute sickness or weakness as confines persons necessarily to their beds,
and puts them out of capacity and ability to betake themselves, where it may be
done as it ought, I am willing to modify Mr. Baxters. rigid epithere of a
positive command, whereby he denominates baptism, so far as to spare persons in
these cases and respects, and to style baptism a duty but suppositive i. e. a
thing that necessarily must be done, if either possibly, or conveniently it may
be done; but if it cannot, may be let alone: but this proves not that
self-preservation must be always preferred before baptism, for then it need
never be obeyed at all, there being no time, wherein it can be done with so
little seeming tediousness, and disease to a man's self, but that self will
willingly excuse it self from obeying it, by pleading the duty of
self-preservation.

This duty of self-preservation has couzened as honest a man as Mr. Baxter ere
now; and it couzens the whole Priesthood to this hour, who generally suppose
that God is no further to be served, then self may be preserved, hence no pay
no preach, no countenance from the magistracy, no continuance in their
ministry, but for selfs sake they turn still with the times, but no faster; as
if they durst trust God no further then they see him, and this was the plea,
whereby Peter would fain have put Christ beside a duty that he foresaw would be
dangerous, for Christ and himself too: but Christ gave him no great thanks for
his labor, far be it from thee Lord quoth he, to go to Jerusalem and suffer; by
no means let this be: he thought he did well to rebuke Christ for owning the
Gospel in that case, wherein he must expose himself to suffer, but get thee
behind me Satan says Christ, thou art an offense, thou savourest not the
things of God, but those that be of men, thou think as if he should say that
self must be favored, before positive duty be performed, that the life must be
saved, and the gospel obeyed no further then is consistent with
self-preservation, but I tell you says he, that if any man will be my disciple
he must deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me. for he that will
save his life i. e. discharge no duty that may prove dangerous to his life,
shall lose it, but he that will lose his life for my name sake, and the Gospel,
shall save it, Mat. 16. 11. to 26. if Paul had stood so much upon the point of
self-preservation, and counted his life so dear unto himself, as Mr. Baxter
seems to do his, he would have harkned to such as besought him to favor
himself, and not have gone up to Jerusalem, where he knew not what should befall
him, save that he knew that bonds and afflictions did there abide him, if he
would there testify to the Gospel Act. 20. 22. 23. 24, 21. 22. nor would he
have exposed himself to so many hazzards and perils by sea and land, perils by
water, perils by hunger and thirst, and cold and nakedness, none of all which
things moved him, that he might witness to the Gospel:

He tattles to us that God must not be tempted, and that it was the devils
trick to draw Christ under pretense of Scripture and trusting of God to have
cast himself into danger of death, who doubts of all this, but is it tempting
to perform a positive command of God, and expose our selves to danger and
difficulty in the discharge of our positive duty to him, because it is so to
endanger our lives by doing that, which we have no call to, nor warrant for,
and which is absolutely sin, and has not the least dram of duty in it at all?
it is true it would have been but pretense of Scripture, and trusting of God in
Christ's casting himself from the pinnacle of the Temple, but dare he say there
is but pretense of Scripture and trusting of God in submitting to his own
ordinance of baptism? is there no more word to warrant us to be baptized, and
to trust in God, and to expect his protection in the execution of that so
absolute a command, then there is to warrant the execution of our selves, which
God universally forbids, and that on no more ground then the bare bidding of
the devil? who would think a mininister should be so moped as to make these two
alike warrantable? it was the devils trick therefore to draw Christ under
pretense of Scripture and trusting of God to self-execution against duty; and
whether it be Mr. Baxters trick only, or the devils in him to draw men under
pretense of Scripture and tempting of God to self-preservation so far as not to
trust God in the discharge of duty, is not amiss for Mr. Baxter to examine for
that it savours not of spirit but of flesh it is so sure that it needs no
examination.

If therefore it were indeed so dangerous to be dipped, as is imagined by Mr.
Cook and Mr. Baxter, yet I see no word of Christ willing a declension of the
dispensation.

But what if this be but a mere Chimaera of those men's coining, how much less
are we then excused in our non-submission? and yet such and no other will it be
found to be at last by then we have sounded this most murderous matter to the
bottom.

For as to Mr. Baxters dismal divination of the hideous consequences that are
(if you will believe him) as it were entaild to this course of constant
dipping, and his composed catalogue of Chronicall diseases viz. Catarrhes,
obstructions, Apoplexies, Lethargies, Palsies, all Comatous diseases,
Cephalalgies, Hemicranies, Phthises, debilitie of the stomach, Crudities,
Fevers, Disentaries, Diarrhoeas, Colicks, I^ack passions, Convulsions,
Spasmes, Tremores, and all Hepatick, Splenetick, pulmoniack distempers, and
Hippocondriacks also.

All which to what end he has Nomen-clattered together here I know not,
unless to make himself, whilst he denies Mr. Tombs to be a Physician, seem to
be a smatterer in the Art of Physic; as to that pitiful piece of proof I
say, together with that formidable lecture Mr. Cook reads us concerning
freezing and suffocation, it is ridiculous and frivilous sibbling, to fray
faint hearted folks with, from finding out that straight gate, and narrow way
that leads to life: but a few will find it for all this, especially when they
shall find their so much believed Mr. Baxter to be such a flat false accuser as
he is of this way of truth.

Hear therefore o ye doters on Mr. Baxters deep divinity; he talks (if you will
believe him) as if it were little less then impossible that persons should be
dipped in cold weather in cold water, and not be killed suddenly by hundreds
and by thousands, or at least not be cast into some Chronical disease, which
within a while must be an occasion of their death; whereas there are hundreds
if not thousands alive at this hour even in this cold Country, as they call
it, many if not most of which have past through that sharp service in the
sharpest seasons, conversion falling out as ordinarily in winter as in summer,
whose present health both proves the falsnesse, and reproves the madness of
your prophet.

Yea I have cause to know a little better then every one, and a little more
then Mr. Baxter in this, Expertus loquor, I speak by experience, against which
no Argument of his availes, I have seen since my five or six years converse
among the commonly called Anabaptists many a one baptized totally in cold water
and weather too by others, besides toward two hundred by my silly self, many of
which have come forth covered, though not with ye, as Mr. Cook phrases it out,
yet with that water which ye truly covered but just before, yet never saw I
any one so baptized in all that time, who was not, if not better in mere bodily
respects, yet at least as well after it as before; he tells you (if you will
believe him) that total dipping is for nothing but to dispatch men out of the
world that are burdensome, but then I wonder how the Creature called
Anabaptist, that is so burdensome to Mr. Baxter, does not die out of the way by
hundreds and thousands, and so save him and others that labor of dispute
against their growth, but rather grow from hundreds into thousands so fast that
they are not likely to be dispatched out of the world, till they are such a
burthensom stone as will press them to death, i.e. the whole Priesthood, that
is troubled with them.

He tells you (if you will believe him) that dipping will destroy men except
they be preserved by Miracles, why else does he say (speaking specially as to
this ordinance of dipping) God has not appointed ordinances in his Church that
will destroy men except they be preserved by miracles; now if it be not so as
he sales viz. that it is a miracle to be dipped and not destroyed, then what a
strange man is he to say so? but if it be so indeed, viz, a Miracle to be
dipped and not destroyed, then ^o fools and slow of heart to believe the truth,
though the Lord confirm it to you with Miracles, which are wrought day by day
amongst the Disciples, who are dipped Winter and Summer as occasion is, yet are
not destroyed!

Yea whereas Mr Baxter dares say that in Cities like London, and amongst
Gentlewomen that have been tenderly brought up, and ancient people, and weak
people, and shopkeepers, especially women that take but little of the cold
air, dipping in cold weather would in the course of nature kill hundreds and
thousands suddenly, or cast them into some Chronical disease, I dare say that
in the City of London there is hundreds, if not thousands dipped in cold water,
and as it happens, in cold weather too, many of which are Gentlewomen tenderly
brought up, and ancient and weak people, and shop keepers, and women that take
but little of the cold air, and yet by the course of grace they are preserved
from perishing by either cold or suffocation: yea and out of the City of London
too, for these hands have baptized of all these sorts in the Country, viz.
Gentlewomen most tenderly brought up, very ancient people, very weak people,
shopkeepers, and specially two women both alive at this day, which I Will become a
fool in telling you of them since Mr. Baxter compells me, did take so little of
the cold air that one of them, if my memory fail me not, and if I were truly
informed, was but once out of her house in 5 year before, by reason of a
dropsy; and that was with much ado, and but a little before her dipping, and
to hear this doctrine, notwithstanding which weakness, and such swellings that
she was wellnigh twice as bigg as now she is, and scarce able to betake her
self to the water, she was dipped, and was rather better in body, then worse
after it, and after sending for some elders of the Church to^ pray over her,
and anoint her with oil in the name of the Lord according to his own
institution in that behalf Iam. 5. was within a while so assuaged in her
swellings, that she is now as sl^nder as in former times, before ever he
distemper took hold on her.

The other had scarce been out of her Chamber in two years together, and durst
not dip her finger in cold water, and was ready to have her breath stopped with
the least annoyance that could be yet was dipped, and was better after it
(through Gods mercy) for a pretty while so as to go abroad: though she now is
weak, and much what as she used to be before.

If then you will not believe the words of God, believe the works, believe the
Miracles, for it is by Miracles that they are preserved who are dipped in cold
water and not destroyed sa^es Mr. Baxter, which if it be then God has wrought
very many Miracles among the men you nickname Anabaptists of late, for they are
constantly preserved from perishing by either cold, or suffocation: yea I have
known many a one better in body, but I nere knew any one, of whom I could
safely say they were the worse in body or Soul for being dipped, save such as
turned from the truth after turning to it, for the latter end with such indeed
is worse then their beginning.

Yet how rashly do these men shoot their bolts to the murdering of the truth,
whilst they make the ordinary practice of it no less then flat murder it self,
and that undeniably to any understanding man, unless there be a preservation by
a miracle; for else it destroys men quoth Mr. Baxter, it directly tends to
overthrow men's lives in the course of Nature, it will kill hundreds and
thousands of them; but if a man escape perishing with cold, yet how can he (i.e.
how is it possible for him) to escape being choked quoth Mr. Cook and stifled
with the water, if he must be plunged over head to signify his death to sin?

2. Secondly kept under water to signify his burial?

How can a man escape choking Sirs, if he be put and kept under the water? why
I tell you that either he can, or else he cannot, if he can, why then he can,
and so Mr. Cook is confuted; if he cannot in the course of nature, without
miracle, then it being certain that thousands do escape choking, it should seem
God by Miracle secures them, and yet for all this nor Mr. Baxter, nor Mr. Cook
are convinced; whether it be the more shame for them or no not to be so, I
leave it to themselves, and all understanding men to consider.

Or perhaps Mr. Cook means how can a man escape choking if he be kept three
days under water, for so quoth he the disciple must, as Christ abode three
days under water, if Christ's burial be represented, but not only his own
party, for mora sub aqua quantulacunque says Tilenus, quantumvis momentanea
says Bucan, abode under the water for never so little a while does most lively
resemble Christ's Burial, but his own practice confutes him clearly in this, for
as the Ministers hand with which Dr. Featley resembles Christ's burial is not
dipped three days together under water, so the infusion of water upon the face
of the infant, which why may it not represent the burial as well as dipping
quoth Mr. C. p. 17. does not last for three days together neither.

Thus you see how well Mr. Baxter and Mr. Cook have quitted themselves in their
proof of our practice to be murder, and against the sixth commandment, and
what high and mighty reason Mr. Baxter has to accuse us to the magistrate as
murderers, and to suggest it his duty to him out of Mr. Craddock, to restrain
us to save the lives of his subjects, and not to suffer but to destroy us.

Rantist.
But if you give way to Mr. Baxter to answer for himself, he clears himself of
moving the magistrates to destroy you; I never moved Magistrate or people,
says he p. 246. either to drive them out of the Land, or to destroy them.

Baptist.
What an egregious untruth is there? does he not say here if those that make it
Religion to Murder themselves, and urge it on their consciences as their duty
are not to be suffered in a commonwealth any more then Highway Murderers,
then judge how these Anabaptists that teach the necessity of such dipping are to
be suffered.

Is not this to tell men that we are no more to be suffered in a Commonwealth
then high way Murderers, which high way Murderers Mr. Baxters conscience I dare
say desires that they may not be suffered, but may suffer no less then
hanging: and yet dares he say he stirs not up the Magistrate against us? I know
not what is to excite the Magistrate against persons if this be not, to charge
them to be as guilty as high way Murderers, which if he judges us to be indeed,
he is bound both in law and conscience to prosecute us to the very death, but
if he in his conscience judges us not to be such (as oh how after to the
contradiction of himself in this does he judge more charitable of us then so e.
g. p. 310. where he says who dare think their error to be such? and yet such
is high way murder when lived and died in, as concludes them from grace) then
Imarvel how he dare charge us so high as to rank us with, and represent us as
bad, and as unworthy to be suffered in a Commonwealth, as high way Murderers
themselves, especially since it remains yet on his part unproved, that ever any
disciple dyed in the time of dipping, or by occasion of submission to that
dispensation.

Rantist.
If there be not such danger of death to the Baptized, yet the Baptizers may be
murderers of themselves, for it is evident that if the Minister must go into
the water with the party, it will certainly tend to his death (says Mr. Baxter
p. 137) though they may escape that go in but once, for weak Students to make a
frequent practice of going into the water, it will cure their ich after
novelties, and allay the heat of their intemperate zeal: therefore me thinks
(says Mr. Baxter) the Ministers should have regard to themselves.

Baptist.
Me thinks so too, or else they are not like their wonted selves, for self was
ever yet for ought I see regarded by most National Ministers much more then
truth.

But I pray Sirs how certainly will it tend to your Ministers death, any more
then it does to the death of our Ministers that do dispense it, among whom I
have known men full as sickly, though not half so selfish as you, that have
often dipped men in the sharpest seasons, and yet never lay by it so much as
once, but your ministers are weak students indeed, that are studied no further
in common sense and reason, and experienced no more in cold, and other Gospel
hardships, which Paul was skilled in, then to think that genum tenus must
certainly and unavoidably make an end of them, unless the Lord by a miracle
deliver them, and such as are fitter to make Curates of for Gentlemen's chapels
of ease then to take care of the poor afflicted Church of Christ.

Rantist.
Well, if it do not prove to be murder, and so against the eighth commandment,
yet I am sure it will prove to be adultery to dip naked, as they say you do,
and so flatly against the seventh, for either you dip naked or you do not, if
you do not, then you cannot dip the whole body: but if you do, if that be not
so shame fully sinful as is scarce fit to be named among Christians, I know not
what is: and this Mr. Cook and Mr. Baxter does intimate to us, whose words I
shall also intimate to you at the present.

I would know with these new dippers says Mr. Cook, whether the parties to be
doused and dipped may be baptized in a garment, or no? if they may, then
happily the garment may keep the water from some part of the body, and then
they are not rightly ^baptized, for the whole man say they must be dipped.

Again, I would ask what warrant they have for dipping, or baptizing garments
more then the Papists have for baptizing bells? therefore belike the party must
be naked, and multitudes present, as at John's baptism, and the parties men and
women at ripe years, being able to make confession of their faith and
repentance; yet though they both sin against the sixth commandment indangering
life, and against all common honesty and civility, and Christian modesty
required in the seventh commandment, they must have this way observed, because
they fancy it the only baptism: shall we think says he, this was the baptism
of John, Christ and his Apostles? thus he,

And says Mr. Baxter, Another wickedness in their manner of baptizing is
their dipping persons naked, as is very usual with many of them, or next to
naked, which is usual with the modestest that I have heard of, against which I
argue thus.

If it be a breach of the seventh commandment, thou shall not commit adultery,
ordinarily to baptize the naked, then it is intolerable wickedness, and not
Gods ordinance, but so it is, therefore.

The Minor is thus evident says he, that commandment forbids all incitements
to uncleanness, and all immodest actions, but to baptize women naked is an
immodest action, and an incitement to uncleanness therefore, and to this he
says Mr. Tombs answered it was thought no immodesty in former times; but
though it may seem no immodesty in Countries where they still go naked, yet
among such as are not savages me thinks it should says Mr. Baxter; if Mr. T.
could baptize naked all the Maids in Bewdly, and think it no immodesty, he has
lost his common ingenuity, and modesty with the truth.

Thirdly, every good man is to watch over his heart, and to pray that he be not
led into temptation, and would it be no snare and temptation to Mr. T. to be
frequently employed in baptizing maids naked? me thinks the very mention of it
says he, could I avoid it is immodest, and what it may be to all sorts of
spectators I stand not to express;

Besides all this says he, it is likely to raise jealousies in Ministers wives
and others, and so to foment continual dissentions, and it will make the
ministry a scandal, and make the people look on them as so many vile
incontinent men, if auricular confession brought that infamy, no wonder if
ordinary baptizing naked do it.

Further, it would debauch the people, and bereave them generally of all common
modesty, if once it grows into custom to behold each others nakedness, and
sure that practice is not of God, which so directly tends to bereave men of all
common civility, modesty, ingenuity and humanity:

Moreover, it would make the worship of God ridiculous, would not vain young
men come to a baptizing to see the nakedness of maids, and make a mere jest
and sport of it?

Moreover the practice of baptizing naked would bring a general reproach upon
the Christian profession among the enemies of it, and discredit the truth, for
when Christians have the repute of Adamites, who will turn Christians? sober
men will be loath to take a woman to wife that has the impudency to show her
self naked to an assembly, and would esteem it next to taking one from the
stews.

If they shall say to all this, as Mr. Tombs said in his Sermon, it is not
necessary they be naked, I reply says he,

First if it be next to naked the difference is not great, and the former
inconveniences will follow, and God would not have the Jews go up by steps on
his altar, lest their nakedness be discovered thereon, Came was cursed for
beholding his fathers nakedness, Christ tells us it is adultery to look on a
woman to lust after her; the Scripture forbids filthiness, and uncleanness, as
not to be named among Saints.

Secondly, such as would have them wholly, or mostly covered differ from their
partners, and to dip them covered will overthrow their own arguments, for the
necessity of washing the whole body, for this will be no washing but a soaking
or steeping, if they stay in long enough, it may wash the garment, but the body
will be but infused in all likelihood, and so I leave this unsavory practice,
which were it not necessary to confute I should not meddle with it.

But in these last cases we dispute not against bare words, but against
experiences, and known practices, for their naked baptizing is a known thing,
and the wickedness that has followed on some, and that some have died on it,
and I would says he, have others more wise, and escape both dangers, only let
me say says he, thus much more that it is very suspicious, and to me unsavory
that Mr. T. should say no more, bu^ that it is not necessary they should be
baptized naked, and in cold water, as if he took it to be lawful, but not
necessary: me thinks he should rather have given his testimony against it, as
sinful, and expressed some dislike, if he ^e do indeed dislike it, and judge it
sinful, and if he do not, I dare say he is very far gone: one may see what you
are by the words of these men, who have here set you out in your colors, so
that I hope all, that read or hear what they say, will rather abhor then adore
your dipping doings, and if you were not a people past all shame and sense of
sin, me thinks you should abhor your selves in dust and ashes, at the
remembrance of your abominable baseness in this particular; yea give me leave
to say one word more to you, who were a minister once that did baptize infants,
and it is the words of Mr. Baxter to Mr. Tombs p. 255. I conjecture that by
that time you have baptized half as many maids and women naked in a cold River,
as you have baptized infants like an officiating Priest, your feet will either
take cold, or your heart will take heat: if you would be ruled by me you should
not endeavor to introduce into the Church a custom for every young minister
or neighbor, so much as to look on a bathing Bathsheba or Susanna, least to
those without, the name of a Church and a stews, a Presbyter and a Pander, a
Christian and a fornicator, do prove Synonimaes.

Baptist.
To those without? I wonder who those are? those without your Church must be
out of the Nation too for ought I know, and cannot well see what is done by you
in it: but to let that pass.

Here is thunder enough, but no lightning, a shrill sound but an empty barrel;
such is Mr. Baxters book indeed, specially this twofold fardle about murder and
adultery, in which whether there be more noise or nonsense I know not, but
sure I am there is ten times more twittle-com-twattle then truth: this doctrine
would make a terrible tumbling in a Country Church as they say, and make all
the people amazed to hear what manner of men these Anabaptists be, but he that
sleeps there with his eyes open, will be stund no more at the hearing of this
clamor, then by the barking of the bells in the steeple; I must needs confess
that this is matter of weight indeed, and a stone is heavy, and the sand
weighty, but a fools wrath is heavier then them both: this soon shot bolt is
big enough to hure where it hits, but as it happens it hits not us: and so
happens to hurt them most that manage it; as for us, against whom it is
managed, it rejoices us rather then otherwise, since it reproaches and reviles,
and says all manner of evil against us falsely for Christ's sake Mat. 5. 11.
12. 1 Pet. 4. 13. 14. 15. if our dipping were such evil doing i. e. murder and
adultery as these men say it is, we had reason to hang down our heads indeed,
and might well be ashamed in suffering from them in this particular, but since
as Paul said Act. 24. 13. they cannot prove the things whereof they accuse us,
we are not ashamed, but glorify God on this behalf.

Of these two accusers of the brethren Mr. Cook is more candid, and a little
more modest then the other, and yet he utters so much that he has much reason
to be ashamed of it, for howbeit he does not so audaciously charge us with that
foul fact of naked dipping as the other does, yet by some simple supposals,

First, that persons cannot be rightly baptized by dipping with a garment on
[as if they may not be put under, and covered and buried therein clothed
as well as naked, and as if a soaking or steeping in water (Mr. Baxters bald
conceit of our dipping) were not a washing or burying.]

Secondly that it is as unwarrantable to baptize garments, as it is for the
Papists to baptize bells [as if those that baptize persons in garments, did as
directly, and intentionally baptize garments, as the papists do baptize bells,
or as if it were more unwarrantable for us to wet the clothes, that persons
are baptized in, when we baptize their bodies, then it is for the priests to wet
the head clothes of infants when they rantize their faces.]

By such silly supposals I say as these that there can be no true total
dipping, unless the persons be uncloathed, he subtly insinuates the world into
a certain supposition, at least a shrewed suspicion that dipping naked is the
only baptism dispensed among us, for which he will once be ashamed; but as for
Mr. Baxter he is so uningenuous, impudent and uncivilly foolish in this present
parcel of his, you have here spread before us, that I profess against it as
having in it much falsenesse, and more immodesty then I ever saw expressed at
the total dipping of any person that ever I saw dipped in my life: for he not
only makes a long supervacaneous discourse of his dislike of dipping women and
maids naked (in which is such a needless and over often nomination of those
terms too, as tends more to the offending of chaste, and corrupting of unchaste
consciences, then to any use of edifying at all) but also most rashly relates
it to the whole world to be the usual, ordinary known practice of a people,
that are as abhorrent of such abominations as himself.

As for his Argument it is a fallacy called Ignoratio Elenchi, for he concludes
not the point in question, for they, who stand most for baptizing by total
dipping, are all (for ought that ever I heard of) as much against naked dipping
as himself: yea so far are we all, (if any had been otherwise minded Mr. Baxter
would surely have assigned them, whose design was to vilify us what he could,
so far are we all from countenancing such a practice, that I dare, in the name
of all the Churches of the Baptists through England, declare their unanimous
utter detestation of it, in Mr. Baxters own words, viz that it is a breach of
the seventh Commandment, an in^ollerable wickedness, an immodest action, an
incitement to uncleanness, likely enough to raise jealousies in Ministers
wives, yea and other women's husbands too, and so to foment continual
dissension, a means to debauch people, and berea^ them of all common civility,
modesty, ingenuity, and humanity, to turn Gods worship into contempt, and make
it merely ridiculous, to bring a general reproach upon the Christian profession
among all the enemies thereof, yea amongst the most sober and discreet, to
discredit the truth, and prejudice men against it; yea verily it is scandal,
reproach and discredit enough, in that it is but belied by Mr. Baxter to be so
base, how much more, and more justly would it be reproached, if his reports
were as true as they are full of falsehood; we I say acknowledge the practice of
naked dipping to be as bad, as Mr. Baxter proves it to be, therefore quorsum
haec? to what purpose does he with such prolixity proceed to prove, what no
sober minded man of either party does deny?

This is aliud a nogate; a plain absurd aberration from the question, which is
not whether it be a sin ordinarily to dip naked or no? but whether we
ordinarily use that kind of dipping?

The first which none doubts of, he endeavors to make evident as one that
light^ a candle, whereby to show men that the sun shines.

The second, which is unknown utterly among us, he proclaims to be our usual'
notorious, known practice: but he offers no proof of this at all.

Such silly Sophistry as this Mr. Baxter uses also in almost every of these
Arguments, whereby he professes to disprove our practice as unwarrantable,
concluding all along another point than that in question; for whereas our tenet
is that persons at years, professing to believe, of what parents so ever born,
are to be baptized, he most simply, and sinisterly concludes against us, as he
supposes, in a matter of four or five Arguments that the children of Christians
may not be baptized when they come to years, and that this practice of
baptizing of Christians children is utterly unconsistent with the Rule of
Christ: as for us we say as much, neither is it our practice or opinion to
baptize Christians children at age, upon that account merely, as they are
Christians children any more then the children of them that are no Christians,
unless they profess to be believers and Christians themselves as their
parents do, and upon that account, viz. as they profess to believe, we baptize
hea he^s children as soon as them.

Thus the man busies himself beyond measure in beating the air, and wearyes
himself ad ravim usque, and his reader ad nauseam in refuting non entities,
about the proof of such things as no body denies, and per ignorationem Elenchi
concludes that, which is as clear to his Antagonists as to himself, and leaves
that utterly undemonstrated, which is the only thing denied by them, the
absurdity of whose way he pretends it to be his business to discover.

For verily those, against whom he fights under the name of Anabaptists, are as
clear in it as he can be, that no Christians child qua talis is to be baptized
when he comes to years, saving upon the same account, on which an heathens
child may be at years so baptized as well as he, viz. his own personal
profession of faith, and desire of baptism.

Again they hold dipping naked to be intolerable wickedness as well as he,
yet these things he belabours himself not a little in making good, but that
which is denied indeed, viz. that it is our usual practice to dip women and
maids naked, this he charges us with most stoutly, most desperately, and tells
a tale of us most absurdly to the base abusing of himself, the true Church, and
the whole world also, but he is so impertinent, and impertinently employed in
proving naked dipping to be a sin, that he either forgets, or has no while to
prove it to be practiced by us at all,

But Si^ who, but he that sees the right eye of the idol shepherd to be u^ely
darkened, would ever think that from such a man as Mr. Ba. desires to be
accounted, such a piece of paultry should proceed, that such a mess of
balterdash as here is should ere be broached by him, that such a mad report of
the walkers in truth should be published by one that goes for a publisher of the
truth among thousands of deluded people?

Me thinks I see Satan gone forth and become a lying spirit in the mouths of
the prime among their prophets, persuading and in the just judgment of God
prevailing with multitudes of mere formal Gospellers to be strongly deluded,
and to believe lies out of their mouths that they may be damned, because they
receive not the truth, that was trodden down for 42 months, and now rises again
and shines forth, in the love thereof that they may be saved, but have pleasure
in unrighteousness and superstition and have no pleasure in the truth.

Me thinks I see National Ministers of singular piety in peoples eyes prove men
of singular pravity, singularly bewitched into an implicit belief of the base
tales that vain fellows raise of the way of truth, and singularly bewitching
their people into implicit belief of them, that so it is as they say, that
neither Priest nor people may obey the truth, but both stumble, and fall and be
broken, and snared, and taken, and ashamed each of other in the end.

Good Lord how is the practice of the truth made a reproach unto thy people,
and a derision daily? for I have heard the defaming of many, report say they,
and we will report it, possess the pulpit and make the Priest believe it, and
then all the Country shall ring out, and the people soon be diabolized into the
faith on it; but hear ye rude reprochers of that people, that are reprovers of
the ways, whereby you run a whoring from the Lord, you shall not prevail by
such sleights, such plausible pretenses, you shall be greatly ashamed, you
shall not prosper, and, unless you repent of your belying the truth of God,
your everlasting confusion, shall never be forgotten.

It is too bad to be credulous to flying reports, worse so violently to vent
them, worst of all malevolently to ^invent them, I dare not say, nor dare I
deem Mr Ba. to be guilty of the last, but of the two first I cannot clear him,
since I perceive that he takes it for a truth that we ordinarily dip naked, and
thereupon disputes against it as our usual practice, and then not confidently
only, but of a certain relates to the whole world that it is no bare word, nor
any doubtful thing, but an experience, a known practice: if he can clear
himself he has leave to do it for me, who also summon him in the name of
Christ Jesus, whose true disciples he has done such dispite to (the Lord keep
him from despiting the spirit of grace) the people of whose love are the people
of his wrath, to prove it our practice ordinarily to dip naked, yea to produce
but one instance of any women of maids that ever he saw dipped naked in all his
days, and I Will abate him much of that I now accuse him of in the court of my
conscience, but if he say as indeed he does in effect that he never saw any
dipped at all, whilst p. 134. he says that all that ever he saw baptized had
water powered on them, how can he say Epertus loquor, it is his experience, he
having never so much as seen such a thing, unless it were upon the brazen
faced front of Featleyes book, where he fasly, feignedly, and filthily
describes men and women dipping in that fashion, or else upon the Titlepage of
Ephraim Pagit, who there paltrily pictures out this people practicing, thus and
there I believe he has experienced it, or if he only has it from the the
mouths of such as heard it from the mouths of others, who never saw it, but
receive it by tradition as well as he, and that originally ^o from the mouths
of some that made it, and in such a manner very likely it was first bruted, for
I am persuaded there was never such a thing done of late in England unless by
some Arch Knave and Arrant Whore in way of mockage to the Gospel, which is
rather a glory, then a shame to Christ his truth, then let Mr. Ba, bear the
blame of his blind blaspheming tho people of the everliving God.

Or if he know indeed that such a thing as baptizing maids and women naked has
been done in serious wise by any persons, I further challenge him to make some
proof of it, and to print the names of such men as have done it; and such maids
and women that have suffered themselves to be dipped naked, and the names of
such credible eye witnesses as will testify it as in the fight of God, which if
he can, though I shall not give place to him thereupon so as to be satisfied
thereby for his overlashing in asserting it to be our practice to dip naked, or
for condemning and denominating a whole party, much more their cause, by the
defects and abuses of some persons whom the cause disclaimes, for then there
was 12. devils because one among the twelve, and then what an Augaean stable is
your Church of England by many members of which notorious roguery is committed
every hour? Yet I shall satisfy him so far as to undertake that the Church, or
Churches where such are shall declare every such person as has wrought such
abomination, incommunicable without solemn repentance for that sordid practice,
or be themselves incommunicable by all o her Churches.

But I believe he cannot do it, though I cannon positively possibly prove a
Negative, much more am I confident that he cannot make good his charge against
us, viz. that it is our ordinary and usual practice: for besides no less then
between one and two hundred, which in gross I can guess at, which with these
hands I have baptized, I have seen with these eyes many a one more baptized by
others, yet never did I see male or female baptized naked to this hour, nor
nex: to naked neither, if I understand Mr. Baxs. meaning in that bawbling
phrase of next to naked; Yea I suppose I may safely say my converse for these 5
years together and upward has been with them that are commonly called
Anabaptists, and my business has been for so long time at least among that
people more then I perceive Mr. Baxs. has, and much more then among any other
people, being more or less acquainted with a score of their Congregations, yet
howbeit Mr. Blake flings a little at us too, and has his fingers so far in
this spatter, as to say page 8. Those that have put a kind of necessity upon
dipping have spoken much of being received naked ^n bap^sm,

I never heard the least speech of such a thing, nor a syllable among them to
such a purpose.

And if Mr. Ba. cannot prove it to be our ordinary known practice to dip naked
then in the name of the Lord Jesus before whom he and I shall shortly both
appear, I entreat Mr. Ba. who as concerning zeal yet persecutes the Church of
God, and poures out reproach upon true Christians, giving his voice for them
with as much modesty as Haman Est. 3. 8. as for high way Murderers, alias that
they may all suffer execution being through blindness and excaecation
exceedingly mad against them, that of an ignorant Saul he would become a
seeking, a searching, a seeing, a preaching Paul of the faith, which he
hitherto destroies: and though he verily thinks with himself that he ought to
do what he does against the truth, yet I beseech him to know that he is but as
others have been before him, zealous of God, but not according to knowledge,
since it is but of the Traditions of his Fathers Gal. 1. 14,

And since he avers from his heart page 129. that for his part he neither knows
the day nor year when he began to be sincere, no nor the time when he began to
profess himself a Christian, in which I believe him, if he mean a Ch^istian in
Scripture sense, I beg of him in the bowels of Christ Jesus, that he would now
begin to be sine cera a Christian indeed, not by the halves, but altogether,
for there is yet a mixture of much wax among his honey, and of much
antichristianism in his Christianity, and as sure as he is ignorant when he
began to profess to be a Christian, so sure I am that he never yet began to
profess to be a Christian in truth, who knows not that ever he was otherwise,
but has and holds his profession as the Turk and Jew do theirs viz. for the
true one at a venture, because they were born and bred in it, and received it
by Tradition only from forefathers.

And as he will prove himself to be what he professes to be viz. a hater of
ignorant violence, so I advise him to be a hater also of violent ignorance, of
which hateful quallity in my mind he has as much as any of the greedy gang,
Gangraena it self only excepted, not excepting Dr. Featley, Dr. Bastwick, Mr.
Bailiff, Mr Pagit, not any among the proud pack of Prelates, that most
perheminently prate against the Gospel.

And since Mr. Ba. says this much more that it is very suspicious, and to him
unsavory that Mr. T. should say no more but that it is not necessary that they
be baptized naked, as if he took it to be lawful, though not necessary, and
thinks he should rather have given his Testimony against it as sinful, and
expressed some dislike if he do indeed dislike, and judge it sinful, and if he
do not he dare boldly say he is very far gone, let me say thus much more, that
then it is as suspicious, and to me unsavory, that Mr. Ba. should say no more
but that it is a breach of the seventh commandment, ordinarily to baptize the
naked, as if he took it to be lawful to do it sometimes, but not ordinarily: me
thinks he should give his Testimony against it as sinful, to do it at all, and
express some dislike if he do indeed dislike and judge it sinful, and if he do
not, I dare boldly say he is gone farther in filth, then Mr. T. or any baptized
person ever went yet, save such as are gone quite off from the way of truth to
the dishonor of it since they owned it, whose sin yet (the more shame for Mr.
Ba.) he in his next argument, lays to the truths charge, and theirs, who both
own and honor it by a biding in it, who are less gladly, and more sadly
sensible of their sins, and villainies then Mr. Ba. can be, by how much by
reason of their lasciviuos ways, which many follow, the way of truth they walk
in is, as was foretold it should be 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2. 3. by Mr. Ba. and his
admirers evil spoken of.

But if Mr. Ba. shall still say it is suspicious and unsavory for Mr. T. to say
the one, but not for himself to say the other, and will none of the foregoing
advice to repent and be baptized, but rather reject the counsel of God against
himself being not baptized, because he has experience (by hearsay) that we
baptize females naked, then a rod and a rod for the back of Mr. Baxter, who
pardons to himself the same defects, wherein he holds others guilty, who so
slenderly takes up every tattle against the truth, and proclaims it for truth
to the whole world, for the simple believes every word, but the prudent man
looks well to his going Prove. 14. 15 a prudent man foresees evil and secures
himself, but the simple pass on and are punished Prove. 22. 3.

As for his next and last argument against us which he draws from the
judgments of God that ever follow us, wherein he jumbles all kinds of sectaries
into the name of Anabaptists as the Antibaptists use commonly to do, witness
Featley and others, and makes them bear the burden of all the mischiefs that
were ever perpetrated by all the mad braind men in all the world, as John of
Leyden and all the rest of his ranting strain, it is scarce current consequence
to say Gods judgments are upon a people, therefore that people are none of
his, for all things come alike to all, and none knows love or hatred by what
is before him here Eccl. 8. 14. and the 9. 1. 2. 3. yet since he speaks of
ruinating judgments, let the consequence pass as valid, but then his minor is
utterly false, for the Anabaptists are not all ruinated yet, nor will be till
the Clergy are quite cashiered, as evident as it is that they have every where
withered and suddenly come to naught heretofore, and since he speaks of
spiritual judgments e. g. that practice says he has never helped, but ^ndred
the work of God where it comes, nor has God blessed their ministry to conversion
of souls as he has other men's, but rather they have been instruments of the
Churches scandal and misery.

Secondly, that has been the inlet to most other vile opinions, few stop at it
but go much further, God has usually given up their societies to notorious
scandalous wicked lives, and conversations more then others that profess
godliness, and never prospered them so far as to have any established
Churches, which should credit the Gospel. I grant that some of these are sad
emblems of a people none of Gods, only Mr. Ba. has here saddled the wrong
ass, for this way of baptism hinders only the work of man's Tradition, which
would make void the commandment of God, but being it self the work and way of
God, is hindered where ere it comes by Priestly malice, preaching Gods fear
after precepts of men, nor has God blessed the National ministry to the true
conversion of souls as he has done theirs, but to the conversion of them to a
Gospel of their own making, for repent and be baptized was the Gospel that
Peter preached, and that is it that is now practiced by us, and how many are
converted and baptized accordingly is so evident, that it needs no proof at
this hour, but repent and be not baptized is the Gospel the Priesthood
preaches, and if you call that conversion, which indeed is confusion, we
confess their converts are more more then ours, such instruments of scandal
and misery to the true Churches are the Priests in all places by their
reproaches, nor is baptism the inlet of any vile opinions any more then the
same was in the primitive times, wherein many that were baptized did turn
heretics, when they had done, as they do now, but what wise man then imputed
it to their baptism? and yet some of those opinions Mr. Ba. calls vile, will be
proved to his conscience in due time to be the truth: yet many that are
baptized do run out to very vise opinions; and practices no better then their
principles, and stop not there indeed as he says, but go much further, and
degenerate into ways of wickedness more abominable then ever in former time,
and of these Ranters Mr. Copp is none of the least attainers, whom Mr. Ba. p.
148. has very well set forth in his colors, for I believe God in Justice has
given him up, and many other besides him to more notoriousnesse of error and
enormity, then ever any that professed godliness,

But what then? shall we impute that fault to his being baptized? I trow not;
for howbeit M^. Ba. so imagines, yet it was because he honored not the truth,
when he had owned it, nor walked in Christ after he had received him, in which
case how often God gives over to strong delusions is evident, not only by the
word, which declares that when men like not to retain God in their knowledge he
often gives them over unto vile affection,

But also by sad experience in the world in these last times, wherein 2 Pet. 2.
1. 1 Timothy 4 1. and the 2. 3. 1. doctrines of devils are rise among them, that
once owned the faith, yet the faith not a whit in fault for all that, but
departure from the says before expressed.

And that the fall of these men is into worse then ever before, it is no
argument against, but rather for the way they newly fall from, the sensuality
of such as separate themselves from the true Churches in the later times, i. e.
congregational after these are once separated from the false ones i. e. the
national, being prophesied of 2 Pet. 2. Jude 19. of old, that it should be
greater then that of all beastly men that were before them; besides corruption
op imi pessima, the higher the rise into reformation, the more desperate the
fall into deformation, of those that reform and prove deformed again: that
greater depth of hell therefore men fall into that fall from us, proves the
hight of our Churches to be nearer heaven, then that of yours, for if after
they have escaped etc. 2 Pet. 2. 20. 21. 22. when Cop was in his standing in
the Church of England, I remember very well, for I knew him better then then
ever since, he had some bounds from conscience to his corruption, but having
been once enlightened higher then Mr. Baxter ever was yet in the will and way of
God, and tasted of the heavenly gift, and made a partaker of the holy spirit,
and obeyed the truth as it is in Jesus, and yet fallen away, his conscience is
feared with a hot iron, and I have small hope of his renewing against by
repentance, who thus denies the Lord that bought him, and crucifies the Lord
afresh, and is twice dead, plucked up by the Roots, a raging wave of the sea
foaming out his own shame.

But what is all this to those that yet walk in truth of baptism, more then to
warn them that they depart not from it, as he has done, lest they come into
the same condemnation with him? does it prove baptism to be the cause of that
grosness that often follows, when a person is baptized? in no wise, for his
non abiding in the love of the truth and that doctrine of Christ gives God
occasion to give over to the height of wickedness.

I appeal therefore to the conscience of Mr. Baxter,

1. Whether the Pope may not by as good consequence charge all these errors
that are upon Protestanism, saying Thus, the Protestants stop not there, but
run out further from Episcopacy to Presbytery, and to Independency, and so to
Anabaptism, and so to all? it is true, Protestanism is occasion or causa sine
qua non, for such as sit still in the smoke of the Popes Traditions, are not
acquainted with the new found fancies of the Ranter, But Protestanism is not
the true cause.

2: Whether Mr. Ba. be so well aware as he should be what time of day it is,
when Peter and Jude point out these things so plainly; and yet he wonders at
them as a Mystery?

3. Whether the few owning, and the few abiding in the true way of baptism,
does not prove it to be the streit and narrow way that leads to life, which few
find?

4. Whether he think we lay not to heart their misery and madness that run off
from us as well as he, and strive not to warn and watch over them as much as
he? and if so, why he blames us more then himself, that, do what we can, so
many run to ruin? besides some he names were never baptized, though near it, as
Mr. Saltmarsh.

5. Whether it be just to load them that still stick to the truth, with the
blame of all their blasphemies that go off from it? T^s true the way of truth
will be evil spoken of by the Priest, by reason of the madness of the false
Prophet 2 Pet. 2. 2. but that is ought let every reasonable man examine: The
Rantizer renounces his sprinkling, and is baptized in truth, and after
renounces that, and runs on to be a Ranter, and then all is reckoned to his
baptism: poor truth may say quum remini obtrudi potest, itur ad me: every one
shifts it off from himself, and truth must carry the scandal, and baptism bear
the burden of all: the Priest and his people are they by whom, the false
Prophet and his people they by reason of whom the way we walk in is evil spoken
of but vae illis per quos, vae illis presertim propter quos, veritatis via
blaspemabitur, quam optimum esset utrisque, si nati non fuissent: Mat. 18. 7.
and 26. 14. 2 Pet. 2. 2.

What force therefore is in this Argument to conclude against the truth of our
way? yea what absurdity is in all Mr. Baxters Arguments against us you see, in
all which he sits beside the cushion, yea and indeed the whole bulk of them is
nothing but a thing full of emptiness.

Rantist.
I would fain see you answer that book as nothing as it is, I believe it is
more then ever will be answered by any to any purpose.

Baptist.
First, there is a great part of his book needs no answering from us, being
such an absurd aberration from what we hold and practice in contradistinction
to him, to other things, which he undertakes to disprove, though we (and who
does not?) do join with him fully in them, and do hold as he does, as namely,
almost all those 7 or 8 Arguments from page 125. to page 138. wherein he spends
himself mostly in declaring against judgments and practices, that are no more
ours, nor any ones else, that I know of, more then his own: for who holds
Christians children qua Christians children, i. e. without their own personal
profession of faith, and Christianity, in which case heathens children may be
baptized also, are to be baptized when they come to years, any more then the
children of heathens?

Again, who holds or practices such a thing as naked dipping of women and
maids? not I, nor any man breathing under heaven I imagine, nor will any wise
man be coxcombd into the belief of it that it is our practice I hope, because Mr.
Ba. disputes against it as ours, yet these are the main matters argl'd against
well nigh in all those pages, yea if he prove the baptism of Christians
children at years ordinarily to be against rule, it is fully sufficient against
the Anabaptists, faith he, if we had not a word more against them, the man
feigns adversaries to himself, and finds himself work with them, and takes on
and lays about him like a Thatcher, and fights, and fences against his foes
when he has none at all about him.

Secondly, much if not more then a third part of it, viz. from p. 262. to p.
286. consists almost universally in a particular private public prate to Mr.
Tombs in vindication of himself from Mr. Tombs's valedictory vindication of
himself from Mr. Baxs. abuses of him, which tedious, mixed, blattering
recrimination, and redargumentation, if any save Mr. Tombs himself, whom it so
personally relates to, shall trouble himself with from better employment, and
the world with any more reply to, then the Lord rebuke him, he has more time
then wisdom profitably to improve it.

Thirdly much if not much more then a third part of the residue, viz. from p.
289. to 338. he spends in division with other divines for pleading and
practicing baptism to infants from other grounds and principles and to other
ends and purposes then himself does, as namely, from Tradition, and yet in
order to baptismal regeneration, as Mr Bedford, who is fain to fly to tradition
for proof of infant baptism, and yet holds that baptism does really as an
instrumental efficient cause confer, and effect the grace of regeneration of
nature on infants, which Mr Bedford, Dr. Burges, Dr. Ward, together with Mr.
Baxter himself, and I know not how many more Divines, in the meandrous
multitudinous mist of whose pro and con opinions a man may sooner loose himself
then find the truth, are all ore the tops of the boots in dissentaneous
discourses about a business called baptismal regeneration, the quiddity,
quantity, and commodity of which non ens, of which nonsense, as to infants, is
so curiously pryed into, and learnedly inquired after by them, that it is not
for every ordinary body, that has no more learning then Peter and John had,
who never Scholasticallized the plain Gospel out of the reach of plain men and
poor folks, as our Rabbis now adays do, to come within a mile or two of their
meaning; some divining on this wise, some on that, some one thing, some
another, some that baptism is instituted to work the first grace in infants, i.
e. habitual, but not in men, in whom the first grace is prerequired, as Mr.
Bedford, some thwarting that by this reason, that baptism cannot have two
different uses to men and infants, and yet saying with all, that it may be for
some ends to the Aged, for which it is not to infants, as Mr. Baxter, some
saying that baptism is a Physical, some a Metaphysical, some a Hiperphysical
instrument to convey real grace into infants, the spirit working it in them
thereby naturally, or rather supernaturally, as Mr. Bedford who holds that it
really conveyes grace on all infants elect, or non elect, and Dr. Burges, who
yet differs and subdivides from him, holding that it conveyes grace on the
elect infants only, and not on the non-elect, some that baptism is only a
moral instrument, and the spirit neither a Physical nor Hyperphysical, but a
moral Agent in baptism, signifying and so working on the souls, sealing and
conveying no real grace, but relative grace, i. e. right to the real, as Mr.
Baxter, who says that real true grace and change of mind is to go before
baptism, as a condition both in the institution, and every example of baptism
through all the bible, therefore not to be conveyed in it, this Mr. Baxter
proves by the institution Math. 28. 18. Mark 16. and by the examples of the
Jews, Samaritans, the Eunuch, Paul, Lydia, the Iaylor, the Corinthians, who
all did gladly receive the word, repent and believe, and then and thereupon
only were baptized p. 300. and because all this is exclusive of infants, who
have no faith nor grace (for to the utter confutation of the Ashford Disputers,
who say infants in their infancy have faith and the spirit of grace, and that
apparently enough, the Scripture making it plainly appear concerning them)

Mr. Baxter professes that it is utterly unknown to any man on earth and
unrevealed in the word, whether God give infants any inherent spiritual grace
or not p 301.

Therefore to salve his baptism of infants that have not that grace, and faith
in them, that is prerequired to be in persons to be baptized, as a condition,
he very goodly tells us that by grace and faith being prerequired, as a
condition, he means either in the party or another for him, so then though
infants have no faith in themselves yet o mirandum! they have faith in the
loins, i. e. in the hearts of their parents, and so are to be baptized, they
are buried in the dipping of the Ministers hand says Featley, and believe by
the faith of their Parents, says Mr. Baxter.

Thus oh how these men, who more stink of the Schools then skill in the
Scriptures, are at variance about their own inventions, bending their brains
some one way, some another, to botch up their business of infant baptism, and
yet, as fast as one builds up, another of them saves us a labor, and razes and
pulls down to our hands; oh what stoch, what stuff, what stirs, what strife,
what stickling, what striking flatly against each others principles, what a
ditty, what a do is here among them? as if the Divines were all mad: so let all
the fraternity of divines be divided o God, and fall out ever about their own
falsities, till they find thy truth, and never let them agree better among
themselves on what account to baptize infants, till they (ashamed of
themselves, and people ashamed of waiting on the Seers for determination of
what is truth) be all driven to confess as (blessed be thy name) Mr. Baxter
does already p. 301. That they find it a hard controversy to prove infant
baptism it is so dark in the Scripture, much more a hard task to prove
different uses of it to men and infants, as needs they must if they prove it to
be of use to infants, for it signifies not at all to them as it does to men,
and so to conclude, to the freeing of themselves from that puzzle and
perplexity, and fire of contention that now they fry in, for their hatred of
that one only plain way of truth that leads to piece, that verily it is not thy
will that any infant at all should be baptized; and let Mr. Ba. who was once in
doubt of infant baptism, upon sight of the slender grounds that other divines
did hold it from, till satan seduced him back again to the belief of it again,
be persuaded, if it be thy will, on sight of the more weak and slender
principles, which with much ado he has found out, whereon to satisfy himself
and others, and to sit still in the shadow of that superstition, to be not
almost only, but altogether, saving their sufferings from him, such as thy
servants are, whom he yet vilifies what he can.

As then to Mr. Baxters Appendix of Animadversions on Mr. Bedfords, Dr. Burges,
and Dr. Wards absurdities about baptismal regeneration of infants, it is no
matter to us, yea I conceive it a likely means of it self to make wise men
renounce Infants baptism, that read there at what ods they are, and how they
wrangle among themselves that own it; beside since he that passing by meddles
with a strife not belonging to him is like one that takes a dog by the ears
Pro. 26. 17. i will pass by for my part, and not meddle with it at all.

Fourthly, another part of Mr. Baxters book is a small slender tract of about
one leaf long penned in proof of baptisms a biding a standing ordinance of
Christ to the worlds end, and therein so far am I from excepting and
contradicting, that I rather approve it, and considering the high head of
contradiction that in this last loose age already is, and within a while much
more, and more headily will be made against it, and how the subtility of Satan
is such that since he can uphold his kingdom now no longer by his old soldiers
the Rantizers, which changed the laws and ordinances of Christ's kingdom, he
seeks to do it by erecting a new moddle, of men, I mean the seekers, and
Ranters, who raze the very foundations of it, and how since he can prevail no
more to deceive the nations from the narrow way of truth by his old Spiritualty
the spiteful Priest, he has spit a new Spiritualty out of his mouth, from
which as from a greater Carnalty then the other, the earth, that it may be ripe
for the sickle as it must be at Christ's coming, shall abound with abomination
i. e. they that separate themselves from the true Church after their separation
with them from the false, sensual having not the spirit, yet pretending more
highly to it then ever any, considering all this, I ^ay, I seriously side with
Mr. Ba. as to that subject, and to show him, who simply supposes we are all a
people posting toward the pulling down of Christ's ordinances, because some do,
and because all of us, as we are sworn to it, seek what we are able to pull
down men's, to show him I say notwithstanding his conceits to the contrary, how
close we keep according to the counsel both of Peter and Jude in that behalf 2
Pet. 3. 2. Jude 17. to the commandments of Christ and his Apostles in these
last days, wherein they declare that others should depart from and despise
them, to show him also how little reason he has to charge us with their evils,
who are (to use his own phrase p. 26.) above ordinances i. e. above obedience
to God, and so Gods themselves, I intend God willing before this work escape my
hand, that is now under it to bestow some few lines on the same subject, having
been often requested to it by others in vindication to the truth.

Fifthly, as for the forepart of Mr. Baxs. book, for more then a fourth part of
it is worn out in Pream^ular passages, apologies, epistles to the Church at
Kederminster, at Bewdley, which Churches alias parishes of Ked. and Bew. (for
all the people, till of late that some few have separated themselves together
to Mr. T. are Church Members with Mr. Ba. in those two places p. 280) which
parishes I say howbeit, sowing pillowes that they may sl^ep themore securely in
superstition,

Mr. Ba. by a dedication of his doings to the Church at Ked. to the Church at
Bew. would fain flatter into a faith, that each of them is a Church of Jesus
Christ, yet I must crave leave to inform those Churches from Christ, that as
yet they are no other then Churches of the Popes calling and constitution; for
the parochial posture of Christning, and so inchurching of all that are born
within the bounds, and barely abide within the preincts of the parish, had its
order from the head of those Churches viz. the Vicar of Christ; but not at all
from Christ Jesus himself, yea and though there may be many honest men in both
Ked. and Bewdley, among whom if Mr. Ba. be one it shall not grieve me at all,
yet according to Dr. Featleys, nor yet according to Mr. Baxs. own definition,
who say a true visible Church is a particular company of men professing the
Christian faith, known by two marks viz. the sin^ere preaching of the word,
and due administration of the Sacraments Dr. Featly p. 4. or a society of
persons separated from the world to God, or (...) called out of the world etc.
Mr. B. p. 87. neither of those two parishes are true visible Churches of Jesus
Christ, for neither were they ever yet called out of the world, or separated
from the world to God in that wise i. e: by such means, and in such manner as
Christ's Church is i. e. by the pure preaching, of the word and pure power of
God, but rather by the power of the word of man i. e. partly of the Pope, and
partly of the civil sword in this nation of old, under a penalty imposing upon
them their present posture; nor is the word preached to them to this hour
sincerely by Mr. Ba. or any other parish minister, who unless he sing a new
song will make them no more a Church of Christ then he found them, but with
wonderful much mixture of man's invention; yea the fear of* God is taught by him
according to the precepts of men, much less are the Sacraments rightly
administered, for their baptism is no baptism at all.

And as touching separation, I know but three separations they have had since
they stood under the name of Christian Churches, answerable to the different
Christian Religions, of point blank Papism, prelatical Prostantanism, and
present Presbyterianism, which the parishes have past under since they have
been Parishes, viz. a Presbyterian separation by appointment of the present
Parliament, who on pain of their displeasure commanded all to separate from the
lesser superstitions of episcopal forms, ceremonies, services, to a finer and
more directorian* kind of Protestant profession; a general Protestant
separation by the Appointment of our english state under K. Ed. and Q. Eliz.
who commanded all on pain of their displeasure to separate from the Romish
grosser superstitions, Popes Supremacies, mass and other Marian opinions and
professions, also a parochial and a paropopical separation, or distinct oppidal
division of their particular selves from each other, and all other particular
Churches i (...). Towns besides themselves, by the appointment of the Pope and
his Subs and Subsubs viz. Christian Emperors, Kings and Princes, who when they
threw down their Crowns, and gave up all their power to make one beast called
Christiendome, and themselves and theirs to be ruld and reignd over wholly by
the whore at her will, did both separate all Christendom from the world, and
then sub-separate it into many smaller Christendomes, and constituted Churches
i. e, national provincial, parochial: and thus Ked. and Bew. first began to be
Churches, or societies visibly separated from the world viz. by the call of the
Pope, who separated one parish from another; but Christ's Churches had another
separation i. e. by the word barely preached, and not by outward force imposed,
they were called to faith in Christ, and baptism, not Rantism, into his name
for remission of sins, and after that continued in the Apostles doctrine, and
in fellowlowship one with another, not forced, but free, and in breaking of
bread and prayers: these are the Churches to which as then, so now the Lord
adds daily such as shall he saved, and therefore I must tell Mr. Ba. and the
honest men in either Ked. or Bew. that are of Mr. Bs. beg^iling that except
they repenting both for and from their dead works, and their vain conversation
in point of baptism, worship, Church Fellowship etc received by Tradition from
their fathers, and their unadvised zeal in siding to smite Christ with
reproaches through the sides of the true Churches, be baptized better then ever
they have been, and do as those did in Act. 2. which as no infant then did so
now none can do, they have neither the true matter nor the true form
constitutive of the visible Church of Christ, yea so many of them only as
shall gladly receive the word, which infants cannot do, and yet may do well
enough too, neither that nor walking in fellowship being required of them, as
it is of others, and be baptized according to his will, shall be owned as the
true visible Church of Christ in these two parishes as Christ's appearing.

Sixthly, the residue of Mr. Bs. book which coutaines his arch argumentation
from three principles for infants baptsm viz. their discipleship,
Church Membership and rightship of being dedicated unto Christ, is for the most
part, to the satisfaction of any that are minded to own the truth, though not
so intentionally in way of formal answer to Mr. Ba. so fully and effectually
enervated before, where the same arguments, as they are used by others, are
examined, that it could amount to no other then superfluity, and Tautologie to
answer them over again, because they are urged in another, that is a more
pedantick for me by him, whose work is not at all to produce any new principles
from which to prove the point, but only to improve more largely in a way of
labor more long then strong, to manage more formally in a way of hipothetical
syllogism, and to drive on more furiously these few old ones; therefore excuse
me, specially since Mr. T. has given reply some while since, who is more
strictly concerned in it, if I am loath, unless there were more need then Mr.
B^xs. new triming up of two or three old arguments ministers thereunto, to
begin and play over the whole game again; I know a trick worth two of that viz.
to refer you to what is already written by Mr. T. and what I have said my self
above, and my friend thereby be admonished, for to make many books, much more
upon one subject is to no end, and much study is a weariness to the flesh, yet
a general return I may chance to give, and some brief reply to his arguments in
particular.

The truest general verdict I can give of it, if I may speak my judgment
without offense, is this, it is a three footed stool, the legs of which are all
lame, and decrepid made by Mr. B^x. for the people of Ked. and Bewd. to sit at
ease on, in that popish posture and practice, in which truth being hid for ages
and generations, both they and all Christendom have been housed, and out of
which Christ Jesus is now about to storm them; it is a tree shooting forth with
three Trunkes against the truth, whereof the middlem^st which is the main, runs
out (...) ramos, ramulos, and ramus^ulos so many smaller boughs, twigs, and
twiggles, and lays it self forth at large into such a train of Trivials, so
many littles to the purpose, that he will find himself great store of small
business, that does more then think his think to his own self of each
particular odd conceit, that is in it, or that alkes to the world of it any
more then in the general, and in the lump.

In the lump therefore I say in the sincerity of my soul, as in the sight of
God, I see not what to style it more suitably to it self in short, then a lump
of Logical superfluity, a systeme of Syllogistical simplicity, wherein the man
mannages his war like some fresh man that is newly metriculated into the
faculty of Logicking in mood and figure, that delights to hear himself
syllogize out every syllable, as he has scribled it over before hand, and
treasured it up in his papers; so he comes out with a huge heap of
hypotheticals, arguing at a vast distance from the business of baptism, and
some times ex suppos^ is non supponen lis too, as if he would fetch infant
baptism from far, since it is so dark in Scripture, as he confesses it is, that he
cannot have it ^igh at hand, proving more roundly then soundly, in a great
circumference of consequence upon consequence, syllogism upon syllogism thus,
if this then that, if this then that, if this then that, but this therefore
that; when not seldom neither this nor that is true; but will you hear the
conclusion of the whole matter? it is this.

ma. If some infants be disciples, and churchmembers, and to be devoted to God
therefore to be baptized.

mi. But so they are,

Therefore to be baptized.

To which besides the sequel of the Major, which I shall show to be utterly
false, i will prove the Minor false by the prosecution of this Syllogism.

If infants be neither disciples in any sense, much less that in Mat. 28 nor
church members of a Gospel Congregation, nor are to be devoted to God in such a
sense as the Jewish males, then not to be baptized;

But so they are not,

Ergo, not to be baptized.

As for his Mediums whereby he Argues infants to be disciples, they are so
frivolous and foolish, that a very child may be ashamed of them.

The first, which is taken out of Act. 15. 10. is so abundantly declared to be
absurd before, that I need not clear it further, and therefore I Will say the
less to it here, he argues thus viz.

Those i. e. all those on whom the false teachers would have put the yoke of
circumcision were disciples,

But some of those on whom they would have laid that yoke were infants.

Ergo infants are disciples.

The Major of which is a foundation so false and infirm, that I stand amazed at
it that a man of Logic should dare to lay it, yet well nigh every one of you
builders lay it as your basis, from whence you divine a discipleship to
infants, and thereon build the business of their baptism, as Doctor Featley,
Mr. Marshall and others, yea who would think it? inter scribendum while I am a
writing this very line in Answer to Mr. Bax. there is a triste brought to my
hands of a sheet and a half, piping hot from the press, penned by Mr. Simpson
of Marden, son to that Mr. Simpson of Bethersden, whose private letters I
answered above, styled a sovereign preservative against Anabaptism, in which
there is nihil novi, no news at all, for it is a furtive collection of some few
fraggments out of other men viz. Mr. Blake, the Ashfordian dispute and others,
which all are also more then enough enervated before, whereupon I shall trouble
my self no further then thus with that toy, the author whereof in his epistle
to the Anabap^sts, as he calls them, about Marden, tells strange stories of his
being stormed on every side, and almost tired out with onsets and oppositions
from their private letters, and among the rest he minds them how he had once to
do with a host of them viz. September the tenth 1649. in which conflict my
self, who was more then an eye witness, though much inferior to a worthy
brother then in presence also, viz. Mr. Blackwood, and therefore far from
arrogating to my self the title of Champion, with which he smites me in his
Margent, can testify how uncivilly and shamefully the man stormed against the
truth, insomuch that unless he repent of the mad-blind, hare-brained zeal he
then expressed, many, if not most of that Auditory he then interrupted, whether
he remember them of it or no, will surely never forget it while they live.

In which book,, I say as there is no new Argument, so to be sure there is this
old Argument, as well as some more, translated out of Mr. Bax. or some other,
whereby to prove infants discipleship p. 20. because the false Teachers would
have put the yoke of circumcision on them.

But Sirs what though they would have put the yoke on the disciples necks, will
it therefore follow that they were all disciples on whose necks they would have
put the yoke? me thinks it should not, if you look well about you, any more
then this, viz.

Augustus Caesar put the yoke of Tribute on all the Jews, i. e. taxed all the
Jews,

Ergo, all they were Jews whom Augustus taxed.

Nay verily had it been said they would have put the yoke of circumcision on
all the disciples, as it is not, yet would it not have held Retro that
therefore all those on whom they would have put the yoke were disciples, but in
very deed neither of those was true, for as it was not all the disciples on
whom they would have put that yoke, for they did not teach that women should
be circumcised, so all were not disciples on whom they would have put that
yoke, for male infants not being capable to be taught cannot possibly be
disciples at all, much less such disciples as are meant in that place, of whom
it is most evident that they were taught verse 1.

Much more might be said in disproof of this foolish fancy but that enough is
spoken to it before, yet this is the first Medium whereby Mr. Bax. bends
himself to make it good that some infants are disciples, and his other are as
mean to the full as this, he proves it next by a disjunctive thus,

If infants be not disciples, it is either because they are incapable so to be,
or else because God will not show them such a mercy.

But neither of these can be the cause,

Ergo, some infants are disciples.

To which I answer that it is not because God will not show them so great a
mercy, for most undoubtedly the Lord shows far greater mercy then that,
though not that to infants that die in infancy, for he saves them and gives unto
them everlasting life, and admits them into the Kingdom of Heaven, and as for
that bare simple notion, outward account and denomination of disciples, what
extraordinary great mercy is that I wonder if it be abstracted from the other?
it is not so great a mercy but persons may have it, and yet be damned for all
that, nor so great a mercy, but that the mercy of God may be as great to them
without it, nor so great as that they are capable of any more benefit by it
from the Church, or from their parents, then they are capable of if they have
it not, they may be prayed for by the Church and by their parents full as much,
and be brought up by them in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, not only
as well, but much better, when they are capable of being disciples, and
instructed, though in infancy neither counted disciples, nor baptized, as if
they were supposed to be disciples before they are taught,

It is therefore because they are not capable to be discipled in their nonage,
and the true reason why they are not capable, is that which Mr. T. alleged,
and alas that it should not satisfy Mr. Bax. viz. because they cannot learn
what is taught them.

Mr. Bax. knowing that, fetches a compass about another way whereby to prove
them capable to be disciples, viz. their being servants of Christ, and subjects
of Christ's Kingdom, and thirdly their belonging to Christ, but what a pitiful
piece of proof, what a mess of miserable mistake is this, as if to belong to
Christ, to be Christ's subject, Gods servant, and Christ disciple were
convertable, and altogether one and the same, whereas howbeit it cannot be
denied but that every disciple of Christ belongs to Christ, and is his Subject,
and Gods servant, yet that every one who may be said to belong to Christ, to be
Gods servant, and his Subject, is Christ's disciple cannot be asserted without
more absurdity, then Mr. Bax. is willing to take notice of in himself, for Mr.
T. gives him an Item of it plain enough, for any reasonable man to consider of,
but he is deaf to it through a mind forestalld against the truth.

He tells us that infants are capable to be Gods servants Levit. 25. 41. 42.
and therefore consequently Christ's disciples, and consequently to be baptized,
for disciples and Gods servants signify the same thing, denote the same
persons, and that there is the same capacity requisite to both p. 18. 19. yea
if there be a difference says he, there is more required to a servant then to
a diseiple, but what wretched evidence is here, when as there is nothing more
clear, and palpably evident, then this, that more is required to make a
disciple then a servant, yea verily the consequence holds sound from Christ's
disciple, to Gods servant, but from Gods servant to Christ's disciple, which is
his way of arguing a very novice may see it rotten, and invalid: there is
enough in all the creatures, the earth and heavens, which as books, wherein we
may read it, though not as men that make any verbal narration of it, declare
the glory of God Ps. 19. 1. to denominate them Gods servants Psa. 119. 91.
Nebucad. Nezar had enough to denominate him Gods servant Ier 43. 10. as Mr. T.
truly tells him, but not enough to denominate him Christ's disciple.

Yea I appeal to Mr. Ba. own conscience, whether at that time, when Christ
exercised his ministry among the Jews, the whole Nation of the Jews as well as
those he mentions out of Levit. 25. 41. and in the self same sense with those,
were not, Iure Redemptionis by right of his Redemption of them from Egypt, the
servants of God, had relatively a peculiar people to himself, yet how few of
them were Christ's disciples viz. those only that attended to his law, in which
respect though he style all Israel his servants, yet he distinguishes those few
only from the rest that harkned not to his law, by the denomination of his
disciples Isaiah 8. 16.

And whereas he says of infants may they not be called Gods servants from the
mere interest of dominion that God has to them? p. 20.

I answer, who doubts of that? but may they thereupon be called disciples, and
be baptized? if so then from the mere interest of dominion that God has to all
men, all men may be called Gods servants, as well as they, and so consequently
be baptized as Christ's disciples.

He tells us further p. 21. that infants are capable of being subjects of
Christ's kingdom, taking kingdom not in the larger sense, as it contains all
the world, nor in the strictest as it contains only his elect, but in a
middle sense as it conteins the visible Church, therefore consequently capable
of being Christ's disciples, and of baptizing; and to prove the antecedent viz.
that they are subjects of Christ's kindome i. e. members of the visible Church,
he uses this medium, they are capable of being subjects in any kingdom on
earth, and therefore why not of Christ's kingdom says he i. e. of the visible
Church of Christ?

Now if this be a good consequence, they are capable to be subjects in any
Kingdom on earth and therefore to be subjects of Christ's Kingdom i. e. his
Church, then the infants of heathens as well as these, being capable to be
subjects in any Kingdom on earth, are consequently as capable to be subjects of
Christ's Kingdom and Church, and consequently to be Christ's disciples, and in
their infancy to be baptized, but Mr. Baxter himself will say non sequitur unto
this.

He tells us further that Christ would have some infants i. e. believers
infants, for those he means, to be received as disciples, therefore some
infants i. e. such are his disciples.

To prove the antecedent he jumbles together a number of places out of Mat.
Mark and Luke viz. Mat. 18. 5. the 10. 42. Mark. 9. 41. Luke 9. 47. 48. in one
of which places because Christ says of a child, who so shall receive this
child in my name receives me, by comparing this place with the rest, where
Christ says to his disciples, and of them also, not of infants, whosoever shall
give to you a cup of water in my name, because you belong to Christ, or as
Matthew has it in the name of a disciple, he shall not loose his reward, he
gathers that some i. e. believers infants are disciples, and to be received to
baptism, as such, for says he, in Christ's name, and as Christ's disciple, and
as belonging to Christ are all one in Christ's language.

To which I answer,

First, by denying that in Christ's name, and as a disciple, and as belonging to
Christ are all one: for in Christ's name is a Term of larger extent and latitude
then the rest, so that we may be said to do good in Christ's name to some
persons, whom yet we cannot do good to as belonging to him in that near
relation of his disciples: in the name of Christ, besides several other
significations, which the phrase has, is as much sometimes as for Christ's
sake, who requires it, and to do good to others in the name of Christ is to do
good to them for Christ's sake, and then we may be said to do good for his sake,
not only when we do good to them that are disciples of Christ, upon that
account of their belonging to him as his, but also, when we do good to them
that are none of his disciples, upon the mere account of his command, who
injoines all persons as occasion is to do good to all, though especially to the
household of faith: whereupon also I persuade my self varily, nor is it very
unworthy of observation, that the spirit when it speaks of doing good to
professed disciples indeed Mar. 9. 41. he incourages to receive them, not only
in the name i. e. for the sake of Christ so requiring, but as belonging to him
also as his disciples, in the name of a Prophet, in the name of a righteous
man, in the name of a disciple; but when he speaks of our doing good to that
child Luke 9. 48. he says no more then barely in the name of Christ i. e. for
the sake of Christ owning such an action, but expresses not the other notion,
and account of discipleship, and Relation to him, as that on which he would
have him to be received.

Moreover were it otherwise, it would make little to the purpose of Mr. Ba. who
brings it to prove some such sucking infants as men sprinkle, i. e. believers
babes to be disciples, since that it was a believers child of which Christ there
speaks, or that he speaks of such children rather then of the children of other
men, is much more then Mr. Ba. can ever clear, and that it was a child of such
a stature as to come to Christ, when he called him, and therefore no infant of a
span long, nor such as is the subject of your sprinkling, is too clear for Mr.
Ba. to gainsay, without clear contradiction of the Scripture Mat. 18. 2.

These are far fetched faddles, whereby Mr. Ba. backs his people in the blind
belief of his fond and false opinion that all believers infants are Christ's
disciples, and thereupon to be baptized.

The mediums whereby he manifests their membership in the Gospel Church are
many, more then a good many, and not more many then manifestly weak, and
utterly unavailable to such a purpose.

Rantist.
Many more then ever will be answered easily by you or any other that set so
light by them as you do.

Baptist.
That may possibly be too, for I think no wise body will immittere pecus in
pratum vbi non est sepes busy himself beyond measure in such a boundless
prate, and piece of sillogization about infant membership as it is, nor be so
extravagant from Mr. Bs. own advice, who p. 12. tells us that we shall never be
able to justify it, if we lay out but the thousandth part of our time, study,
talk, or zeal (yet if he have not spent the twenteth part of his own, I am must
mistaken) upon this question it self, either for or against it, as to lose a
moiety of his time in replying distinctly to such a mint of impertinencies as
are handled at arms end here by Mr. Ba. for my own part I am not minded to
tire my self to much with tracing at large after every new hare that starts in
my way, nor to stand dancing the hay after Mr, Ba. into every corner of that
laborinth of Logic, into which he leads me, and yet leaves me after view and
Review as little ground for infant baptism as if he had said nothing at all:
nor shall I bury my self up from better employment in the bottomless pit of
those absurdities, which this part of his book also is fully fraught with,
partly because I find that most that he says there is in effect answered
already in the book called Anti-babism, where the genuine sense of the main
Scriptures he rests into his own use, is given out viz. Romans 11. 1 Cor. 7. Mar.
9. 36. Romans 4. 11. Mal. 2. 15. partly also because I perceive a vain of
particular contest with Mr. T. to run through the whole, which Mr. T. according
to the particular interest he has therein, has already taken notice of in
Print, so far as its worth an answer, partly also because I am not so happy as
to have the patience of many, scarce of any of the churches of Christ, whose
servant I am, suffering me hitherto, without such frequent avocations of me
from this to services of another nature abroad, as are inconsistent with my
writing of much more at home.

Nevertheless besides some animadversion of as much of its absurdity as may be
with convenience, I shall take the sting out so clearly that it shall not hurt,
and that by both a clear, though general disproof of it all, and as clear
though general, and brief demonstration of the contrary,

Take notice therefore of the most cardinal argument, upon which he grounds
infant church membership under the Gospel.

It was so once that infants were of the church, and it is not repealed,
therefore it is so now.

To which I answer, by granting it was so from Abraham's time, and downward to
Christ (for before that time all the pairs he takes does not, and all the
brains he has in his head cannot produce the least sollid proof of such a
thing) for all that Church and the materials of it were a ceremony and a type,
and never the viler for that, as Mr. Ba. foolishly fancies p. 59. of the church
under Christ, it was so in that outward typical covenant that God made
concerning an earthly Canaan with the natural feed of Abraham in the loins of
Isaac and Jacob, not Ismael, Genesis 17. 20. 21. nor any of his seed by Keturah,
Genesis 25. 1. 6. upon the performance of certain carnal ordinances as
circumcision, and the rest of the ordinances of Divine service pertaining to
that covenant, which circumcision bound them to till the time of reformation
Heb. 9. but that therefore it is so now in the church under the Gospel Covenant,
that was typified by the other, I utterly deny, whose heavenly inheritance and
spiritual seed of Abraham, i. e. believers born of God by faith in Christ,
answer as the Antitype to that earthly Canaan, and fleshly seed of Abraham,
and before which the type is fled away, for all the ceremonialls of that law
are vanished, among which this admitting of fleshly babes was one, and what it
pointed at is showed abundantly in Anti-babism, which may serve as an answer
also to his fourteenth argument, for their present membership, where if the law
of infant-Church-membership were ceremonial, he bids us show what it tipified:
the membership therefore of infants, which belonged only to that particular
Church of the Jews, which was also the whole universal visible Church that God
then had upon earth, unless we shall dream with Mr. Baxter of more particular
visible Churches then that of the Jews during its standing, different from it
in form, order and constitution, which together with that made up some one
universal visible of which infants were members first, as he dotes, and then
secondarily of that particular; which conceit of his concerning such a
universal visible, is a mere invisible chimaera, for who ever saw any visible
Church, or people whom God visibly inchurched, and gave his oracles to besides
Israel? of whom it is said God dealt in that particular, as he did not with any
other Nations, suffering all others to walk after their own ways Act. 14. 16.
nor can there be now any universal visible Church, but what is made up of the
particular visible Churches, so that a person must first be a member of some
particular Congregation, before he can be of that universal: the Membership I
say of infants that belonged to that Church only, which was to be National,
and tipical of that true holy nation i. e. all the saints, where ever
scattered, is now repealed, nor can any of that Mr. Ba. syllogizes to us evince
the contrary.

He tells us that if it be repealed then either in justice, or mercy to
infants, but it is in neither says he p. 38. Ergo. he falls a proving the
Minor, but with his leave I shall make bold to deny the Major, it was neither
better nor worse as to the whole species of infants, it was severity to
unbelieving Jews, goodness to believing Gentiles, but it was not done with any
such special respect to infants in their ^onage, as that if it had stood the
whole species of infants through the world would have been much the better, for
such a mere titular thing as membership, in the Church, unless that membership
would Ipso facto have more entitled them to heaven, nor now its taken away are
sucking infants ere the worse, for saving the great dignity that you deem to ly
in the bare title of being a member of the visible Church, whether they die
before your admission of them, or just after, if in infancy, their salvation is
for that neither more nor less, and if they live to years as they are then are
no longer infants, and no nearer heaven for their being baptized, when they
were infants, unless they repent and believe the Gospel, so repenting and
believing it, they are as capable then of heaven, though they were not, as if
they had been baptized, and in bare churchmember ship from the womb: this
therefore is petty reasoning indeed as Mr. T. calls it see Mr. Ba. 40.

His second, third, fourth, fifth, six Arguments are all out of Romans 11. which
place, as I have declared my sense of it before, so I testify again is so
clear against the standing of infants as members in the family of Abraham, or
Church of God now under the Gospel, that he is as blind as a beetle, that sees
any thing in it tending to the proof of it, for it seems plainly that the
natural branches, or seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob themselves, that stood
the children of the Church before without faith, upon the mere account of being
their natural branches, cannot stand children of the Church now, unless they
be also spiritual branches, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were; yea if being the
fleshly seed of a believer could ingraft persons into the Gospel Church, as it
did of old into the Jewish Church without faith, then the Jews to this day,
being as much believing Abraham's natural seed as ever, might by that birth stand
Members as truly, as any Gentile believers seed, but they cannot, yea the same
persons that were members of that Church without faith, were not admitted to
pass from that Church to membership in this, for want of faith; but when very
forraigners, that had no relation to, nor descent from Abraham, became his
children in the Gosspel sense, and members of the Gospel Church by personal
faith, the very natural seed of Abraham, was cut off through unbelief, so that
the standing before was by a fleshly birth of Abraham, of some believing
proselited Gentile, but the standing now in the Church is not by a birth
natural of any parent, no hot of Abraham himself, unless there be faith in the
persons themselves, as Mr. Baxter believes not there is in any infants, for to
the confutation of the Ashford Pamphlet, which pleads infant-faith, Mr. Baxter
p. 98. Makes the very essence of faith to lie in assenting to it that Christ is
King and Savior, and consenting that he be so to us and whether infants do
thus both assent and consent let Mr. Ba. be judge of it if he please.

Because of unbelief the natural seed were broken off, thence Mr. Bax. argues
that infants stand still in the Church, but thence I argue they cannot stand,
because those that stand now stand by faith ver. 20. i, e. personal, not
parental; thou stand (says Paul) by faith, i. e thy faith, not thy Fathers,
for then we may as well say the just shall live by his fathers faith, not by
fleshly descent, though of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob themselves, as of old they
did, and infants cannot stand by faith unless they had it, and therefore not
at all.

Mr. Baxter argues it was the Jews own Olive tree or Church they were cut off
from for unbelief, Therefore infants stand in it still, But thence I argue that
our infants cannot stand therein, for if god spared not the Natural Branches
of Abraham, but broke them off their own root, their own father Abraham and his
family, so as to be counted no longer his children, their own olive tree the
church so as to abide no longer in it, because they believed not, the terms of
standing church members being now no fleshly descent but faith, then much less
will he admit any Gentiles, that are not natural branches of Abraham, to be
grafted into the good olive tree without faith, and therefore no infants that
believe not.

Mr Ba. tells us that some branches only were broken off, therefore not infants,
It is true all were not broken off, and why? because some believed, and so
abode in the family, others and those the most believe not when they should,
others and those all infants nor believed, nor yet could, and therefore could
not abide, nor have a visible being, a visible membership, a visible standing
in that visible church, the terms of standing in which is only and alone by
faith.

Mr. Bax. argues that Israel shall again be grafted into their own olive tree,
and saved, even the children with the parents, and therefore infant-membership
in the Gospel church is not repealed.

I answer it is true that if they abide not still in unbelief, they shall be
grafted into their own olive tree, the visible Church, and family of Abraham,
that is so many as shall believe only, this infants do not, but whether they
believe or believe not, when the Redeemer, i. e. Christ Jesus shall come, all
Israel shall be saved, and be owned, and made the most glorious people upon
earth, and enter into a flourishing state indeed, but not in this way of
baptism, and membership, Mr. Baxter speaks of, who I perceive is not a little
ignorant of this mystery as yet, how long blindness shall happen unto Israel,
and in what manner their calling shall be, of which I also have at this time as
little list, as leisure to inform him.

Mr. Ba. argues from the samenesse of the Olive tree the Jew was broken off
from, and the Gentile was graf^ed into, that therefore as infants stood members
then, so they must now.

I answer it is true there is some kind of indentity between the Jewish, and
the Gospel Church, but not such as concludes an indentity of membership for
infants, they are the same ingenere visiblis Ecclesiae, they agree in the
common name of Church, and visible Church, elected and segregated from the
world, but there is little else that I know of wherein they are the same, they
differ in circumstantials, in their accidental forms, in their officers,
ordinances, customs, constitutions, subjects, members, that being constituted
of one whole nation of people, or fleshly seed of Abraham, taken out from all
other nations, this of a spiritual seed of Abraham, i. e. believers scaterred
here and there, taken out of any nation as they happen to be called, almost
every nation some, the ceremony of inchurching Abraham's own, much more any
other man's mere fleshly seed being ceased.

Mr. Bax. peddles on a pace, and brings a company of Scripures in proof of
infants Church Membership and baptism, which though he style them, as indeed
his whole book, Plain Scripture proofs for those two, yet a man that is not
minded to force the Scripture into the Service of his own fancy, because it
does not serve it freely, may look till dooms day before he see in them any
plain, perspicuous proof of either one of these or of the other.

Christ says he Mat. 23. 37, would have gathered Jerusalem often, as a hen
gathers her chickens under her wings* but they would not, therefore sure he
would not have put them, or their infants out of the Church, the strength of
the consequence lies here, says he, he would have gathered whole Jerusalem,
and that into the visible Gospel Church, therefore infants also; Now that
Christ does not speak of whole Jerusalem here, as he says he does, both men
and infants, the circumstances of the text do fully evince to us, for he speaks
of the same persons he speaks to, and the same persons he complains of, saying
ye would not, the same and no other are they to whom he speaks, when he says,
Oh Jerusalem how often would I have gathered etc. but those were men and women
only, whom he called to believed in him, and not infants.

Again he gathered them by preaching of the word into baptism, and membership,
and received all that came, and no more viz. sometimes the children and not the
parents, sometimes the parents and not the children, so that a man's foes for
the truths sake sometimes were they of his own family, his own flesh, therefore
he offered not to gather infants, for he preached not to them, nor called them
at all, nor were any more baptized and added to the Church Fellowship in the
Gospel, then they that gladly received the word, that did not infants, yea 3000
were gathered into the first Gospel Church by preaching and baptism in one day,
and never an infant among them all, for they surely did not continue in fellow
ship, in breaking of bread and prayers Acts 2.

Therefore whereas Mr. Ba. in his Epistle to the parish of Bewdley challenges
Mr. (...). to name him one particular Church since Adam either of Jews or
Gentiles, where infants were not Church Members, if they had any infants, till
200 years ago; I name him the first Gospel Church that ever was A^t. 2. in
which there was not one infant; yea there was three thousand baptized in one
day, and it is a hazard but that those three thousand had many, perhaps no
less than three thousand infants belonging to them all, and yet as Mr. Cotton
thinks, so think I, that none of their infants were baptized with them, much
less were added with them to the Church, or continued with them in fellowship,
as the whole Gospel Church did, in breaking of bread and prayers; yea
though-there was no infants in that Church, which was gathered at Jerusalem it
self, to which Christ says how often would I have gathered thy children, etc.
and therefore Mr. Baxs. sense is very sinister, so I challenge him again to
show me, not by such dubious, muddy, cloudy, circumlocutory, inconsequential
consequences as he does, but undeniable evidences any one of all the Gospel
C^urches of the primitive times, either of Jews or Gentiles, which we are all
to re^orm by viz. Jerusalem, Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Philippi, Ephesus,
Thessalonica, or any other to fellowship in which there was one infant
baptized, added and admitted, and I shall cry him mercy, and lay down the
Cudgelis at his feet, and acknowledge he has broke my pate.

The next Scripture he uses is more impertinent then this, yet Mr. Ba. makes a
certain shift to squeese an argument out of it, and to compel it invita minerva
not a little against its own intent, and meaning to corroborate his crooked
crazie creed concerning the inchurching and cristening of infants viz. Rev. 11.
15. whence he thus Syllogizes,

If the kingdoms of this world either are or shall be the kingdoms of the
Lord, and of his Christ, then infants also must be members of his kingdom i. e.
the visible Church, the Antecedent is the words of the text indeed, as he
says, but the sequel is so sure, and follows so firmly in his fancy, that he
says nothing can be said against it, that is sense or reason: but indeed it
self is against both sense and reason.

Who would ever think, if the word did not declare that the things of wisdom
are hid from the wise and prudent, that such a disputer as Mr. Ba. holds
himself to be, should deduce the now membership of infants, from such a premise
as this viz. because the kingdoms of this world are, or else shall be the
kindomes of God and Christ? what is this I trow toward the eviction of the other?
much every way says Mr. Ba. yea so much, that for any thing he can see this*
text alone were sufficient to decide the whole controversy whether infants
must be Church members,

Amen so beit say I, let this Scripture decide it, and let us see what Mr. Ba.
says out.

If they can say, quoth he, by kingdoms is meant here some part of the kingdom,
excluding all infants, such men may make their own creed on those terms, let
the Scripture say what it will, I know in some places the word kingdom, and
Jerusalem etc. is taken for a part, but if we must take words always
improperly, because they are taken so sometimes says he, then we shall not
know how to understand any Scripture, so of necessity it must be understood
properly i. e in its prime signification of the whole kingdoms, and whole
Jerusalem with him, and not improperly for a part only, though Mr. Blake to
Mr. Black, says upon occasion of our pleading for the proper signification of
baptize, nothing more or dinary then to have words used out of their prime
signification, whereby we may see how these men will needs have that
signification that best serves their turns, whether proper or improper, when
the proper most fits them, then the improper cannot be meant there, when the
proper makes against them, the improper is pleaded for as none more usual then
that, thus the word household must include infants, when baptism is spoken of,
but when the passover is spoken of then infants are excluded, because else we
shall argue from thence to their eating the supper, as they from circumcision
unto their bap^ism, but this by the way that it may be noted how the men will
have things their own way, by hook or by crook, not that I deny the word
kingdoms to be taken properly for all the whole kingdom here, yea I grant it,
but let us see what of that? why even this, if the whole kingdom be the Lords,
then infants must unavoidably be members of Christ's Church, and if we ask how
comes this about? he will tell you two ways,

First, as infants are all of the Kingdoms of this world, taken for the whole
kingdom,

Secondly, as by the word kingdom of Christ is meant Christ's church.

Now let us spell and put all together, and it is thus much,

First, by Kingdoms of this world is here meant the whole Kingdom of this
world, or Kingdom taken universally, not for some part of it only.

Secondly, by Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ is here meant Christ's church
only.

Thirdly, infants are a part of the Kingdoms of this world, and so
consequently of Christ's church, for the Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ i. e. Christ's church, oh brave and plain
Scripture proof for infant church membership and baptism.

Let us examine what is true and what is false in this.

First, as above, I grant that here the Kingdoms of this world signify the
whole Kingdom, as he pleads it, but that here the Kingdom of the Lord and his
Christ signifies Christ's church, I utterly deny it, and am amazed that a
reasonable man should affirm it, and so consequently I deny that it appears
from this place that infants are now members of Christ's church.

But he brings reason for it, such as it is, and that shall be a little examined.

First, if they say says he that the Kindome of Christ is not here meant
Christ's church, they speak against the constant phrase of Scripture, which
calls Christ's Kingdom his Church, et conversim, Christ is King and savior of
the same society, what is Christ's Kingdom but his church?

To which I answer, Christ's Kingdom is the whole world as well as his church.
And

Secondly that he is King and Savior of all men in some sense as well as of
that same society. And

Thirdly, that it is not against the constant phrase of Scripture to say by
Christ's Kingdom here is not meant his church, for though it is true by his
Kingdom is sometimes expressed his church, et retro by his church is meant his
Kingdom in a special and restrictive sense, yet not constantly, there being
many places where the word Kingdom of Christ is taken in a larger sense, as
signifying not the church, but the whole world O bad. 21 the Kingdom i. e.
Monarchy of the whole earth shall be the Lords i. e. Christ's so Dan. 7. the
Kingdom i. e. Dominion, Monarchy and greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
heaven is given to the son of man, and the Saints, yea his Kingdom is over all,
he shall rule the Nations, govern and judge the whole world in righteousness;

Oh says Mr. Ba. the Kingdom of Christ is more large, and more special; but
here it cannot be meant of his kingdom in the larger sense, nor as he rules
common societies, and things for so says he the Kingdoms of this world were
ever the Lords and his Christ's, and it could not be said that they are now
become so.

To which I answer,

First, that in granting what he here does, that Christ's kingdom is taken
sometimes in a larger sense, then for the church, he contradicts himself above,
where he says it is the constant phrase of Scripture to call Christ's Kingdom
his church, and what is Christ's kingdom but his church?

Secondly, whereas he says the Kingdoms of this world were ever the Lords and
his Christ's in the larger sense, as taken for his Government and Rule, I grant
de jure Christ has been Lord of the whole earth a long time, but de facto he
is not King, so as actually to reign over the whole earth, as ere long he shall
do i. e. at his appearing 2 Timothy 4. 1. to this very day, but in that indeed i.
e. when he comes he shall be King, Monarch over all the earth, and rule with a
rod of iron over the Nations, and judge the world in righteousness together
with his Saints, who has been judged in unrighteousness by the Nations and
Rulers hitherto Zach. 14. Dan. 7. Act. 17. P. 2. Rev. 2. then he shall be in
point of execution, as before by commission, and really, and actually, as now
intentionally King of Kings, and Lord of Lords Rev. 19. but till then, as yet a
little while, and his Kingdom comes to his hand, and the Kingdoms of the
world do thus become his, for the work of recovery of his right is now very hot
in fieri, and will not be long before it be in facto esse, till then he has
been an underling, and other Lords besides him have had dominion over him in
his, and also over the whole earth, which is his, and over the Kingdoms of
this world, which de jure are his, but specially that servus servorum, dominus
dominorum the Pope and CCClergy, that are the whore that has reigned in three
divisions over the earth, between whom and Christ the great justle now is in
all christendom, whether he or they, that by permission have had it so long
from Christ, who only has the commission for it, shall be King of Kings and
Lord of Lords, hitherto Christ has reigned in the world as Charles the second
has reigned in England, and no otherwise i. e. has reigned in the hearts of a
few of his friends and followers.

But I perceive the Gospel or good news of the Kingdom of Christ coming, which
is to be preached more had more before the end, is yet a riddle to Mr. Ba. and
though I hope it will be, if seeing he will see, yet it is not yet given him to
know the mystery and manner of Christ's Kindome.

Thirdly, whereas he says that the Kingdom taken in the larger sense i. e. for
the world cannot be meant here, but the church only by this phrase the
Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ, I strongly assert that of all places in
Scripture the word Kingdoms of Christ cannot here be construed for the church,
that the church cannot be meant in that phrase, but the Kingdoms in the
largest sense i. e. the whole world, and directly oppositly to Mr. Ba. who
says it is the church, I disprove his opinion thus,

First, If by the kingdoms of Christ be meant the Church, then it must be thus
read, viz. the Kingdoms of this world are become Christ's Church, but what an
absurdity must that be, specially with Mr. Bax. above all men, who so
strenuously contends that by the word Kingdoms of this world is meant not in
part only, but the whole kingdom? for to hold that by that phrase the Kingdoms
of this world is meant all the kingdoms upon the earth, taken wholly, and not
Synechdochically for a part of those kingdoms only, and that by the kingdom
of Christ the Church only, is to make the sense thus, viz. the whole world is
become Christ's Church, therefore it cannot be so, but thus (and so all the
circumstances of the text do evince, for it is spoken of Christ's reign over all
the world in the latter days, after the seventh Trumpet has sounded, and not
over all his Church only, and of Christ's taking to himself ver. 17. that great
Monarchy, power, kingdom, or greatness and glory of his reign, which before
he permitted to be in the hands of the Dragon, beast and whore, so that they
reigned over the whole earth, and the saints too in rigor, and
unrighteousness Rev. 13. Rev. 17. ult: I say it must be thus viz. the
Kingdoms of this world, the Kingdoms under the whole heaven, the Monarchy of
the whole Earth is now come into Christ's own hands, or the Government over all
is now actually on his shoulders.

Besides what will Mr. Bax. gain more by his sense of that Scripture toward
the proof of his infant-membership then I for the membership of heathen
infants, then for the Church membership of the whole world, if I were minded to
plead for it, if the Kingdoms of this world wholly taken, none excluded, do
become the Church of Christ then all men as well as infants must be
Church Members on that account.

Besides he speaks as de futuro what shall be under the seventh Trumpet,
therefore if it were to be taken as Mr. Bax. imagines that the Kingdoms of
this world, infants as well as men, are now become Christ's Church, then it
would evince that it was not so from the beginning of the Gospel Church, for
what effects are spoken of as falling out now newly under the seventh Trumoet,
are things that never were in being before.

Besides observe Mr. Baxter how he pleads to have Kingdoms taken in the
largest sense in the former part of the verse, and how angry he is if it be
taken for lesser then all the whole kingdoms of the world, but in the latter
part where Kingdoms must needs be, and is as largely to be taken (for it is
the Kingdoms of the world are become Christ's Kingdoms, i. e. dominion, not
Christ's churches) there he will needs lace it up into the narrowest acceptance
that the word kingdom can possibly bear.

Oh therefore the gross pieces of ignorance, that are in that Argument of his
for infants membership in the Church, which he grounds from a Scripture, that
will as well prove all the world to be Gospel Church Members as believers
infants, if his very own false sense of it should be admitted, but in truth
proves not the one nor the other; thus he argues viz. the Kingdoms of this
world, i. e. all, and all in them shall become Christ's kingdoms, therefore
infants of only believers, not heathens, are Church Members under the Gospel.

He that says this follows any better then the Pope follows Peter in the holy
chair shall never be counted, or voted mentis compos, whilst I am compos voti.

Mr. Bax. therefore had better have found 40 shillings, where he never looked
for it, then have looked for infant-membership in this scripture, where he will
never find it with his eyes open.

His three next Arguments, viz. the ninth, tenth, and eleventh run all upon one
strain, and therefore as he need not have made more then one of them, so I need
not make more then one answer to them all, yea, I need make none at all, having
spoken to that point sufficiently before, yet a hint of it here may do no hurt.

They stand all upon one bottom, viz. the meliority of the times under the
Gospel above the times of the Law, of this new covenant above the old, the
sum of what he says is this, if believers in fants may not now be members of
the visible Church, then both Jews and Gentiles are in a worse condition now
then before Christ, and Christ is come to be a destroyer, and not a Savior,
and to do hurt to all the world, the believing Jews, and the Church; yea and
the very Gentiles thereby, in regard of the happiness of their children, are
in a worse condition then of old, but this is a vile doctrine, says he, for
Jesus is a Mediator of a better covenant established on better promises Heb. 8.
6. where sin abounded grace much more abounded, Romans 5. 14, 15. 20. and the
love of Christ love has height, length, depth, breadth, and passes knowledge
Ephesians. 3.

To which simple inconsequent conceits I answer by denying the consequence, it
follows not that the world is in worse estate under Christ then before,
because infants might be members of the Jewish church, but not now of any
visible church of the Gospel, nay verily the world is in a far better condition
then formerly, by how much they are under more clear, and plain promulgations,
more fa^re and universal tenders of salvation, then in the narrow or shadowy
dispensation of the Law, and also under greater love, richer grace, better and
more glorious promises, unless they fall short of them, through their own
unbelief, then those which were made to the natural Israelites only, all whose
glory was but a type of the other, for the great favor, love and promises of
God to them, as merely Abraham, Isaac and Jacobs natural seed, unless they
also believed, and then they, as now all the world might be heirs with Abraham
of the grace and promises of the Gospel, did make them heirs of that earthly
Canaan only: but the Gospel grace makes all men heirs on terms of faith and
obedience to Christ, of the glory of the heavenly Canaan for ever, the grace of
God that brings salvation unto all men now appears: and as for infants,
albeit no infants now be baptized into fellowship with the visible Church, nor
are privileged as the Jews infants once were with interest in the blessing of
an outward earthly Canaan, nor yet vouchsafed that merely titular account, of
sanctified and peculiar people of God, as in opposition to other infants, as by
birth, accountatively sinners, common and unclean, which distinction of a birth
holiness and uncleaness Mr. Baxter had he but half an eye in his head might
clearly see Acts 10. 28. is so taken out of the world and ended in Christ, that
now no man however born, no not a Gentile may be called in that sense as the
Gentiles were of old in reference to the Jews, either common or unclean, and
if no man can be called by birth common or unclean in reference to other, then
none may be called by birth holy in reference to other, for this birth
holiness and uncleanness are such Correlatives that the one cannot be
supposed to be in the world without the other; albeit I say no infants have now
such standings in such external happiness and salvation, yet they are in no les
capacity to be saved then the Jews children of old, and so neither their
parents whoever they be, in any worse condition in regard of their comforts in
their children, whether they die infants, or live to years, then the godliest
Jews were in regard of theirs, for either infants die in infancy, or else do
not, if any man's infants die in such nonage as in which they never committed
actual transgression, our Ashford Pamphlet tells us they have not deserved to
be exempted from the general state of little infants declared in Scripture,
viz. that of such is the Kingdom of heaven, yea I wonder what should damn such
dying infants, as never had iniqu^y of their own, since God himself assures us
that the son shall not die i. e. eternally for the iniquity of his father, but
every soul that dies shall die only for his own iniquity, Ezekiel 18. and no
better hopes could be harbored of the Godliest Jews infants then this, that
dying infants they were not damned.

But if any man's children, even his that is ungodly and profane, do live to
years, then if they believe and obey the Gospel, the tender of which is to
every creature, they may be saved though their parents be wicked, when Jews
children not doing so, shall be damned, for all their father Abraham's faith,
and their own Church Membership for a time, and that with so much the greater
condemnation: whereas therefore Mr. Ba. tells us such a story of a meliority of
being in the visible Church rather then out, I tell him it is not universally
true, but as it may happen, for besides that children may as well be prayed for,
and instructed by their godly parents, remaining unbaptized, and non-members in
their nonage, as if in infancy they be admitted to both, it may so fall out,
and mostly it did among the Jews, that a lifting up to heaven in respect of
participation of outward privileges and ordinances, may prove an occasion
unhappily through their abuse of it, of their sinking deeper into hell.

His next Argument is drawn from Deuteronomy. 29, 10. 11. 12. a place that does as
well prove that all the wives and the servants, and the slaves, even all the
hewers of wood and drawers of water are to be taken into Covenant with God, as
his, and admitted into Church Membership upon the Membership of Masters, and
Husbands, as little ones upon the membership of the Fathers; and so indeed it
was in those days, wherein the whole body of the Nation was inchurched
together, though not so now, therefore though I might easily discover that (yea
he is blind that sees it not in the same chapter, notwithstanding it is
alleged in that allusion of Paul in the tenth chapter of the Romans to that
place) to be no other then that covenant which was made with the nation in
particular, which God brought out of Egypt, yet I shall trouble my self to say
no more to it then so.

His 13 Argument is from Romans 4. 11. where circumcision is said to be a seal of
the righteousness of the faith which Abraham had, is answered above, where I
have given out the genuine sense of that place, and disproved that crooked
construction, which is by others as well as him commonly made of it, therefore
i will say no more to it here.

His 14 Argument is also answered, but a little above, where I have showed the
inchurching of that fleshly seed to be ceremonial, and also what it typed out,
therefore no more of that also in this place.

His 15. plain Scripture-lesse proof for infants present churchmembership and
baptism is this viz.

If all infants, who were members of any particular Church, were also Members
of the Universal Visible Church, then certainly the Membership of infants, he
means by virtue of the membership of their parents, is not repealed.

But all infants who were etc.

Ergo.

The consequence says he is beyond dispute, because the universal Church never
cease here, yea the whole Argument so clear, that were there no more it is
sufficient.

To which as unanswerable as he judges it, I answer first by denying the
consequence of his Mayor, as most flatly false and inconsequent.

Secondly, by saying as Mr. T. did, whose answer is both solid and sufficient
viz. that infants membership in the universal visible church was only by reason
of their then membership in that particular national church, neither can Mr.
Ba. while he breathes prove them to have bin members of that universal visible,
as he calls it, but as they were members of that, and therefore when that
particular, national church of the Jews ceased, the standing of infants as
members upon the mere account of their parents membership ceased also
therewith, as one of the things that were not essential to a church, but
circumstantial only to that church, as one of the particular accidental
ceremonies pertaining only to that individual national church; for accidental
ceremonies Mr. Ba. himself confesses, and must confess did cease still with
that particular church, to which particularly they related, otherwise he will
be paid home with his own weapon, and in his own coin, yea if Mr. Baxters
consequence be true, and if it be not so as we say, that accidental
ceremonies, and so this accidental ceremony, and circumstance of infants being
members upon the membership of their parents, did cease with that particular
church of the Jews, twill pass all the brains Mr. Ba. has in his head to
answer his own argument, if we retort it on him in proof of that which he
denies, as much as we do the inchurching of infants upon the fathers membership
viz. the inchurching of wives, and servants to this day upon the membership of
their husbands and masters, for whereas he argues thus viz. if all infants who
were members of any particular church were also members of the universal
visible church, then certainly the membership of infants by virtue of their
parents membership is not repealed, but all etc. Ergo

What answer will he make, if we answer him by arguing back upon him thus viz.
if all wives and servants, who were members by virtue of their husbands and
masters membership of any particular visible church, were also members of the
universal visible church, then certainly the membership of wives and servants,
hewers of wood, and drawers of water, by virtue of their husbands and masters
membership, is not repealed, but all etc. Ergo.

I leave it to wise men to consider and examine whether Mr. Bs. argument does
not as fully tend to the proof of it that the wives and servants ought, as of
old, to stand members in the visible church now, upon the husbands and masters
membership, as infants upon the membership of their parents.

Several other palpable absurdities are obvious to every observant eye in his
amplification of this argument, which whoever notes, will take heed of pinning
his faith implicitly on Mr. Bs. sleeve, and of listening to his Logic, so as to
be led by it besides all sense and reason.

To say nothing to his universal visible, which is little less then a visible
bull, for sensus, adeoque visus est proprie solum modo singularium, intellectus
universalium, the proper object of sense, and so of sight is particulars only,
and universalls only properly of the understanding, yet this universal visible
church is the universal vision, and dream of the universal Clergy, but to bate
them the baldness of that term, and grant that there is a Catholic visible
church, is there any unversal visible church, but what is existent in, and made
up of all the particular visible churches? I trow not: yea that was wont to be
good Logic, and Theology too heretofore, to say that all the particulars make
up the unversal, that the universal visible Church, and all the particular
visible Churches are adaequate, and convertible, yea Dr. Featley p. ^2. makes
the universal visible church, and all the particular visible churches
equivalent, the universal or formal church says he i. e. all the assemblies
of Christians in the world: the whole is not broader then all its parts
collectively taken, nor without its parts, for omne totum ex suis partibus
constituitur, ordinatur, mensuratur, determinatur, every whole consists of its
parts, is measured and determined by its parts, and so the whole universal
visible Church, and all the homogeneall parts of it simul sumtae i. e. all the
particular visible churches taken together, are of equal latitude; so that he
that is of a any particular visible church must needs be of the whole, and he
that is of the whole universal visible must needs be of some particular
visible church, yea cui adimuntur omnes parts totius universalis, eidem etiam
totum universale adimi necesse est, whoever is not a part of some part or other
i. e. of some particular visible church, cannot be a part of the whole i. e.
the universal visible: this I say is the Logic and Theology, which was wont to
pass for current among your selves, but Mr. Ba. learnes men a new kind of
Logic viz. that all the parts put together are not so big as the whole, that
the universal visible church is larger then all the particular visible
churches in the world, of which yet it consists, so that there is room enough
for a person to stand a member in the universal visible church, though he be of
no particular visible church at all; I ever understood yet that he, who is
removed and cast out of all the particular visible churches of the Saints, is
consequently cast out of the universal visible church, but he tells me a tale
that to be removed out of every particular visible church, is consistent still
with a standing in the universal visible: so that excomunication out of all the
particular visible churches in the world, is not excomunication out of the
whole visible church with him.

Another thing worth noting, though worth nothing, is this, he tells us there
that Keturahs children, when they left the family of Abraham, that they
continued members of the universal visible church still, which compared with
the clause above, where he tells us that it is a far higher privilege to stand
in the universal visible church then to stand in any particular whatsoever,
amounts to thus much viz. that the Midianites, for they were some of Keturahs
children, had far higher privileges, then those that the Israelites had by
being members of that particular visible church of Israel, which if it were so,
then we may say what advantage has the Jew indeed, and what profit by
circumcision, and by Gods commission of his oracles unto them? yea what
necessity of circumcision of themselves, and their males at all for any
strangers, or of joining themselves to that particular church of the Jews,
since they might have had as high privileges if they had joined themselves to
the seed of Abraham by Keturah, of whose posterity circumcision, nor the strict
law it bound to was not required, and so consequently what need of baptism, if
persons might be of the uniuersal visible, which is the greater, though not of
the particular visible church of the Jews, without circumcision and keeping the
law?

But it is a question with Mr. Bax. whether Keturahs children must leave their
seed uncircumcisied p. 60. yet I tell him it is out of question, that unless
it were in order to joining, and inchurching themselves with that individual
Church of of the Jews, to which pertained peculiarly the adoption, and glory,
and covenants, and law, and promises, and which was all the visible church,
that I know God had then upon the earth, circumcision was not enjoined to any
other of Abraham's own posterity, not the Ishmalites, nor Midianites, but those
only that came of Sarah by Isaac and Jacob, for the covenant, of which
circumcision was a sign, was established with none of them, but with Isaac only
and with Jacob, and his seed after him, and so many as should join themselves
unto them.

Many more odd conceits about this universal visible church, Mr. Ba. broaches,
but I spare him, and hasten to what follows.

His 16. plain Scripture-lesse proof for infants church membership and baptism
is from a clause in the second command^ment viz. I will show mercy to 1000s of
them that love me, and keep my commandments, a phrase out of which a man may
as easily prove the Pope to be head of the church, as prove either of those
points in proof of which he does produce it.

Yet oh the miserable muddy, wretched, ragged, crooked, cloudy piece of
disputation for infant baptism, which this man makes from that place!

For my part I mean not to wander after him in that wilderness of worthless
discourse, that he vents about mercy, Church covenant, promises, nor am I so
wise as to wot what he means, nor so foolish as to believe he knows well what
he means himself by much of that he there utters, or else he would never say
that wicked men in the church are within the covenant, and so have this mercy
spoken of in the second commandment stated on them by promise; as if wicked
men in the church were in some special wise beloved of God, when yet they are
more hateful to him by far then heathens.

It is enough to serve my present purpose, that what proof Mr. Baxter pens in
the head of this argumentation, his own pen dashes it all out again in the
tail of it.

For first after a great deal of wiestling to make the mercy here promised to
thousands of them that love God, necessarily to include church membership, he
confesses at last that it lies doubtful in the text what mercy in particular is
there meant, which if he do, then it is not necessary that church membership be
implied in it, for there may be much mercy, yea special, yea eternal saving
mercy showed to persons, to whom the mercy of membership in the visible church
and baptism is not vouchsafed, or else what becomes of such infants, as
notwithstanding your timely admittance, do yet die without both membership and
baptism? are they shut out of the kingdom of heaven?

Secondly, he confesses it is doubtful in the text to how many generations God
shows mercy to the children of parents that love him, whether it be to the
remote or nearest progeny only; and though he pass his judgment that it is
only to immediate children of godly parents, that the promise in the
commandment is made, yet thereby he contradicts his own sense of the place, and
overthrow^s all that he contends for, in that if the words were as he would
have them read, viz. I show mercy to a thousand Generations, or to the
thousandth generation of them that love me, it were evident that he meant not
the nex^ generation only, for that to a thousand generation should signify no
more then one generation to come is most irrational, and plain brutish to
imagine; and if he say it is to a thousand generations, if such children succeed
their parents in godliness, that sense excludes infants quite from the mercy
here promised, and extends it to such children only as are at years, and that
on condition of being godly themselves, and on that condition of being godly
themselves God shows mercy to the immediate seed of the very wickedest
parents, as well as of the Godliest parents in the world.

But in very deed to put him out of all his doubts at once about this place,
viz. whether God mean the remote or immediate children, I desire Mr. Baxter to
consider that this promise is not made to any man's posterity at all, but only
to all such individual persons as love him, and keep his commandments, for the
words are not as he reads, and construes them, viz. I will show mercy to a
thousand generations of them, but to thousands of them that love me, i. e. to
thousands of such people, such persons as love me and keep my Commandments; and
so if the mercy were that of membership, yet it were nothing concerning infants
in their infancy at all, but concerning thousands of such individual persons as
love him and keep his commandments, or else God must show mercy to all infants
in their infancy to this day, merely for their father Noah's sake, though the
immediate parents be wicked, and if he he do not he shows not mercy to the
thousandth generation of believers infants, there being not a thousand
generations from Noah to this day.

We may see what little plain proof these men can find for their false way of
inchurching and baptizing of infants in the New Testament, in that they are
feign to fetch it so far off as the old, thus does not Mr. Ba. only but others
also as well as he, who would certainly never look for it so far behind as ^he
second commanment, if they could easily find it nearer hand: among the rest
this minds me of one of more then ordinary note, viz. Dr. Channel of Petworth
in Sussex, who January the first 1651. in a public discourse with my unworthy
self, being desired to assign some particular place of Scripture, where Christ
commands the practice of infant baptism, assigned the second commandment, to
whom as I said then before hundreds of people, so I testify here again before
the whole world, that if any man see infants baptism commanded in the second
Commandment it is because his eyes are out: for though he tell me that the
general scope of the second Commandment is to command all Gods people to
observe all Gods institutions from time to time, yet I tell him again, as also
I did then, that infant baptism is none of those institutions, yea I tell him
yet further, and Mr. Bax. also, that unless it can be made appear by plainer
Scripture proofs then ever were yet brought by either of them, that Christ
Jesus injoined the baptizing and inchurching of infants, or that its any other
then a tradition of man, and an addition to the Gospel, which was not so from
the beginning, and that is more then either of them will ever make plainly to
appear, the second Commandment does rather forbid them both, yea (Ah si fas
dicere^ sed fas) the second commandment, the general scope of which, as their
own selves expound it, is to p^ohibit all will worship and superstition, all
serving of God after our own invention, all customs, devices, innovations,
Traditions of men, all addi^ion to and alterations of Christ's will and
Testament, all teaching other doctrine then is containedin the word, does
forbid, it, and therefore i^ haled in by head and shoulders to serve the turn
of these men, and to help to uphold them in their rantizing of infants into the
same visible body with them, whom yet they deny to drink with them into the
same spirit, as all that are baptized into the same body are to do 1 Cor. 12.
which infellowshipping persons by the halves into Gospel participation, if it
be of Christ, what else is of man I plainly know not.

His 17 plain Scripture-lesse proof for infants Church Membership and baptism
is drawn from Psalm. 37. 26. where it is said that the seed of the Righteous
are blessed, whence he argues as before, and therefore need not have made a
distinct Argument of this, if God have pronounced the seed of the righteous
blessed, then certainly they are members of his visible Church, its absurd once
to imagine quoth he, that god should pronounce a society blessed, and take them
for none of his visible Church.

But I am ashamed of such trifling stuff, such straw^, and stubble as he here
builds upon, as if God himself can no way be said to bless the seed of the
righteous, unless he require them to be baptized, and inchurched visibly in
their infancy, as if God had but one blessing, even that of baptism and
church membership, upon which all other blessings are so eternally intailed,
even to infants, that such of them as attain not to an actual interest in these
are ipso facto accursed in all respects else and that for ever, whereas to say
nothing how that phrase the seed of the righteous may be taken for the race of
righteous ones, that succeed one another in righteousness, as well as a seed
of evil doers Is. 1. 4. for the whole race of evil doers, that succeed their
forefathers in evil doing, for these indeed I take to be the seed to which the
Scripture often pronounces blessing and cursing, and not always the mere natural
seed of good men and bad, for the^ there is manifest falsehood in many promises
and threats, the natural seed of righteous men often perishing, and being not
counted their own fathers children, unless they be like them in righteousness
as John 8. 39. Christ denies Abraham's natural children to be Abraham's children,
and blessed with him, because they did not as Abraham did, and contrary wise
the natural seed of the wicked prospering, when they do well, contrary to Prove.
2. 21. 22. Is. 20. 14. Ps. 37 20. if the word seed were there taken for the
natural seed, where it is said the seed of evil doers shall never be renowned;

And so the seed of the serpent, and the children of the devil expresses those
that do his works, to say nothing I say of this, which yet is enough to blunt
the edge of Mr. Bas. argument, grant the word seed here to be taken for the
natural seed of the righteous, even those in infancy may be many ways blessed
though they neither be baptized in infancy nor inchurched, yea they may be
blessed with eternal salvation, dying in infancy, without either baptism or
membership in the visible Church, for I hope you will not say those 1000s. of
Jews and belieuers infants, that have died before circumcision, baptism, and
visible admission, are damned without any more ado, because they fell short of
your admired membership, and if these be blessed with salvation to whom you
delay baptism, why not those to whom we deny it? does our denying baptism to an
infant before he dies send him to hell sooner then your delaying it till he be
dead?

But however the seed of the righteous may be blessed with many temporal
blessings, as provision, fruitfulness, multiplication, and yet not be taken
into the visible Church, and to say the truth if Mr. Ba* had not been resolved
to wrest this Scripture besides its true sense, to botch up his proofs into a
multitude, he might easily have seen by consultation with the verse before that
it is not such a thing as membership, that is here meant by the word blessed,
but mere matter of outward sustentation; I never saw the righteous forsaken,
nor his seed begging bread; he is ever merciful and lends and his seed is
blessed i. e. provided for, and preserved from beggary, and considered by
others in time of adversity, as he considered others in the like case.

And lastly, whereas he challenges us to show where ever God pronounced any
blessed, and yet took them for none of his visible Church? saying it is absurd
once to imagine it that he did, I assert it is most absurd in him to imagine
the contrary, for God himself by promise pronounced Ishmael blessed, saying as
for Ishmael behold I haved blessed him, and I will make him fruitful, and
multiply him exceedingly, and make him a nation, because he is thy seed: and
this at the very same time when he denied to establish the Covenant with him,
which he established with Isaac, and commanded that he should be cast out of
Abraham's family from sharing with Isaac in that very covenant, which Mr. Baxter
contends with all his might p. 64. 65. that whoever are not in it are not under
the promise of the mercy, which Church Membership is with him a special part
of.

In proof of this consider and compare Genesis 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. with Genesis 21.
10. 11. 12. 13. as if there were no blessing but that of Church Membership, or
atleast no blessing without this of Church Membership, whereas, as admired a
mercy as this mere membership is with Mr. Baxter, persons may be blessed
without it, and also (witness the Jewish Nation, which for the most part were
reprobates) they may have admission to the mere mercy, and bare blessing of
membership, and yet perish and be accursed for ever.

The 18th. plain Scripture-less proof for infant Church Membership and baptism
is this.

If infants were Church Members before circumcision was instituted, then
certainly it was not proper to the Jews, and consequently is not ceased, but
infants are, therefore. The Minor of which argument Mr. Baxter endeavors to
prove as well as he can, and this he does,

First, partly by perverting the sense of the text Mal. 2. 25. where it is said
God made two one i. e. instituted the ordinance of marriage between man* and
woman, that he might seek a seed of God i. e. a legitimate Issue, for
legitimacy only in the issue is the result of marriage, and that among what
parents soever, even heathens as well as others, for whom as well as others
that state of marriage is sanctified, yet Mr. Baxter says he made two one, or
ordained marriage that he might seek a seed of God in another sense, that
better serves his turn i. e. to seek Church Members, as if Church Membership in
the seed, were the direct result of the state of matrimony in the parents,
which every simpleton knows to be false* for marriage is honorable among all,
and was ordained for all mankind as well as the Godly, and yet the seed are not
therefore Church Members; besides marriage was instituted in the state of
innocence, to this end that mankind might be propagated in a more modest way
then other creatures, and not that the seed so propagated might be
Church Members.

Secondly, partly by a heap of frivolous conjectures of his own, in which a man
may warrantably enough choose whether he will believe him or no, but whether his
Minor viz. that infants were Church Members before circumcision was instituted
be true or false it makes nothing to his purpose unless he had made surer work
in his Major; for that is so inconsequent, and utterly unsound that had I
happened to have heard his argument before it came in Print, I should have
spared him all his pains about the Minor, and have put him to the proof of his
Major, the consequence of which he will never make good by fair play while he
breathes; for there were many things long before circumcision was instituted,
which were proper, if not to the Jews till the Jews were in being, yet to the
ceremonial law that was after more clearly given to the Jews, and to that old
Testament of which Moses was the Mediator, and circumcision the sign, and the
Jews the subject, and yet were tipicall and ceremonial only, and so ceased
together with circumcision, as the keeping the seventh day, the sacrifices, the
cleanness and uncleanness of certain creatures, and (if that were at all
before circumcision, as Mr. Ba. does not plainly prove it to be) among the rest
the Church Membership of infants.

His 19. plain Scripture-lesse proof is this.

If God be not more prone to severity then to mercy, then he will admit of
infants to be members of the visible Church but God etc. therefore etc.

Oh the wit of this man how wonderfully does it work, and wind to and fro, and
wander far and near to fetch in any manner of fuel, wherewith to feed that
false faith men live in, concerning infant baptism, for fear it should be quite
extinguished, and brought to nothing.

Ex nihilo nihil fit in an ordinary way, but such is the extraordinary
eagerness of Mr. Ba. to have the game go his way, by either fair play or foul,
that he is wise to extract something out of any thing, and any thing out of
just nothing to his purpose: this that God is not more prone to severity then
mercy, may serve, and that soundly to make against those that say God is
willing to save but a few, and did peremptorily determine to damn personally an
100 men to one before they were born, and that without reference to their
foreseen rejection of his grace, but how it seems to make a jot against such as
suppose the salvation of all dying infants, denying only infants mere
membership in mere gospel fellowship, I must profess my self too shallow to
conceive, yea I am astonished, saving that the word tells me the seers must be
blinded for teaching Gods fear after men's precepts, that the the ministers
should buzze such a business abroad in print viz. that if infants be not now
Church Members, then God is more prone to severity then to mercy, and then back
it so baldly too as Mr. Ba. does: it is evident thus says he God has cut off
multitudes of wicked men's infants both from the Church, and from life for the
sins of their progenitors viz. Dathan and Abirams, Achans, Amalecks, the
Midianites, Daniels accusers, the Hittites, Amori^es, Canaanites, Perrezites,
and Jebusites, therefore if he should not admit of some infants of faithful men
so much as to the visible Church, then he should be more prone to severity then
to mercy.

I cannot but inwardly blush at Mr. Bas. blindness, as if God had no way
whereby to vindicate the honor of his mercy, and clear himself from the
censure of more severe then merciful, but one, that is by giving commission to
us, which yet he no where gives us in any part of his will and Testament, to
baptize and inchurch some infants: as if he had no way to recover to his credit
again to his most merciful name of the Lord, merciful, gracious, and slow to
anger since his cutting off so many infants together with their wicked parents
by mere temporal death, and to make amends as it were for all the slaughters,
that he made of innocent infants, with their rebellious fathers in the days of
the law, unless in liew thereof he grant some infants of faithful men to be
members of his visible Churches, and in visible fellowship with them in the
days and ages of the Gospel.

Who sees not the weakness, the wretchedness of this consequence? yet so it
is with Mr. Ba. that God is more prone to severity then mercy if he now admit
no infants into the visible Church under the Gospel, except says he, it be
proved that God gives them some greater mercy out of the Church. To which
exception of his I say thus.

First, it need not be proved, and yet his consequence will prove false, for if
the mere admitting of some faithful men's infants into the visible Church will
so make up the matter as to salve God from censure of pronesse to severity,
rather then mercy, and magnify his mercy so as to make it appear to be that he
delights in more then judgment, notwithstanding his severity in slaying so
many infants with the parents, then God magnfied his mercy in that kind of way
sufficiently to make amends for that severity in the very time of the law it
self, forasmuch as then he did admit for 2000 years together not only some
infants of faithful men, but in all that time innumerable infants of
unfaithful and wicked men (for such were the Jews for the most part in their
several generations and yet such infants your selves would not now have
admitted) to stand in the visible and national Church of the Jews. And so
there is no need of any admittance of infants now, in order to such an end as
satisfaction for his severity to some infants of old, into visible fellowship
with Gospel Churches.

Secondly, to satisfy him further it may easily be proved that God gives
infants, if they die in their infancy unbaptized and not inchurched (for if
they live to years they may be baptized all, and inchurched too, if they
believe) a greater mercy then that of mere church membership here on earth, for
they having never committed any actual sins whereby to deserve exemption,
charity teaches us to believe, and hope thus much says the Ashford Pamphlet of
all such, that of such is the kindom of heaven.

One thing more I cannot but take notice of in this passage not in way of
contradiction to Mr. Ba. but in way of discovery how contradictory unto him
some of his brethren are, who manage the same cause with him, that they may
either close more handsomely together, or else excuse us if we believe none of
them till they be agreed more among themselves, for whereas Mr. Baxter lays it
down as the manner of old that when the parents sinned and broke Gods covenant
so as to deserve to be discovenanted thereupon, the children that had right to
stand by the Quondam membership of their parents, were wont to be
discovenanted, dischurched, and sometimes destroyed with them;

I find the fornamed Dr. Channel of another mind, for when in a second
public discourse with him at Petworth on January 5. 1651. I asserted his
practice to be contradictory to his own judgment, forasmuch as his judgment
was that believers infants only were in covenant with God, and in right to
Church Membership and baptism, and yet his practice to baptize all or most of
the infants in his parish, not one of many of whose parents he judged to be
believers, as appeaed by his refusing communion with them for many years
together in the supper,

He gave answer to this purpose, viz. that the parent, i. e. believing (or else
the child has no right secundum te O Presbyter) may sin himself out of
covenant again, out of all communion in the Church, and be damned, and yet the
child stand still in right to baptism and membership which he had by the faith
of those parents; which as it thwarts the wonted wayof discovenanting,
dischurching of children with the parents, so it contradicts himself more
another way, though he evade his first contradiction by it, to say that
believing parents (for such only say your selves give right to their infants
to be baptized) may sin themselves out of covenant, and be damned, for though
as I then told him he preached it in saying thus, yet I am persuaded he holds
no falling from grace.

More things I take notice that that Dr. and Mr. Bax. knock heads in, but I
spare to do more then advise them to accord better with each other, but
specially each of them with himself, or else as implicitly as men have believed
them heretofore, they will try them ere long, and scarce trust them any longer.

His 20 Plain Scripture-lesse proof for infant churchmembership and baptism he
draws as he says from Deuteronomy. 28. 4. 18 32. 41. blessed shall they be in the
fruit of their body that keep the covenant, and cursed in the fruit of their
body, i. e. that break the covenant etc. he may well say he draws it, for
there is no such thing as he draws flows freely from that or any other Scripture
he produces, he draws indeed, but at such a distance, that I see nothing
follows from thence at all: he does not fall flatly upon it, nor deal down
rightly with the text alleged, nor does he interpret the blessing and cursing
to be membership, and nonmembership, so as to say that by blessed shall be the
fruit of thy body is meant thus, i. e. thy infants shall be inchurched, and by
cursed shall (...) of thy body thus, i. e. thy infants shall be dischurched,
for that had (...) ^lpably to pervert it, but he keeps a loof off from it, and
does not draw^ ^o the heart and center of it, but syllogizes in a
circumference, and fetches it from far for fear, I think, least it should fly
in his face.

The Argument that I fetch hence is this.

That doctrine, which makes the children of the faithful to be in a worse
condition, or as bad, then the curse Deuteronomy. 28. makes the children of covenant
breakers to be in, is false doctrine.

But the doctrine which ^denyeth the children of the faithful to be visible
Churchmembers, does make them to be in as bad or worse condition then is
threatened by the curse Deuteronomy. 28.

Therefore.

The Minor of which Syllogism is most false, for infants may be both unbaptized
and no visible Church members, and yet be in a better condition then such as
are under the curse, and the captivity threatened Deuteronomy. 28. and so are all these
to whom baptism and admittance into the visible Church is delayed by your
selves, who in the Church of England in old time were wont to defer the
baptizing of all infants to two times in the year, viz. Easter and Whitsuntide,
and so are all those also to whom we deny it, for both those to whom you delay
it, and those to whom we deny it, dying in infancy without it, may be saved
without it as well as if they had it.

And at the same rates as they dispute them to be under cursing to whom we deny
baptism, and visible Church Membership, and our doctrine to be false that
denies it, may we dispute those infants to be under cursing, to whom they delay
baptism and visible membership, though but for a week during the time of their
delaying it, and their doctrine to be false that delays it, if we retort the
same Argument on themselves, which I shall do and leave it.

That doctrine which makes the children of the faithful in as bad or worse
condition then is threatened in that curse Deuteronomy. 28. is false.

But that doctrine which delays baptism and visible Church Membership to the
infants of the faithful till the tenth, twelfth, or twentyeth day of their
age, till Plumcake be made, makes them during the time in which it is delayed in
worse Condition then is threatened in that curse, Deuter. 28.

Ergo it is false.

Till then you have ingrafted your children into the Church by baptism they are
it seems with you in worse state then if they were in captivity, and all the
poor innocent infants of those parents that are in England, to which your
selves (O Presbyters) deny baptism, unless the parent will confess his faith
before the ^ason, are in worse and more cursed condition then if they were in
captivity.

And if an Indians infant should be born and bread up here in England, and be
in never such a hop^ful way of coming in time to the knowledge of the truth,
yet all the time he remains unbaptiz'd, and not visibly added to your corrupt
church of England, he is belike under a worse curse, and condition then if he
were in slavery or captivity: I wonder where Christ or his disciples ever
preached such kind of Gospel.

His 21 plain Scripture-lesse proof for infant-Church membership and baptism
runs upon this disjunction, viz. Either they are in the visible Church of
Christ or in the visible kingdom of the Devil, for there is no third state,
says he, in which they are, but if they be not in Christ's visible Church they
are visibly out of it, and if they be visibly out of that visible Church then
they are visibly in Satan's Kingdom.

This is the sum and substance of what he lays down, and the basis upon
which he builds a necessity of admitting the children of the faithful into,
and reckoning upon them as in the visible Church of Christ, or else we must
(says he) say they are in the visible Kingdom of the Devil; which to say
says he is false doctrine; the rest is but amplification and augmentation
rather then Argumentation of this position; now how bent a wise body that is
not resolved to trouble himself, and fill the world with curious pryings, long
proofs, and prolix prates about matters, which the wisdom of Christ in the
word of his Testament, which was written to, for and concerning men and women,
and not infants, is pleased to be silent in, would surely have sat down
satisfied with that sober saying, which Mr. B. himself cotes out of Mr. T.
Apol. p. 66. viz. that infants are neither in the Kingdom (i.e. visible church)
of Christ, nor Satan visibly till profession.

For really so it is, and no otherwise properly, and quoad nos, who have no
warrant to take cognizance of them as in either one or in the other visibly,
but as at years they visibly appear to cleave to either, neither are these two,
viz. the visible Kingdom of Satan, and the visible Church of Christ the
adaequate dividing members of the whole world, but (excepting infants) of the
adult ones in it only, which visibly obey either Christ or Satan; neither does
Satan's visible kingdom consist of any infants visibly at all, but of such as
visibly are acted by him, even the children of disobedience, in whom he works
Ephesians. 2. 2. nor Christ's visible Church of any infants visibly at all, save
when some were inchurched and incovenanted as a type for a time, but of such
only as visibly obey him, these I say are visibly the subjects, servants,
disciples and children of each Romans 6. his servants ye are, i. e. visibly, to
whom i. e. visibly ye obey, whether etc. 1 Ioh. 3. 10. in this i. e. doing or
not doing righteousness are manifest, i. e. visibly, the children of God, and
of the dev^l so John 8.

They are visibly of their father the devil, who do the works of their father
i. e. in Gospel account; for else in the laws account they, as Abraham's seed,
were then the Churches children, howbeit I say any one that is not willing to
be wise above what is written, and to have vision of more then is visible,
would rest in this, yet since Mr. B. will put us positivly to prove a third
state, denying that there is any medium asserting that infants, if they be not in
the visible Church of Christ in their infancy, are in the visible kingdom of
the devil, which to say is false doctrine, I shall bring Mr. Baxter to stop the
mouth of Mr. Baxter and to convince him that either there is a third state, in
which believers infants are in their infancy, which is neither of these two, or
else to drive him to that Dilemma, to preach this false doctrine himself that
believers infants are in the visible kingdom of the Devil.

To this purpose I first demand of him, which of these two viz. the visible
church of Christ or the visible kingdom of the devil believers infants are
visibly in before baptism?

First as for the visible kingdom of the devil he must say they are either
visibly in it or out of it, if he say they are in it, then he himself preaches
that false doctrine, which he says is ours, and makes all infants, even of
believers members of the visible kingdom of the devil; if he say they are out,
and not in the visible kingdom of the devil, then that doctrine, which teaches
men to leave them unbaptized, and denies them to be admitted members of the
visible church of Christ till they come to age, is not guilty as he says it
is, of making them doctrinally members of the visible kingdom of the devil,
for it is but a delay indeed till they can do what is required to baptism.

As for the visible Church of Christ he must say they are either visibly in it
before baptism, or not in but out of it, if he say they are in the visible
church of Christ visibly before baptism, then they cannot be said to be (as oh
how often ore and ore again are they said to be by Mr. Bax. p. 24. 25.?) admitted
to be members, entered, listed, added, initiated into it as into Christ's
School, and first stated into it by baptism, for to be first entered into it by
baptism, and yet to be visibly in it before baptism, these two are (...)
utterly inconsistent each with other, as to be let into a room when, and while
one is already in the room is impossible, yet with Mr. B. persons are let into
the visible church after they are in it, yea they must be in it, says he,
before they may be admitted to be in it, nor will his distinction of a member
complete and incomplete p. 24. which he used before to the term disciple,
which I know he will make, help him at all here, since with himself an
incomplete member is one that has but jus ad rem, not in re, ad Ecclesiam, not
in Ecclesia a right to only, not a standing in the Church, a title to the
relative change, and not a being yet in that relative change, that he says
passes upon him by baptism.

Besides, to say the truth they are but incomplete members after baptism, whom
you baptize, since when baptized and in the church they have not present right
to other ordinances of the church, for you admit not your infant members to the
Supper: but if he say they are not visibly in the church of Christ before
baptism, but out of it, as indeed they are, then either he must say they are in
the visible Kingdom of the devil, which is false doctrine with himself to say
of believers infants, or else say they are in some third or middle state, to
the unsaying of what he said before by way of denial of such a third state,
which let him say, and we will agree with him, and such a third state there is,
which all infants are in as well as some, whether he will deny himself so as to
acknowledge it yea, or no.

His 22. plain Scripture-less proof for infant Church Membership and baptism is
this viz. That doctrine which leaves us no sound grounded hope of the
justification or salvation of any dying infant in the world, is certainly false
doctrine, but that doctrine which denies any infants to be members of the
visible Church does leave us no etc.

This argument I have spoken to sufficiently above, and thereupon might well
pass it by here, and refer Mr. B^. thither for an answer, where in answer to
the Ashford Disputants, that urge the same argument, enough to satisfy is
returned;

But finding this to be that which of all things most gravels Mr. Baxter and
makes him stick so stiffly to his plea for the baptism, and Church Membership
of infants, because unless that be owned he can find no good ground in all the
word whereupon to hope or believe that any dying infant in all the world can be
saved, which if he could find, he would find the vanity of his venting so much
concerning a necessity of baptizing, and inchurching infants, and save himself
a deal of puzzling himself about that, which the New Testament has not one
word of, and fearing lest I should be judged cowardly to slide by it, as if I
saw Mr. Ba. handled it more unanswerably then any other, and partly because Mr.
Ts. suspension of his judgment concerning the future state of any infants is
puffed at by him, and uneffectual to his satisfaction, unless he could assure
him of the salvation of some dying infants, at least of believing parents,
which if he could assure him of out of the way of their church membership and
baptism, it should satisfy him sufficiently, I perceive, to censure all other
infants to hell, and to say all those millions of poor innocents, I mean the
dying infants of other men, in respect of which these he is so pitiful to are
scarce one of a 100. are all damned for ever, with which harsh, cruel, bloody
and merciless censure of his I am much more, and more groundedly dissatisfied,
then he is about the denial of mere outward membership, and bare ordinance of
baptism to those few, on whose behalf he pleads them, and lastly hoping the
Lord may lend him some ligh: whereby to see a consistency between the non
membership and baptism of believers infants, and the salvation of the dying
infants of, not believers only, but all dying innocent infants in the world, I
shall enter on an examination of what he says to the contrary, and an
explication of what apprehension in this particular I am begotten to by the
word of truth, and though I shall decline sacerdotale delirium that common
stock of divinity, which the Clergy have treasured up in their Theological
Systems, out of which ocean of error, and dead sea of tradition the younger
Rabbis use to draw into their common place books, and store themselves with
arguments against Anab aptistical heresy, i. e. this trouble some truth, yet I
trust I shall give a good account before all the world at the Tribunal of
Christ Jesus.

In order hereunto therefore I first flatly deny the Minor of Mr. Bas. above
cited syllogism, which by another Syllogism he proves viz. They that are not so
much as seemingly or visibly in a state of salvation, of them so dying we can
have no ground of Christian hope that they shall be saved.

But they that are not so much as seemingly or visibly of the Church, are not
so much as seemingly or visibly in a state of salvation, therefore of them so
dying we can have no true ground of hope that they shall be saved.

The Major of this second syllogism, which he sets himself to prove, I freely
grant to be true.

The Minor I have many things to say to;

First, I take notice how he changes the terms from what they were in this
pro-syllogism, which, had he been minded to deal fairly, and not to
sophisticate and shuffle, I know not why he should do, and a sincere disputant
whould not have done it.

In the Minor of the former syllogism the terms were thus viz. that doctrine
that denies infants to be members of the visible church, but here he writes,
leaving out the word visible, foisting in the word seemingly and visibly to
fill up the room of it, that it might not be mist, they that are not seemingly
or visibly of the Church, whereas he ought of right to have brought in the
Minor, and conclusion thus viz. but they that are not members of the visible
Church, are not so much as seemingly or visibly in a state of salvation,
therefore of them viz. them that are not members of the visible Church, we can
have no true ground of Christian hope that they can be saved, I say he should
have expressed it visible Church in both places, else the word Church being
understood by Mr. Ba, for the invisible Church sometimes, i, e. them that are
not only seemingly sincere, and in state of salvation, but as really and truly
in state of salvation as they seem, by this variation of his from visible
Church to Church without the term visible the state of the question may be
changed: and how beit he premises this and takes it for granted that to be a
visible member of the church, and to be a member of the visible Church is all
one, saying he that denies that will show but his vanity, yet he takes it
before it is granted him from me, who am one of those vain ones, that by his
favor deny these to be all one, unless by the word Church in both places he
means the visible Church, which though I do notsay he does not, yet I say if he
do, he should by right have expressed it, or else there may be fallacy in it, for
I aver to Mr. Ba. and albeit I seem to him to speak paradoxes, and parables
through the distance of our principles, yet I hope to make it clear to his
conscience, that the visible Church does not so contain the invisible in it, as
he says it does p. 75. but that there are cases wherein persons may be both
real and visible i. e. to us seeming members of the invisible Church, or
mistical body of sincere ones, and in state of salvation, and yet not be real
members of the visible Church; or else (not to speak now of the state of
believers infants, whom you rantize, before you rantize them) let him tell me
what visible state believers themselves, whom only, and not their infants Acts
2. 41. 42. the first Gospel ministry bap^ized, were in immediately before they
baptized them? they were not visibly members, after profession of their faith,
of the visible Kingdom of the devil, and therefore at least visible and seeming
members of Christ's mistical body, and of the invisible Church, and in state of
salvation, and yet were they not members visibly of the visible Church of
Christ till (though I hold not baptism it self neither to be the immediate
formal entrance into the visible Church, yet necessarily previous to it) till I
say they were (to use Mr. Bas. own phrase by baptism admitted, and stated in
it: for to be admitted to be a member of the visible Church, and yet to be a
member of that visible Church before that admittance are utterly inconsistent
each with other, yea to enter in by baptism, and yet to be in before baptism,
beside the contradiction that is in one of these to the other, it makes your
baptism, which you call the sacrament of visible entrance, to be what you say
the supper is, i. e. a sacrament rather of continuance: to be seemingly
therefore and visibly a member, or to be a visible member of the church,
unless we mean the visible Church, (and then it ought to be so expressed by them
that hold there is an invisible) and to be a member of the visible Church are
not all one: thus having first justly faulted the Minor for its fallacious
faultring in the terms, and form of it, and varying from those of the first
syllogism and setting down the syllogism in the plain terms in which Mr.
Baxter should have done it, viz.

They that are not so much as seemingly or visibly in the state of salvation,
of them so dying we can have no true ground of Christian hope that they shall
be saved.

But they that are not members of the visible Church, are not so much as
seemingly or visibly in a state of salvation, therefore of them that are not
members of the visible Church, so dying we can have no true ground of Christian
hope that they shall be saved.

In the second place I fault the Minor of this argument as most false and
unsound in the matter of it, and therefore I lay down this for truth, which is
directly opposite to it viz. that they that are not members of the visible
Church may be seemingly and visibly in a state of salvation, and so
consequently that of them that are not members of the visible Church so dying,
we may have true ground of Christian hope that they shall be saved.

These two positions with the consequence thereof are so contradictory each to
other, that if this latter be truth then the former universally understood i.
e. of all that are not of the visible Church, as it must be, or else it serves
not Mr. Bas purpose, must needs be false: whereupon I need do no more toward
the disproof of his then to prove my own, in order to which I shall premise
what the visible Church is, and then examine whether it be not possible for
some persons as Mr. Ba. it seems thinks it is not, to be seemingly and visibly
in a state of salvation, and yet not be members of the visible Church.

The true visible Church now in the times of the Gospel, and so only it
concerns our purpose to consider of it, is all those several particular
visible assemblies, and societies of persons in the world, or visible disciples
collectively taken, which in all places and ages since Christ past, present and
to come, being first separated, or called out of the world to personal
prosession of repentance from dead works, and faith toward God, of remission
of sins by Christ Jesus, of resurrection of the dead, and the eternal
judgment, and baptized in water in the name of Christ for remission of sins,
and together with imposition of hands, prayed for, that they may receive the
holy spirit of promise, do afterward continue steadfastly in the doctrine of the
Apostles, and in fellowship, and in breaking of bread and prayers: all the true
universal visible Church that I know of, if you will needs have an universal
visible is that which does exist in these particular visible societies, and is
neither narrower nor wider then these particulars.

Such was the visible Gospel Church in the primitive times, and the same and no
other then that which was the visible Church then is the visible Church now,
and in all times of the Gospel, wherein it is at all: the visible Church was
that which did consist and was made up of all the particular Churches that then
were viz. Rome, Corinth, and all the rest, which were societies and assemblies
of persons thus called, gathered and built up an house unto God, upon the
foundation of the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, as the six above
named are called Heb. 6. 1. as they are also called Ephesians. 2. 20. the foundation
of the Prophets and Apostles i. e. that form of doctrine as it is called Romans 6.
17. which every beginner in Christ did own and obey, and which obeying he was
fit matter for the visible church, and was after by mutual consent of the party
offering himself, and their suffering him to join with them Acts 10. 26.
formally added, actually admitted to visible fellowship with them in breaking
of bread and prayers, for that with freedom on both sides such persons as had
thus far been taught, and had learned these principles, this a b c, and owned
it i. e. professing to believe what of it was matter of faith, and visibly
practicing what of it was practical, were visible disciples, new born babes
Heb. 5. 13. and such babes being baptized, and, having laid this foundation as
to fellowship, were then accepted thereunto that they might grow up to
perfection, in order whereunto unto this visible church Ephesians. 3. 21. which
though it exists in many several particular bodies, each of which is
independent on any other head then Christ, and empowered from him to determine
all its own affairs ultimately within it self, yet since it endeavors to keep
the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, is said to be but one body,
because of one spirit, one call, one hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and father of them all, who is above all and through all, and in them
all, God has given officers gifted for its service, viz. some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
work of the Ministry, for the edifying of this visible body of Christ, till we
all come to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of
christ Ephesians. 4. 3. 4. 5. 6. 11. 12. 13.

As for that Catholic visible church, I mean that voluminous body or part of
the world commonly called Christ'ndome, which was once all as it were of one
language and one speech, and is now rather three in one or a Triune treader of
the truch viz. Papal, Prelaticall, Presbyterial, yet to this day exists in
those particular visibles as were never thus separated, and called, and
constituted upon the foundation of the doctrine of the Apostles, but
conglomerated by the lump by the Apostle Peter's supposed successor into
National, Provincial, Parochial, (to call a spade a spade) I can call it no
other then the C C Catholic Beast, that bears now in three parts a B B
Babilonish C C Clergy Rev. 16. 19. i. e. indeed the very C C Catholic whore
Rev. 17.

As for particular persons, though professing to be believers that yet are not
baptized, and added to some such particular visible society or church, but are
yet abiding in the capacity only of single though visible Saints, till they are
both baptizd and added as members to walk in fellowship with some particular
assembly, and congregation in breaking bread and prayers, as every such a one
as supposes himself to be a saint ought to be, or else his saintship may be
much suspected if he will not, they are no visible members of the visible
church but only fitter materials then they were before their faith, and in a
nearer right to be both baptized and admitted to be members, then when they had
none: they are better matter for the visible church, but not yet formally of
the visible church, have jus ad re^, not in re, ad ecclesiam, not in Ecclesia a
right to the church, but not actual standing in it till entered and admitted.

Nor yet are they immediate matter for, or in immediate right to membership,
though believing, till baptized, but materia remota, and ^n ^re quodam
conditionali, and remoto, a certain remote matter, though nearer then when
merely men, and in a conditional and remote right.

For as believers are the immediate matter for, or in immediate right to
baptism, so baptized believers after laying on of hands in prayer are the
immediate subject, i. e. in immediate right to be admitted, yet neither are
baptized believers actual members till admitted, the formality and most
immediate entrance, and way of becoming a visible member of a particular
visible Church, and so consequently of the general visible (if I may so call
it) which has its existence in all the particular churches, which are the
immediate matter, of which that is made up, being not simply the act of
baptism, but the act of joining our selves after it Act 9. 26. and the
constitutive form of a visible Church is not their being all baptized, but
their free falling into fellowship with each other, and though we are said to
be all baptized into one body, it is an expression of the necessity only of every
ones being baptized in order to a being in the visible Church, for none has
right to be of the visible body unbaptized, but though the baptized have
immediate right to be of the body, yet are they not merely of it because
baptized, till added to it, and as one cannot be said to be actually under
baptism, from an immediate right to it by faith, till he have submitted, so
neither can we be said to be actually in the body from our immediate right to
it by baptism, till we are admitted.

Self condemned sinners have a right to believe in Christ, believers a right to
baptism, baptized believers a right to the spirit of promise and to have hands
laid on with prayer, that they may receive it according to the promise Asts 2.
Acts 8. Acts 19. such as these to fellowship in the visible Church, yet not in
fellowship till, assaying to join themselves, they are accepted, and yet in a
visible state of salvation too both before baptized, as the thief, and after
baptized before added to the, Church visible, as the Eunuch, who both were
seemingly members of the invisible Church, and yet then when converted and
baptized, neither one nor the other as yet actual members of the visible:
stones though never so unhewn and ragged are remote matter, hewn and polished
stones immediate and fit matter for a building, yet not a building, till built
together; many sheep are fit matter to make a flock, yet not formally a flock
till they come near together.

Christ's visible church is Christ's flock, Gods house, Temple, building, several
sheep, and single disciples, that hear his voice, believe in him, and are
baptized into his name for remission of sins, are pecious materials, and in
potentia proxima thereunto, yet be they never so many of them, not visibly,
actually, nor formally a flock, an house, a Temple, a Building, his visible
Church longer then imbodyed into fellowships, nor till fitly framed together
they are builded an habitation of God through the spirit, Ephesians. 2. 20. 21. 22.
any more then many sheep that never came near each other, are a flock, and a
multitude of fitted and squared stones, lying a long way a sunder each from
other make a building.

Mr. B. shall be no Champion of my choosing to manage the matter against the
non-churchers of these times, for all he flourishes his sword so against them
at the end of his book, if he plead the cause of them so, that sit down
satisfied in single fellowship between God and themselves only, living up with
him in the spirit, contenting themselves to believe only, and renouncing all
ordinances, forsaking the assembling of themselves together, and all fellowship
in breaking of bread and prayers; if he grant the denomination of the true
visible Church to such as these, as well as to those that continue steadfast in
the Apostles doctrine, and in fellowship in breaking bread and prayers: yet Mr.
B. does not yet agree with me in this that the particular assemblies
collectively taken are the only visible Church, for indeed he is aware that it
overturns all his visibilities from the bottom, and lays this foundation of no
salvation for infants without the visible Church, on which he frames his
present Argument, flat on the ground, to allow the bounds of the visible Church
to be no broader then all the particular visible societies that are actually
baptized, and in formal fellowship in breaking bread and prayers, so as to say
he is no member of the visible Church, that is not actually entered, and
solemnly stated in some particular congregation or other; therefore being
politic, he premises this among the rest.

3. You must understand, says he (but a man may understand a little better if
he will) that to be a member of the visible Church is not to be a Member of any
particular, or politic body or society.

Nay more to make his own matter good, and that he may find out a way of his
own, whereby to hope well of all the infants of believers before baptism, that
they may be saved (for let all other dying infants damn for him, he cares not
for harboring any hope of them) and finding no way but one, whereby to help
himself to any hope of those, i. e. by feigning them to be of the visible
church, he fetches the visible church so far, that he makes it larger then the
number of visible baptized ones, and holds all believers infants to be in the
visible Church from the womb, and though in the last page but two of his book
he disputes against twice entering into the visible body; he feigns them to
enter first into the visible church, when they first enter into the world,
besides and before their second first entrance into the visible Church by
baptism: I wonder whether he hold those believers infants to be of the visible
Church or no, that were once alive yet die again in the womb?

But for all these flim-flames, Mr. Ba. will once know I hope that the true
visible church is no other, then all those particular political assemblies, in
which baptized believers hold fellowship together, and that to be a member of
the visible church is to be a member of some political society (or else how can
such be ruld, admonisht, complained on to the church as Mat. 18. and
excommunicated, if need be, in case of obstinacy, if under no Ecclesiastical
Government?) and yet to hope well of the salvation of all infants that die in
infancy too without either baptism or visible membership in those visible
societies.

And if he will not agree with me about it, that the visible church is all the
visible assemblies of Christians only, will he agree with Dr. Featley, who
defines the true visible church to be where the word is truly taught, and the
sacraments duly administered? where therefore neither word is taught, nor
sacraments at all administered, as to unbaptized infants I judge they are not,
nor baptized infants neither, there is no visible church;

Again, the universal visible church, that is says he, all the assemblies of
Christians in the world, the visible church and all the assemblies are
adaequate with him, at least therefore unbaptized infants cannot be of it, for
they were never entered into the assemblies; but if Mr. Ba. will agree with
neither of us, we shall persuade him I hope to agree in this with Mr. Ba. for
nowbeit Mr. Ba. will needs reckon upon the very unbaptized infants of believers
as not in right to the visible church only, but of it, in it, visible members
of it as as soon as born (for let him study his own book, how often does he beat
upon that, saying, there is but two states for them to be in, or members of the
visible kingdom of the devil, or the visible church of Christ, but believers
infants before baptism are not in the first, therefore in the visible church of
Christ?) though I say he speak of them as in the visible church before baptism,
as not knowing else how to hope their salvation, if they die without it, yet if
any man living do deny infants, or any other to be of or in the visible church
before or without baptism, Mr. Ba. denies it, with whom how often is it expressed
that baptism is the first visible entrance into it?

Yea (to say nothing of his own definition of the visible church, p. 75. to be
such as were baptized and continued together in fellowship in breaking broad
and prayers, which ought to conclude the whole church so, defined unless he
have defined it by the halves) in his plea for the continuance of baptism
against the seekers p. 342. 343. he says so, and says moreover that we must
not admit any to be of the body without it, that it is the appointed ordinary
way of ingrafting all into the body that are ingrafted, and p. 24. 25. he says
baptism still is to be at and not after persons are stated in the Church, at
and not after our admission, at and not after our igrafting and entrance into
the visible Church, making baptism and our first being in or of the visible
church so simultaneous, that we may not, must not be supposed to be in, to be
of, to be visibly members of the visible church before baptism, which if it be
true, as indeed it is, that none can be counted to the body, as one of it,
though in never such right to it first, before baptism ordinarily, at least as
he pleads, how does all this hang together, and agree with what he pleads here
and in the foregoing argument p. 71. where he says it is not the denial of
baptism directly that leaves infants in the visible kingdom of the devil? I
would every one, and Mr. Ba. himself would consider this grant of Mr. Ba. for
then, what ever necessity there may be of supposing them, as he does, to be
visible members in infancy, and even before they are baptized, we can suppose
them in as good a state as he, yet at least there will be no need to baptize
them, whereby to put us into more hopes of their salvation if they die in
infancy, for if I can hope the salvation of some believers infants that die
without Baptism, upon that account, what ere it is, I may as well hope the
salvation of them all dying without Baptism, and so save the frivolous pains of
baptizing infants at all, he goes on thus, it is true says he, that many
unbaptized are in the Kingdom of Christ, meaning his visible church, but no
man who is known to be out of Christ's visible church ordinarily can be out of
Satan's visible kingdom: I say how do these things square? hear what he says,
no entering into or being in the visible Church, but by baptism, and yet many
unbaptized are in the visible Church viz. all believers infants before baptism
viz. from the womb.

Either Mr. Ba. must hold two first entrances into the visible church viz.
natural birth and baptism, or else he must hold that baptism is not the first
entrance, or else that believers infants are not entered, and if not so, not in
the visible church before baptism, whether they have right to be so or no,
which is another question; if he choose to say the first, then he contradicts
what he says of entering the visible Church p. 343. if the 2d. he contradicts
all he says of baptisms being the only entrance; if the 3d. that believers
infants are not entered, and so not in not visibly of the visible church before
baptism, then of these two things he must say one viz. either that all the
infants of believers that die before their visible entrance into the visible
church by baptism are damned without hope, which he neither will nor can say,
or else say that there is hope of dying infants salvation, and that they may be
seemingly and visibly in a state of salvation, and yet not be visible members
of the visible church, and then what need any further witness or disproof? for
heel confute the Minor out of his own mouth, which I am to disprove, and save
me the labor.

For if they may be in a visible state of salvation and yet not be visibly in
the visible church; then it is so, and there is an end.

If to all this he says that he means not more, but that believers infants
before baptism have right to be baptized, and to be of it, and to deny them
that right to it denies them salvation, I deny that infants dying without right
to be of the visible Gospel church denies them to be in state of salvation, and
shall show the contrary, nevertheless Mr. Ba. might have spoken more properly,
and plainly, then to call a right to visible membership by the name of visible
membership it self, as he often, yea all along does, therefore we might wish
him to mend his Minor before we meddle with it, and also he must confess to
the contradiction of himself, that there is a third state between the visible
church of Christ, and the visible kingdom of the devil, in which infants must
be supposed to be by himself viz a right to the church, but not a present
standing in it, which kind of right and middle state I acknowledge unbaptized
believers to have, but as for infants, though they are in a present visible
state of, and right to salvation as well as they, unless living longer they
reject Gods grace afresh which dying infants cannot do, and so not in the
visible Kingdom of the devil, yet are they neither in, nor yet in immediate
right to the visible Church as men and women of years not yet baptized and yet
believing are, but in medio abnegationis together with them, these things
premised, I come now to the disproof of his Minor, in which i will take him in a
fairer sense for himself then he expresses himself in, and yet make no question
but to disprove it, in contradistinction unto which I say down my self thus;

Viz. That not only some men may be de facto no members, but all infants de
jure in no right to membership in the visible Church of Christ under the
Gospel, and yet both be possibly in state of salvation.

Now how far forth de facto persons may be out of an actual standing in the
visible church, and yet in a visible state of salvation, i will not meddle much to
examine, because the question is (though Mr. B. does not so fairly express it,
but I take it in the way that is most to his advantage) whether denial of the
jus this imediate right to membership excludes them not from salvation? yet
thus much I shall say to that viz. if persons must be seemingly, and visibly in
state of salvation, before they are to be admitted members, they may be as yet
no members of the visible church de facto, and yet in a visible state of
salvation.

This is evident not only by the singular case of the theif, who never was
actually admitted into the visible Church, nor so much as baptized at all for
want of opportunity, and yet in a visible state of salvation, but also if we
instance in all others that ever we read were baptized in the primitive times,
who were first seemingly and visibly in a state of repentance, faith and
disposition to obey Christ in all things, and therefore in a visible state of
salvation Heb. 5. 9. and then after this added to the church Mvt. 3. Mark. 16.
16. Act. 2. Act. 8. Act. 16. Act. 18. for a certain remote, and conditional
right all persons have; thus de facto: and now de jure that the denial of
persons present and immediate right to membership in the visible church does
not deny them universally to be in a visible state of salvation is evident also
thus, viz.

If some persons both men and infants may appear to us to be in state of
salvation, and yet not in immediate present right to be joined to the visible
Church, then the denial of persons present and immediate right to membership in
the visible Church does not universally deny them to be in a visible state of
salvation.

But some persons, yea both men and infants, may appear to us to be in a state
of salvation, and yet at the same time not be in so much as immediate and
present right to be joined to the visible Church.

Therefore.

The first proposition is most clear, the second I shall make as clear.

First, briefly concerning men,

Secondly, More largely concerning infants, because the question mainly is of
them.

Concerning men I instance in all the believers in the primitive times, of whom
comparing Scripture with Scripture Act. 2. Act. 8. Act. 19. Heb. 6. 1. 2. its
most evident they had not an absolute immediate right to visible fellowship in
the visible church, though converted to faith and repentance by the word, and
so in a visible state of salvation, as the thief upon the cross, so far as
with him visibly repenting and believing, till such time as they were admitted
after baptism, and ^aying on of hands with prayer, and of single disciples, as
they were before, they were added, and admitted in to the visible body, till of
single living precious stones, as they were before by their precious faith,
they were built up visibly into a house, the whole building the whole body was
fitly framed together, fitly joined together, as well as shaped before,
therefore they that were not actually added and joined were not of the body
Ephe. 2. 21. the 4. 16. if the whole were compacted by joints, and bands, then
all the parts were actually added and joined, and those, that were not joined,
were no part of the whole so Col. 2. 19. kn^ together.

Mr. Bax. argues (...) or the Cart before the horse, they must be first
supposed to be visibly members in the visible Church, before to be visibly in a
state of salvation, but it is undeniably apparent they must have visible right
to salvation, and that by faith too, before visible right to membership in the
visible church.

Mr. Bax. supposes persons must be first supposed to be members of the visible
Church a priori before they can be warrantably supposed to be of the invisible,
i. e. to be such as shall be saved, for if a person be of the invisible Church
he must be thought to be of the visible much more, for the visible contains
the invisible in it says he p. 72. and ordinarily we may not judge any to be
of the invisible Church, he means in real state of salvation, who are not,
meaning first, of the visible p. 72.

But now I say and suppose the clean contrary viz. that persons must be first
supposed to be of the invisible Church a priori before they can be warrantably
supposed to be of, yea or so much as to have right to be of the visible; who
backs Mr. Ba. in his sinister supposition I weig^ not, let him choose his second
if he will, i will choose Mr. Bax. himself to back me, and to be witness to the
truth of mine, whose words are altogether the same with mine p 73. viz. if we
were fully certain by his own external discourses that any man were not of the
invisible Church, that man should not be taken to be of the visible. In order
of time therefore persons were to seem to be members of the invisible church,
and were visibly in a state of salvation first before they could have any right
at all so much as to be baptized, which with Mr. Ba. himself was the first
entrance into membership in the visible church, but with me is not so much as
an immediate entrance into it, but that which is necessarily to go before it,
therefore persons may be seemingly in a state of salvation, and not yet in
present right to membership in the visible Church, much less actually and
visibly in it.

And now concerning infants, of whom Mr. Ba. asserts that they must be members
of the visible Church, or else cannot be seemingly or visibly in a state of
salvation, upon such slender grounds as these, he concludes it to be clear viz.

First, because it is the body that Christ is the Savior of, and his people
that he redeemeth from their sins, and his sheep to whom he gives eternal life,
and those that sleep in Jesus that God will bring with him, and the dead in
Christ that shall rise to salvation, and those that die in the Lord that rest
from their labors and the Church that Christ will present pure and unspo^ed,
all which places I appeal to Mr. Bas. conscience whether they speak not of the
mystical body, and invisible church of Christ, to which all and only they
square, and are adaequate, and not to the visible Church, which he was to speak
to, or else speaks nothing to the purpose, to all which visible church, and to
only which these things agree not, for neither all those that are of the
visible churchare saved, nor only those of the visible Church saved, witness
many infants of believers whom Mr. Ba. dares not say are damned, some never
living to enter the visible Church so far as to baptism, and some, once
alive, coming dead out of the womb, which he is blind that ever saw to be in
the visible church, so that he sits here beside the sa^dle.

Secondly, and Thirdly, because there is no divine revelation for the salvation
of any without the visible Church, that yields good ground of Christian faith,
or hope that any such shall be saved, as notwithstanding he says there ^s not,
yet I shall show there is by and by.

Fourthly, because it is said Acts the 2. 47. that God added to the visible
church daily such as should be saved, which though he did, yet it was not all nor
only such, but only such men and women, not such infants, as should be saved.

Concerning infants in proof of the proposition above viz. that some infants
may be in visible State of salvation, and yet not be in, nor yet in present
right to membership in the visible Church,

I argue thus downrightly.

First, if all infants are in infancy in a visible state of salvation, and no
infants are members, or in any right to be members in their infancy of the
visible church under the Gospel, then some infants may in infancy be in a
visible state of salvation, and yet not be in, nor yet in present right to
membership in the visible church,

But all infants etc. and no infants etc.

Ergo, some infants ut supra.

The first proposition is most undeniably clear, the Minor has two parts,
which I shall prove successively one ofter another, and then I have done with
this argument of Mr. Ba. I Will prove the last first, and the first last, and here
I dare-say I might easily muster up scores, if not a century of solid arguments
toward the fuller clearing of it, that no babes now, but the new born babes
spoken of 1 Pet. 2. 2. 3. 4. 5. i. e. at least in appearance spiritually born
babes, such as those 1 John 1. 1 Cor. 3. 1. Heb. 5. 13. are to be baptized, and
built upon the foundation i. e. doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, a
spiritual house, a holy templ^ i. e. visible church unto Jesus Christ now in
these days of the Gospel^, and that no man's fleshly seed or natural posterity,
no not Abraham's own barely on such an account as being his bodily seed, much
less any believing Gentiles, who has not m^re privilege then his seed I
think, but only the (at least seeming) spiritual seed of Abraham i. e. those
that are children of God, and Abraham's too by faith in Christ Gal. 3. 26. 28.
as no infant is, have right to dwell in this family, the babes, the seed of
Abraham circumcised in heart, the children of the heavenly promise pointed at,
and typed out by the Jews babes, and that circumcised seed of Isaac, and those
children of that earthly promise of the old Canaan, these are the true sons of
the free woman, the Gospel visible church, before whom the bond woman, and her
son i. e. Abraham's mere fleshly seed, though by Isaac, are cast out, that they
may dwell alone in the house, as Hagar and her son were cast out of Abraham's
house of old before Isaac and his seed, that they might dwell alone, for look
how Ishmael and his seed stood in reference to Isaac and his, that were the
children by promise of the earthly Canaan viz. but servants that must not abide
the house longer, when the other came in to stand, so Isaac the type, and his
seed themselves, in reference to Christ the true Isaac and his seed i. e.
believers viz. as servants that must be packing, when he comes in, and not
abide in the house together with him see John 8. Galatians 4. ult.

But that were to begin the work again, which I have finished above, where I
have given a touch of these things, and but a touch in comparison of what might
be said; And of multiplying Arguments, and making many books there is no end.

Therefore i will hint but a few, among which this shall be the first.

If the standing upon the root Abraham, i. e. the family or visible Church of
God since Christ be by faith in the person only so standing, and not by faith
in the parent, as of old, then infants cannot now stand therein.

But so it is,

Therefore the other.

The consequence is cleared by the consideration of the incapacity of infants
to believe, faith being assent to something propounded to us, faith coming by
hearing, and hearing by the word Romans 10. so that who so thinks it possible for
infants (...) credere when it is said how can they believe in him of whom they
have not heard, is wretchedly inconsiderate.

The Minor is evident out of Romans 11. where it is said the very natural
branches of Abraham's body, that did on that account merely as the fleshly seed
of that father of the faithful stand in the olive tree, the visible Church,
before time, yet now could stand no longer on that old account, why? were they
not the seed of Abraham still, that stood without faith in the old visible
Church to the very end of it? yes, but they believed not in their own persons,
therefore could not stand in this house, but were cast out of their own olive,
their own father Abraham's family, i. e. the visible Church, now Christ came in,
because of unbelief, and thou (says Paul to the Gentile) stand, how? by
fleshly descent? no, that standing is gone from such as come of Abraham's
himself, therefore is not to thee, nor to thine, but by faith, i. e. personal,
and not parentall.

A Second this,

If all they that are baptized into one visible body under the Gospel are made
in the supper to drink into one spirit, then infants, who cannot drink into one
spirit with the body, secundum te may not be baptized into that visible body.

But this is true 1 Cor. 12. 13.

Therefore that.

So Col. 2. 19. All the body is knit together, and by joints, and bands has
nourishment ministered, and increases by that which every joint, and member
supplieth Ephesians. 4. 16.

But infants are not capable to have Spiritual nourishment Minstired, and to
grow in grace, as all the body ought to do at least, and this in the use of the
Supper.

If you say they are capable of spiritual nourishment, I say as capable I think
as of the spiritual birth, for where there is a birth there is a growth, but then
me thinks they should be as capable of the supper, which is the Sacrament of
spiritual nourishment, being capable of that, as being capable of spiritual
birth, they are of baptism the outward Sacrament of the same.

But Mr. Bax. denies that page 114. 115. among other reasons for this, because
though capable to be washed, yet not to eat bread, and drink wine in their
first infancy.

Oh strange! they may have it then as they can eat and drink.

A third is this,

If no infants were baptized and added to the first Gospel visible Church,
then surely they had no right so to be, for the Apostles would not do them that
wrong as not to add them that had right,

But this is true, Therefore that.

The Minor is plain out of Acts 2. where to the 120. men and women that without
infants continued in fellowship Acts 1. there were added 3000. more in one day,
and not one infant among them, but as many only as gladly received the word,
nor more nor less (for else Luke couzens us in his history) and continued
after their baptism in fellowship in breaking bread and prayers, which no
infants did, and yet it is well nigh infallible, that those 3000 had some
infants belonging to some of them, which would have been added with their
parents, if the promise is to you, and to your children and them a far off,
even as many as the Lord shall call would bear the sense divines draws it to.

Yea Master Cotton himself conceives that no infants were baptized at that
time, and when else either these or any other were, neither I, nor any one else
ever found, since they began to read Christ's Testament with their eyes open.

Yea Peter commanded no more to be baptized but the same persons whom he speaks
to also to repent, which me thinks he should have done, saying be baptized
every one of you, and baptize your children also, if any such thing had been
intended, and Christians infants were to have been separated out of the world,
and called to be saints, and baptized, as Mr. B. believes they are to be, but
not I.

For what says Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, chapter 1. I suppose he
wrote not to infants, yet to all the called Saints, to all that be in Rome
called to be saints.

So in 1 Cor. 14. the 23. If the whole Church come together, and all speak with
tongues, and all Prophe-y.

So 26. Every one of you has a Psalm.

So 31. Ye may all prophecy one by ons that all may be edi^yed.

He writes, and so surely he seems to me to do all his Epistles, to the whole
church, and speaks to the whole body, yet I cannot conceive that to any
infants, who are incapable to be edifyed and comforted.

Yea 1 Cor. 12. 25. 16. The Members of the visible body of Christ ought to have
the same care one for another, so that if one Member suffer all the Members
suffer with it, if one be honored all rejoice with it.

This cannot infants do,

Therefore surely are not of this visible body of Christ.

Another Argument which Master Baxter himself mentions, and slights, as simply
supposing that it excludes infants from salvation, is that of Mr. Tombs viz.

That the only way now appointed by Christ to make visible church Members is
by teaching the persons themselves, and that none else must be Members of the
visible Church, but those that have learnt as infants have not.

This Argument is of great weight, and receives as trifling an answer from Mr.
B ^or says he, then it will much more follow that they are not, or at least
that we may not judge them to be of the invisible Church at all i. e. to be
such as so dying shall be saved.

The contrary to which, and inconsequence of which I have showed above and
shall show more by and by.

Secondly (says he) If they may argue from Matthew. the 28. 20. that none, but
those that are taught are true Disciples, and are to be baptized, why may they
not as well Argue from Mark the 16. chap. 16. verse, who ever believes not
shall be damned, that all infants are certainly damned?

To which I say first I am one, who argues from Ma^h 28. that none but such as
are taught are disciples, and to be baptized, for (...) is teach ye, or make ye
disciples by teaching, or cause to learn, then which I testify to Mr. B^. face
that there is no other way, whereby we can make disciples of Christ, persons
being properly called disciples of disco (...) of (...) to learn, and I blush
at that bald stuff, wherewith he strives, and streines his wits till he becomes
ridiculous, to make the denomination of disciple appear to be due to infants p.
23. as namely,

Because they are taken into Christ's school and Kingdom, i. e. his visible
Church, [whereas it is before persons are taken into this School that they are
disciples therefore not by it] also because they are not less docible then
some bruits [as if some brutes are so docible as to deserve the name of
disciples of Christ, therefore much more infants] because Mothers, Nurses teach
them by gesture, action and voice partly, and dishearten, and take them off
from vices, and if not at first to know Christ, yet if any of the duty of a
rational creature it is somewhat [somewhat indeed but nothing to purpose, for
as if mothers could take them off from vices in such mere nonage wherein you
baptize them, as or if they could learn them any of a natural creatures duty so
young as at eight or nine days old, as if to learn the duty of a rational
creature, which many a man learns, but no infants, could denominate disciples
of Christ] because Christ can teach them immediately by his spirit if they can
learn nothing of their parents by action, and voice] [from which Christ can
teach them to denominate believers infants disciples of Christ, before we have
any evidence that he does teach them any more then other infants, that must be
no disciples, when Christ can teach these as well as those I cannot conceive
the foppery of it it is so great] because when a Philosopher was hired to teach
a man, and his children those were children disciples of that Philosopher [as
if ever any wise man did hire another wise man to teach him and his nine days
old infants] because infants can so quickly learn to know father and mother and
what they mean in their speeches and actions [as if so quickly as you baptize
them, and lastly as if this will be an accurate account for baptizing of
infants, and accepted as an answer of Christ's commission, who there bids us
teach or make persons disciples to plead th^s, viz. Lord we could not teach
infants, nor make them thy disciples by teaching, yet seeing they could quickly
learn to know father and mother, we supposed upon this, and several such like
reasons, that the name disciple of Christ was their due, and so that it was our
duty to baptize them.]

Moreover Adhominem, as he says of the word holy p. 82. So I of the term
disciple, whose constant meaning is one that has learnt as Mat. 11. 29. (...)
so John 6. 46. (...) every one that has learned, we shall have better defense
before the Judgment seat of Christ for taking the term disciple in that sense
as the Scripture uses it in scores of times viz. for persons learnt or taught
then they that take it for indocible infants, a sense the Scripture never uses
it in at all, but a hundred times otherwise, to say nothing of John 8. 31. Luke
14. 26. 33. where Christ says if we do, what (I am sure) infants do not we
are, and if we do not what infants cannot do, we cannot be his disciples.

Secondly, as (...) is teach them i. e. the Gospel, so none are here bid to be
baptized, but the very same individual persons, that are bid also to be taught:
first baptizing them, and after teaching them again, whom? those persons in the
Nations whom they have taught only, and not their infants; for we may as well
say the men that they never taught, as them, since Christ has in precepto
conjoined teaching, or our discipling and baptizing together, and infants
cannot by our teaching of them be discipled visibly.

The argument in its true form is this viz.

What Christ has conjoined i. e. in his commission for baptizing that man must
not separate, i. e. in his practice.

But Christ has conjoined our discipling persons and baptizing them in his
commission, for baptizing, as a standing course to the end of the world as Mat.
28. 19. 200. shows.

Erg no man must separate these two in his practice.

If Dr. Featley were alive to answer this he would happily say it is no Topical,
but a Sophistical Syllogism, for when A. R. makes much what the like from Mar.
16. 16. viz.

What God has joined together no man ought to separate,

But faith and baptism God has joined together Acts 8. 37.

Ergo faith and baptism none ought to separate.

He says there is a double falacy in it viz. homonimiae, or ambiguity in the
premises i, e. in the terms joined together, for it may be meant says he,
either in precepto, and that no man denies, or insubejcto the subject i. e. so
as to say that all that are baptized have faith, and none have faith but the
baptized, and in this sense it is apparently false says he, whereupon to
prevent Dr. Featleys followers from charging the above syllogism with that
fallacy* I have expressed in what sense I mean it, viz. in precepto, in which
sense the premises are granted to be true by the Dr. himself, and therefore I
know no^ why they should be denied by Mr. Ba. or any else, and then the
co^lusion must be true: but says Dr. Feat. there is a fallacy called ignoratio
elench^ in the conclusion i. e. it concludes not the thing in question, but
that which is not denied by us, for they that are for baptizing of infants, do
not separate faith and baptism, for they baptize children into their fathers
faith says he;

Secondly they believe that infants of believers receive some hidden grace of
faith in time of their baptizing, his followers say before baptism p. 3. of
their pamphlet (oh how contrary are they each to other) therefore are to be
baptized; but Mr. Ba. will say none of all this I hope, for he is against
Baptismal regeneration, nor will he charge the syllogism with sophistry I hope,
but deny either the Major, or the Minor, either of which if he do, he answers
his own grand argument against the seekers p. 341, where word for word (saving
a term or two put in here for explication) this very syllogism is his own, or
else he will grant both these, and consequently the conclusion to be true, and
then why will he dispense baptism to persons i. e. infants, before they so much
as seem to believe?

But it may be that which is a good syllogism, when used by himself, will be
mere sophism with him too when urged by us:

Secondly the reason why we may not argue that all infants are damned from Mark
16. 16. though they believe not, is this viz. because that place speaks of
persons at years only, to whom the Gospel is preached, and not of infants,
that are not capable to believe.

But then says Mr. Ba. the same may be answered to the argument from Mat. 28.
against infants being disciples, and to be baptized.

To whom I reply thus.

First, if he says (as we of Mark 16. 16.) of Mat. 28. 20. viz. that go teach
all nations baptizing them, is meant of men at years only, and not of infants,
then he grants as much as we desire, and confesses that Christ, in his
commission to teach and baptize the nations, do^s not mean discipling and
baptizing infants, but men, and if the commission to baptize extend not to
infants, as the subject, then what warrant to baptize them?

Secondly if that place be meant of men only, and not of infants, then Mr. Ba.
was well busied the while, when he brings that very place in the very front of
his plain Scripture proofs, for his infant membership and baptism, its ill
stumbling at the very threshold.

But I shall not multiply, nor improve as Mr. Ba. has done to the utmost, but
give one argument more against infant membership, and so come to the other
member viz.

If all that can be said in proof of the visible Church Membership of infants
may be disproved as weak, and inconsequent utterly to that purpose, then sure
there is enough, if one would stand upon it, to be brought against it.

But all that is said by Mr. Ba. in his two dozen of arguments, who improves
himself to the utmost to say as much as can be said in proof of the visible
Church membership of infants, is well nigh already, and will be altogether by
and by disproved as weak and inconsequent.

Ergo there must needs be enough against it: for contradictoriorum uno negato
statuitur, probatur alterum.

If all, that can be said on one side to the proof of this that infants ought
to be members of the visible Church, will not avail to evince that to be the
truth, then that infants ought not to be members of the visible Church of
Christ is a thing will prove it self well enough.

And so I have done with one member of my proposition, that I may say a little
also to the other, which is this viz.

Though no infants have right in infancy to be baptized and joined to the
visihle Church, as I have already proved, yet all infants in their infancy are
in a visible state of salvation.

Mr. Ba. finds out or rather fancies to himself certain grounds whereupon to
hope, that some dying infants are saved viz. some of the dying infants of the
faithful, as in opposition to all the dying infants of the wicked, I say some
of them, for he dares not say p. 78. that his own grounds yield a certainty,
though a probability, of the salvation of all such neither, so does he narrow
up the grace of God to that innocent age of infancy, for all he would seem so
merciful as to plead its cause against those cruel conceits which he conceives
are conceived of it amongst us, yet he finds no good ground whereupon to hope
the salvation of the dying infant of any godly man, but the same on which he
conceives them of nececessity to that salvation to have also a right to
membership in the visible Church, but such a necessary dependence of them each
on other, that suppose one to be no member, at least in no visible right to
membership in the visible Church, of that person, so dying, there can be
harbored no hope at all of his salvation: but what if I can make it good from
one of those very grounds of Mr. Baxters own bringing that there is a ground to
hope the salvation of one such dying infant, as of whom it is most palpably
evident, that it was neither actually a member of the visible Church before it
died, nor so much as in any visible right to membership in the visible Church
if it had lived? Mr. Ba. will then I hope let go his wretched conceit of a
necessity of dying infants membership in order to our having hopes of their
salvation.

And in order to the making good of this, I instance in the very same child,
which himself brings in as his fifth ground page 77. and alludes to, as his
example of the contrary viz. the child that David had by Bathsheba, while she
was yet the wife Uriah, of whom I testify the very same that Mr. Bax. does
viz. that David's comforting himself concerning his dead child, because he
should go to the child, but the child not return to him, was an evident
argument that David was confident that that child of his should not be damned,
and yet he could not hope so upon any such account as his child's dying a member
of the visible Church, for the child never lived so much as to the 8th day, nor
to be circumcised, and thereby entered into the visible Church, for its plain 2 Samuel 12. 18. that it died on the 7th. and if Mr. Ba. say it was a member de
jure, though not de facto i. e. in a right to have been a member had it lived,
I deny that with as much confidence as the other, for a bastard was not to be
admitted into the congregation of the Lord unto the tenth generation, and its
evident that that child was a bastard.

I conclude therefore contrary to that round Mr. Ba. runs about in like a horse
in a mill, making a necessary concatenation between being in visible right to
Church Membership, and in a visible state of salvation, proving the one by the
other, concluding sometimes, that infants of believers are children of the
Gospel promise, and so visibly in a state of salvation, and therefore they must
be baptized and in churcht, or else they could not, and others may not,
sometimes that infants of believers are in visible right to be admitted into
the visible Church, and therefore we may have sound ground to hope their
salvation, so dying, as denying their right to membership we could not have,
and of other infants we cannot, I conclude I say that there may be sound ground
whereon to hope the salvation of some dying infants, that dye without actual
membership in the congregation, or visible Church of Christ, and without any
right to it also in their infancy had they lived longer.

And if we may hope well of some infants that die without membership, and
without right to it also, I know not why we may not hope the like of all, for
all Mr. Baxs. impropriating the unlimited and boundless grace of God, and
engrossing all hope of the salvation of dying infants, to the dying infants of
none but faithful parents, specially considering, besides what grounds more of
my own I shall add in proof of it by and by, two more at least of Mr. Baxters
own grounds whereon to hope the salvation of believers infants are grounds,
whereon to hope the salvation of other dying infants as well as them, the
Scriptures he refers to for them speaking, if of infants at all, then of the
whole species, of the whole kind of that Stature called infants, and not of
infants of one kind more then another.

For first whereas his 6th ground for the salvation of believers dying infants,
and of being without any fear of their damnation is this viz. because it is
said Psalm. 127. 3. 4. 5. children are the heritage of the Lord, and the fruit
of the womb his reward etc. if that be spoken of infants at all, as it seems
rather to be spoken of children that are grown up, that are the strength of
their father and his family, it is surely spoken of all infants as well as
some, and he that particularizes that indefinit term of children, and the fruit
of the womb, where ever the Scriture speaks hopefully of such, so as to
understand it universally to express, and sound forth no more then those
individualls viz. the seed of believing parents (and yet thus Mr. B^. muzzles
up all such Scriptures, and makes them sound no more then he would have them)
does little less then force the word to his ownfancy.

Secondly, whereas his 13th ground is from Mat. 18. 10. where he argues thus,

If little ones have their angels beholding the face of God in heaven then they
shall be saved, for that is a mercy peculiar to the people of God.

I argue that if little ones literally taken (i. e. if infants be there meant,
as he says, but never shows, they are (saving per alios and not per se) then
surely all infants as well as some, for he speaks not there of the little ones
of believing parents in special, but of what kind of little ones soever he
speaks, he speaks of that kind of little ones in general without exception,
whether it be of infants, or of his disciples, and if yet it must needs be
understood of infants only, that they shall be saved, it is understood
universally of them, and so much Mr. Ba. might have seen, and would have said
had he consulted the 14. verse, but just below where it is thus said of all
little ones that are lost, and so of all as well as some, viz. it is not the
will of your heavenly father that one of these little ones shall perish.

And since Mr. B. so suches it out below p. 104 105. etc. from Mark 10. 14. 15.
saying that of such is the kingdom of Heaven must needs be meant, viz. by
kingdom of Heaven salvation, which I grant, and by such (as i will grant also at
this time however, since thence I shall have another Argument ad hominem to give
hope by of the salvation of all dying infants) not such as are like infants,
but infants themselves, and that not of those individuals only that were then
brought, which whether they were children of believing parents or no too is
more then Mr. B. ere can demonstrate, there being many that came to Christ for
healing of themselves or theirs, as it is most evident that these did, of whom
not more then one of ten were as they should be, for of 10 leapers cleansed
where were the nine?

I say not of those individuals only, but of the very species of infants, yea
how often ore and ore and ore again does he inculcate this upon us in that place,
saying, it was the species of infants, the very species, infants in specie, and
not those individuals, whom Christ says the kingdom of heaven, i. e.
salvation does belong to, I appeal to Mr. B^. own conscience, whether there be
not out of his own mouth a strong Argument of hope, if not of assurance from
Christ himself that the whole species of infants, so dying, i. e. all infants,
and not some only shall be saved: for the ^pecies of infants expresses not
some infants only but all infants, or infants qua tales, so that quatenus
ipsum evermore including de omni, whatver belongs to infants inspecie i. e. to
the kind or to infants as suchbelongs toall infants, quod convenit homini,
purely qua est homo, convenit omni homini and so what ever belongs to any
thing, as it is such, belongs also to all that is such.

But Mr. B. teaches us the truth in this, that the kingdom of heaven and
salvation belongs by Revelation from Christ himself to infants, not in
individuo only, i. e. not to those infants only that were then brought to
Christ, nor any other, but to the kind, to infants in specie i. e. all infants
as infants, therefore the kingdom of heaven and salvation belongs to them all,
and so did that kind of coming to Christ's person, while he was on earth, with
infants, not for, nor by baptism, but for healing, belong to all infants that
needed it as well as some, that were then on earth, as coming to Christ with
infants by prayer to him to help and heal them, in whatever malady, since his
person is absent, belongs to all infants in the world, and not to believers
infants only; and yet not baptism, and a standing in fellowship in the visible
Church, for they indeed are not fit for fellowship.

Therefore though Mr. Ba. contracts the grace of God to infants, as concerning
their everlasting salvation into little a little corner, yea good lord how few
dying infants does he hope shall be saved, that has hope of none but of some i.
e. believers infants, which are but one of many, and also not of all, but only
some of them? yet (to conclude this in a way of resemblance to Mr. B^.
conclusion of his Argument from Mark 10. p. 107.) I bless the Lord Jesus
Christ King of the Church, though he gave no order to baptize, and inchurch
infants here on earth yet for having a greater tenderness toward the eternal
state of all dying infants, then Mr. B. is yet aware of, and toward all that
live to years such a tenderness as to invite them to himself universally, and
bid them wel-come, and so great a care to inform his Chutch in his Word and
Gospel concerning his good will to all men, and to all insants also in that
particular, so as to speak it so plainly, that plain minded men, that are not
minded never to change their minds, as I hope Mr. B. is not, may well see his
mind in this case, even as if he had therefore done this, because he foresaw
that some would arise so carnally, and so cruely conceited, as to suppose it
impossible to be, and but in vain to hope it almost, that Gods saving mercy
should extend to any more dying infants then those few, and not all those few
neither, of their own: and for my part I gladly accept Christ's information, and
submit to his discovery, let them resist it that dare.

And lastly, one more Argument of hope that I have within my self that all
dying infants must needs be saved, is this yet, because I could never find
since I looked for it, as also none ever shall that look not without their eyes,
what should, nor what (save the Priesthoods divine kind of Doctrine) does damn
them, I mean any of them so dying, any more then one of them.

First as for sin, which only damnes, I know none they have of their own, and
to say that any infant dies eternally for theiniquity of his father only, makes
the word of God, which is truth it self, no better then a flat falsehood to me,
who read in Jeremy 31. 29. 30. and Ezekiel. 18. 3. 4. 19. 20. and Deuteronomy. 24. 16.
and 2 Kings 14. 16. that the ways of God who requires it strictly of man, not
to put the children to death for the sins of the father, but every man only for
his own sin, are so equal, for all the false accusation of him by the wicked
Jews, that seeing he both says, and also swears it, that men shall never have
occasion to say, the child's teeth are edged by the grapes the father only has
eaten, and in way of complaint for injustice, does not the son bear the
iniquity of the Father? but that every soul that dies shall die for his own
iniquity only, and that individual soul only that sins shall die, i. e.
eternally, for temporally it is true we all die in Adam, as far as a to temporal
death, God may, and often does visit the sins of the Father on the children to
the third and fourth generation of such as hate him not only when children
inherit, so as to imitate their fathers hatred of God, in which case only it is a
punishment to those children, but also on infants, so as to take them out of
the world with the fathers: as in the case of 'Dathan and Abiram, Amaleck,
Hittites, Amorites etc. yea Sodom and Gomorrah, and the old world, on which for
ensamples sake to them that in after times should live ungodly, the flood, and
the fire fell, not only temporal but eternal to the adult ones that gave
themselves over to fornication and followed strange flesh, though but temporal
only to infants, who neither lived ungodly, nor gave themselves over to
fornication as the other did, and therefore though passing hence with the rest
to a temporal death by that fire, yet are not set forth as an ensample with the
rest to all that should live ungodly, by suffering the vengeance of eternal
fire 2 Pet. 2. 6. Jude 7.

But the same temporal death that may be in fury to one, as it is a passage to
worse, may be a mercy to another, and so to those infants a passage from worse
to better, as good Josiah was slain in battle, as well as wicked Ahab, and
that for going on his own head to war as well he, yet was it in respect of that
eternal state that followed, as well for him, as ill for Ahab.

Since therefore its said so plainly the son shall not die for the iniquity of
the father, and yet temporally they may be taken away with the father, it must
needs be meant that eternally none die, nor lie for ever under wrath for no
more then merely the fathers fault, whereupon all dying infants having no
trangression of their own, cannot be damned for their own, nor yet for their
father Adams transgression, and so are all, as well as those of believers, in a
visible state of salvation, and while they live infants, unless hereafter they
reject it, as Esau did the land of Canaan, in visible right to so dying to the
heavenly Canaan.

Yea many thanks to my Ashford opposites for that clause of their pamphlet,
which is assistant to me almost at all assaies, Christian charity it self,
which does presumere unumquemque bonum, nisi constet de malo, constrains us to
hope all things, believe all things concerning the salvation of dying infants,
and of all infants as well as some, specially since these, more then those, i.
e. the infants of unbelievers more then of believers, have not committed any
actual sin, whereby to deserve to be exempted from the general state of little
infants declared in Scripture viz. that of such is the Kingdom of heaven.

Secondly as for righteousness there is enough in Christ to take away, it being
imputed, what ever unrighteousness is imputed for Adams sin, and why that
righteousness should not be imputed, if the Scripture had not said it so
plainly as it does Romans 5. 2 Cor. 5. 19. 21. 1 Cor. 15. 22. to all poor dying
innocent infants as well as some, I cannot imagine, unless you say not God the
fathers love to all, but man the fathers faith, is that thing that must save
some of those infants of believers, that are savd, by interessing that fruit of
his body in the righteousness of Christ, as well as himself, for the taking
away the sin of his soul, which faith a father wanting, the child shall perish
for ever in default out, and yet be in no fault in the world about it:

Alas poor infants indeed, that descend from such parents as believe not, if it
be so, that that the fathers faith only does interest the infant in Christ,
their forefather, the first Adam by his sin unawares to them damned them say
they, and say I, if it did, there is righteousness enough in the heavenly
father, and the second Adam to save them, but because not they themselves, for
they have no more ability so to do then a new born infant has to dress its
naked body, but their fathers put it not on by faith for themselves, and
theirs, which if the dying infants might live to years, as Christ said of
Sodom, they happily would do, therefore millions of these poor innocents must
perish: so then belike it is thus, and this is the covenant of the Gospel, the
fathers faith saves him, and all his dying infants, and the fathers sin of
unbelief damnes for ever not himself only, but all his dying infants also.

All infants that are damned then, are damned through the fault of two unhappy
fathers, a remote father for sinning, and and immediate father for not
believing, between which two the love of the heavenly father cannot come at
them: a wise man may spend all he has with looking, but never find such as
this in all the Scripture: earthly inheritances are often stated, and removed to
and from posterity for fathers faith, and faults, as all Abraham's posterity by
Isaac and Jacob did enjoy Canaan, and Esaus lost it, but the eternal
inheritance is neither won nor lost by the children, through the faith or
unbelief of the parents: and besides if Adams sin, though a remote parent, does
so damnifie all infants, that the righteousness of Christ cannot save them,
without the fathers faith, me thinks he being their great grand father, Adams
faith should recover him and all his, at least from that guilt his sin brought
upon them; by interessing them in Christ's righteousness, as well as his single
unbelief at first destroyed them, if any fathers says shall entitle his
infants to salvation; or else God seems not to be so prone to mercy as
severity, yea indeed he that says God is not more prone to severity then to
mercy, and shows it no other way, as to his dealing with innocent infants,
then by saying he saves no more dying of infants then those few, i. e. some of
the dying infants of believers, and from the Mothers womb damns eternally all
the rest, may say over that his creed in my hearing 500 times and ten, before I
shall learn to believe it after him once.

Thirdly, as to threatenings of damnation I find none at all to insants in their
ininfancy, from one end of the book of God to the other, but all that ever is
spoken as concerning eternal wrath, the second death, everlasting damnation,
the Lake of fire, is declared as the portion of those only that do, and do not
that, which was never at all, much less in order to salvation, and on pain of
eternal fire enjoined by infants either to be done, or forborne: yea this is the
condemnation, and nothing else that I know of, that light more or less comes
to persons, and they love darkness more then light because their deeds are
evil, those that Christ speaks nothing at all to, as he does to heathens
themselves Romans 1. Romans 2. but not to infants, that yet know not the right hand
from the left, much less either good or evil, they have not sin, for sin is
the transgression of that law, that is lent us to live by, whether a law within
only, or without also Romans 2. but when he has spoken and they obey not, when
they know God, and glorify him not as God, then they are without excuse, and
have no cloak at all for their sin: and the word he has spoken to every one,
being rejected that same word shall judge him at the last day.

I find it said no whoremonger, fornicator etc. no actual impenitent sinner
shall ^ver enter, or has any inheritance at all, but not no unbelievers dying
infants in the kingdom of God or of Christ; and that the Lo^d shall come in
flaming fire taking vengeance on all them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of Christ etc. and yet on no dying infants, though they neither know
him, nor obey him, for if he should then believers infants should therefore to
the pot as well as others, as who in infancy obey no more then their fellows;
that the fearful and unbelieving, and dogs, and socerers, and murderers, and
all liars etc. but not liars dying infants, shall have their portion in the
lake of fire burning with brimstone, which is the second death; and that the
unprofitable servant, that traded not with his talent, and not infants, that in
infancy have no talent to trade with, shall be cast into utter darkness; that
those on whom Christ called, and they would not hear, and to whom he stretched
out his hands, and they regarded him not, and would none of Christ's council nor
reproof, shall call on him at that day and not be heard, and not infants on
whom he never called; that the Lord added to the Church daily such men and
women Act. 2. not at all such infants, as should be saved; that he that
believes not the gospel shall be damned, but not infants to whom he never
preached; that it shall be said to the wicked, go ye cursed into into
everlasting fire, for I was hungry and you fed me not etc. among which, if
there were any that died infants, they might justly reply indeed, as no wicked
men at years can do, Lord when saw we thee in distress, and neglected thee,
and did not come and minister unto thee?

In a word the whole body of the new Testament or covenant in the promissory,
praeceptory, and minatory parts of it (saving some two or three such gentle
touches about infants, as those above named, whereby we may have hopes that
none of them dying such, are for ever lost) was written and given to, and
concerning men and women, and not infants, to declare unto them the way of
everlasting salvation, and in what ways God would and would not accept of
them, and he that with an unprejudiced spirit observes all this will trouble
himself no more about his infants to inchurch and baptize them for remission of
sins, which is the prime use of baptism to sinners, and utterly lost when
di^penst to infants that have not sins, not indeed to do more then instruct
them as they grow up, and pray for them while they live infants, and hope well
of them if they die in their minority: but it pitties my heart for them to see
what moyl and toil the Priests create to themselves and the people, and what
much ado they make about their poor infants, even much more then about
themselves.

As for Jacobs being Lovd before he was born (he means in contradistinction to
Esau) with is Mr. B^. tenth ground of hope that believers infants are from the
womb in a hopeful way, I suppose he takes it to be so declared, but is
miserably mistaken, if he think the ninth of the Romans says so, for it is true
the elder shall serve the younger, which relates to the posterity of those two,
and not their persons (for Esau was mostly Jacobs Lord) was said before they
were born by God, who foreseeing it might easily foretell how it should be and
did so too, but for the wo^ds Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated, as they
also were spoken of the two Nations, that came out of their loins viz. the
Edomites and Israelites, and that not without respect to Edoms being the border
of wickedness, so far was it from being spoken of them before they were born,
that it was hundreds of years after they were dead and rotten, Mal. 1.

But if it were just as Mr. B. understands it, that before they were born, and
without any respect to their personal rebellion, and obedience in time it had
been said Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated, would it prove that article in
Mr. Bs. creed that God has promised to be merciful to Godly men's seed in
general, in contradistinction to the seed of the wicked? in no wise, I suppose;
since as godly as Isaac was, even one of his Sons was hated from the womb; if
Mr. B^. con ceit were true, as well as the other of them from the womb beloved:
but surely had not Esa^ sinned and set so light by the heavenly blessing, ^e
had not lost it, much less if he had dyed from the womb.

Fourthly as for the universallity of redemption which is by Jesus Christ's
dying, as Mr. Ba. says ttuely, for all, for every man, for the sins of the
whole world, which he had meant to have drawn an Argument from, but did ^ot, he
might easily have drawn one that would have served my turn in this place, viz.
to have proved that very age, even the whole species of infants to be savd by
Christ from wrath and ruin, except they live to rej^ct his grace a fr^sh, as
in infancy they do not, but it utterly overthrowes his hopes by the halves of
infants, for it is both a good ground, and as good a ground, whereon to hope
the redemption from wrath to come of every dying infant, as of any one,

And lastly to conclude my answer to this 22 Argument of Mr. B. which I have
insisted the longer on, in much hope of helping him to a better hope of all
dying infants, that neither are, nor are to be added to the visible church,
whereas I was once set upon by a Gentleman with this objection, who if ever
this book came to his hands, and this passage to his eye, will remember it,
though I forbear to name him.

Viz. Ob^. If we may be assured of the salvation of all our dying infants, we
may then in love to them knock them on the head in their infancy, and so be
sure to prevent their per^shing by condemnation.

I entreat that Gentleman to beware o^ so much as saying, that we may do such
gross ^vil that so great good may come thereof, least his damnation for it be
just, and then what little benefit will accrue to him all men may judge, that
to save his infant damnes himself.

There Is but four Arguments of M. Bs. behind brought in proof of the right of
membership to infants whereof two, viz. his ^4th and 26th are the one from 1
Cor. 7. 14. the other from Mark. 10. 13. 14. 15. Two Scriptures that I have
talked on so much in the book above, and given the genuine sense of, that I
shall but tautologize to speak particularly to them again, seeing I see nothing
new taken notice of in them by Mr B. but what is abundantly answered in effect
above, where I have showed the abr^gation in Christ of that birth holiness he
means, and the uncleanness consequently opposite thereunto, so that there is no
man however born, though a barbarian, can be called, in opposition to others,
as by birth holy, by nature a sinner in that ceremonial sense, from Act 10.
Gal. 2. yea M. B. confesses p. 8^. the Common s^se of holiness was one and the
same in all. i. e. Priests and Levites under the Law etc. Temple, Altar,
Sacrifices, children of believers, and believing yoke fellows viz. a
separation to God, so then if that holiness of Priests, Temple, etc. was
ceremonial, so this is, and if that holiness is abolished in all other things,
why abiding only the seed?

I have also proved that the other place, where it is not evident that the
infants brought to Christ were ever baptized by his dis^iples, or any other,
does more deeply disprove infan^s-baptism and membership, then all the places
ever brought by Mr. B. are capable to prove or make good either.

Yea as good a man might have said, as send me to those two places for
infant baptism, you may find it if you l^ok in the bible.

I Will say no more therefore to them.

His other two viz. the 23th and 25^h are both as he con^esses but probable,
and and by and by will appear not to be so much;

His first is this.

If an Infant were head of the Church then infants may be members.

But Christ an infant was head of the Church,

Ergo.

That cannot be half so much, as a probable Argument, whose premises are
neither of them true, yet such is the syllogism here brought by Mr. B. both the
propositions of which I deny, his consequence is true indeed, that infants may
be members, if an infant were the head, i. e. are capable o^t, supposing Gods
will that it should be so now in the Gospel, which a man may suppose if he
will, but shall never find to be so in his word; nor does his curious crotchet
out of Irenaeus, that Christ went through every age to sanc^ify it unto us,
prove the other to be a truth, for there is no truth at all in it self, yea it is
falsum pe^ falsius, for Christ did not pass through every age of man, that he
might sanct^fy that age, for he lived not to any old age here, though now he
that was dead is alive again for evermore, for his life was soon cut off from
the earth.

And as concerning his headship in his infancy, I admire a man of wisdom
should assert it, for to say nothing how little this agrees with that above
page 62. where he says ^is disputable whether ever Christ was a Churchmember
properly or no, (as if the head, because the principal that rules the rest,
were no member at all of the body) it is evident to me that as man be had not any
of his Preroga^ives settled actually upon him, till after he had purchased them
by his death; he was perfect first through sufferings Heb. 5. 9. and after his
death and resurrection he was made Lord and Christ Acts. 2. And exalted highly
above all Phil. 2. and set fa^ above all principality, and given to be head
over all things to his Church which is his body Ephe. 1. ult.

Moreover to me there is as much force in it, if Christ had been head of the
Church in his infancy, and much more then in Mr. B^. to argue thus, if Christ
the head of the Church, that was circumcised in his infancy, yet was not
baptized till he came to years, then, though under the Law the circumcised were
circumcised in their infancy, yet under the Gospel none are to be baptized till
they come to years.

His 25th runs thus.

If the Scripture frequently, and plainly tell us of the ceasing of
circumeision, but never at all of the Churchmembership of infants, then though
circumcision be ceased, yet we are not to judge their membership to be ceased.

but etc.

Therefore.

This is so far from a demonstration, that its not a Topical but Sophistical
Syllog^, in which there is fallacia homonomiae, or ambiguity in the middle term
viz. the Scripture tells us, which may be taken for an express, or for an
implicit telling, or having a word for a thing, yet one of his propositions
will be false let him understand it how he will, for if by the Scripture
telling us, and having a word for it, he means an express telling of the
cessation of membership in totidem verbis, a Syllabical word given out of that
particular by name, then his consequence is false, for it follows not because
there is not an express particular prohibition in the New Testament for the
cessation of things, that were under the old, therefore they are not ceased,
for so we shall make most of the types and ceremonies, among which infant
membership was one, as I have showed, to remain in force still as well as that,
as the dedication of the first born, and many others, the cessation of which is
not so syllabically spoken of.

But if he mean an implicit prohibition, or word for the cessation of
Churchmembersh^p of infants, which is enough, then there is prohibition enough,
yea the very command for the cessation of circumcision of infants any more Act.
21. 21. vertually is a command to cease inchurching of infants, for the very
end and intent of circumcision was the inchurching of infants thereby, which
thing was formally done then by circumcision, besides circumcision ceasing, the
whole law ceased with it, the whole of which he was a debtor to keep that was
circumcised also Heb. 2. 12. it is said summarily thus viz. that the priesthood
i. e. of that testament being changed, there must be of necessity a change also
of the law.

And so I have done with all his arguments for the church membership of
infants, which is the second medium, and next to that of discipleship, by which
h^ would prove but cannot, infant baptism.

His third medium which he only names, and handles not, therefore I shall do
the like in speaking to it, is drawn from the duty of parents to engage their
infants solemnly to God in Covenant, and runs thus viz. if it be the duty of
christian parents solemnly to devote their children to God in covenant, then
they ought to do it in baptism, but etc. therefore.

He proves his Minor from the practice of the old Testament, from the duty of
parentsthen, from which time, as to that particular of dedicating, and solemn
engaging of their children, it will not follow to our doing the like in all
respects now as they did, for then we must thus dedicate our first born, and
that both of man and beast.

His consequence is also false of his Major proposition, for I may devote my
children in a gospel sense to God according to my duty, I mean engage my self
to the Lord to bring them up in the nurture and a^monition of the Lord, and
also devote them to him in prayer, i. e. give them up to him as his right, and
to him to teach by his word, and his spirit, when they come to years, and
sundry other ways, and yet no necessity of doing any of this in baptism.

But I shall make this as short as he does himself, and gather up the sum of
what he has said viz. infants are disciples, visible Church Members, and to be
solemnly engaged to God in Covenant as a holy seed etc. therefore are to be
baptized, denying now the consequence, as to him, as I did the antecedent
before, which I have been all this while in disproving.

For, Ad hominem, so long as he argues for baptism to be after the manner of
circumcision, the consequence will not follow, if this were as true as it is
false, that infants are now disciples, Church Members, and a holy seed, and in
covenant, that therefore they must be baptized; for women under the Covenant
whereof circumcision was a sign, were both disciples, and visible
Church Members, and a holy people in the sense of the Covenant, and dedicated
to God in Covenant as well as males, and yet not then circumcised, and why?
viz. for want of a commission to do it, and the like I say now of infants if
they were, as twill never be proved while the world stands, that they are
disciples, in right to visible membership, and holy in his sense, and to be
engaged etc. yet of necessity it follows not they must be baptized, unless
there be some command or commission for it, which no man ever shall find in the
word of Christ: all the rest of his arguments wherein he undertakes to disprove
the practice of baptizing naked, and baptizing children of Christians of age,
as I have showed above, are ignoratio elenchi a dispute besides our practice,
for we do not so, therefore though I see some gross absurdity in them all, yet
I Will meddle no more with them here.

Thus I have done with both that subject of rantizing, which partly at the
motion of you Ashford disputants I was engaged in at the end of your Review,
and partly by that mere demi-reformation that is made in this point of baptism
by a party of men in Lincolnshire, and elsewhere, (of whom I suppose there are
several congregations) who having long since discovered the true way of
baptism, as to the subject, viz. that professing believers only, and not any
infants are to be baptized, but remaining ignorant of the true way and form of
administration of that ordinance are fallen into a frivolous way of sprinkling
believers, which to do is as much no baptism at all, as to dip infants in no
baptism of Christ's ordaining: which people, for whose sakes as well as others I
write this, will be persuaded I hope in time to be, as to the outward form, not
almost only, but altogether Christians, and rest no longer in that mere midway
mongril reformation. I have done also with this book of Mr. Baxs* for infant
baptism, the weak arguments of which for it were enough, if I had no more, to
convince me of the error of it, and to make me doubt ofit, and renounce it,
even as M. B^. himself says he had like to have done once, when he saw the
weak arguments of others for it, which had he done, he had done no more then
what is his duty to do now, and in order to Gods glory though it were as much
to his own shame, as it will be rather for his honor, to deny himself, and
embrace the truth as it is in Jesus, I hope he may do yet in due time, if he do
not shut his eyes against the Gospel, because I find him saying and unsaying
again what he said before he had well studied itp. 113. and he is out in print
for infant baptsm, and against the true baptism, for all his professions of so
serious search after it, before he had well studied it to the bottom: if he do
not recant his error, I am confident some of the people will, that have been
deluded by him, and out of love to the Lord Jesus, that loved them as a Priest,
and washed them from sin, in his own blood, and as a Prophet, and a King
requires them so to do, arise and be baptized, as they ought, washing away
their sins calling on the name of the Lord.

Thus my friends and you my Ashford Antagonists, you have my mind amongst you
in this matter,

If any one of you answer, and I have satisfaction from him to the contrary, he
shall hear of my recantation, if I have not, he shall see it by my silence, for
I Will never lose so much time, as I have done by the bare writing of this, from
preaching to poor ignorant creatures the free love and rich grace of God in
Christ to all that obey him in truth, and as I see I must, if I meddle more at
the press with this subject.

ANTI-RANTERISM CHRISTNDOM NEW CHRISTND, OR Christ's ordinances continning till
Christ's second coming In a small system, wherein are some few reasons rendered
for the now raising ofwater baptism into its right way of administration, as to
the form and subject, and for the remaining of both it, and other ordinances in
their primitive right, till the return of Christ Jesus.
FOr as much as I have been several times solicited by several persons witness
these words received in a late letter from two Gentlemen of Chichester viz. SIR,
The occasion of these lines is the result of a late conference viz. ^o desire
your grounds and arguments (in wriing) for the continuance of water baptism,
and what you conceive required to evidence a right administrator and subject
thereof. Sir our end herein (if we know our own hearts) is to be assured of the
mind of the Lord Christ touching that ordinance, and our duty therein, that we
may walk conformably to his will etc.



both by word of mouth and otherwise^, to give out unto them the grounds, ends
and arguments in writing of my continuance in the practice of water baptism,
and other ordinances of Christ, as laying on of hands, prayer, breaking of
bread, church f^llowship etc. according as the Churches of Christ in the
primitive ages of the Gospel did, and for that I find it an easelesse and well
nigh an endless business to write the same things in private letters, about
one particular subject, to every of those particular persons, that may
successively desire it, I have therefore thought good (being called to the
press by sundry challenges of the Priesthood, and more specially by not only
the publication of that abusive pamphlet concerning the Ashford-disputation for
infant baptism, but also their professed expectation, that I should give some
answer, or give the cause) to insert here this ensuing account of my own
reasons, for the right of our remaining in the use of ordinances till the
return of Christ, and animadversions of what little reason the Ranter has to
run from them, and redeem himself from that bondage, which he deems to be in
the observation of them, before the time appointed, much more to run beyond the
bounds of modesty and all good manners also, as not all, but many, if not most
of those do first, or last, who despise any of the ord nances of the Lord
Jesus: and herein as I shall be plain, using no other form, method and order
then what the Lord gives into me as I write, so I must be brief, the foregoing
part of this volume having risen already unawares to a far greater magnitude
then was meant to the whole, when I first cast the bulk of it in my mind, and
there remaining also something yet to speak, and I know not well how much, to
the Priests concerning themselves, in way of return to the last piece of that
pedobaptistical pamphlet which was pu forth by who knows? or rather by who
knows not whom? in order to the plainer disquisition of the truth in this
question viz. whether the ordinances of Christ, that were in use of old, are of
right to be practiced still? as there are for services, then in use, the
necessary use of which is now denied viz. baptism in water, laying on of hands,
breaking of bread, ^d church fellowship, so I shall address my self to prove
the practice of these four severally to stand, even de jure till the second
coming of Christ, which is yet to come.

And because baptism in water, though most strenuously denied by many to be so
much as lawful to be either dispensed, or submitted to, and by many even of
those that have submitted to it to be necessary, or any other then a matter of
indifferency, is yet the first in order to be practiced, and that without, or
before which we are not once to meddle with the other, I therefore propound it
as the first in order to be proved, and in order to the proof of at least the
lawfulness thereof against such as say its si^ful (for this will be included
in the other) I shall by the help of God prove a necessity of it, against such
as judge it needless or superfluous, and by several Scriptures show it to be
such a service, the present performance of which is so far from being sinful,
that it is no less then sin and rebellion against Christ himself to leave it
unperformed.

The Scripture which I shall most directly make use of to this purpose, and lay
as the very basis, and foundation of this business, and make as a certain
cardinal (...) from whence to argue, and whether to reduce all the rest, which
I shall more collaterally handle, is Mat. 28. 18. 16. 20. All power is given
etc. in which place these things chiefly are observable as subservient to the
proof of the point in hand.

First, we find Christ pleading that absolute power, which was given him by the
father to be the Sovereign Lord, and Supreme lawgiver to the whole world
thorowout all nations and generations of it from thenceforth even to the end;
in these words viz. All power is given unto m^ both in heaven and in earth i. e
I am he to whom this prerogative is granted to give out to all men what laws
and rules they shall be guided, and governd by, what ways they must walk in in
order to that eternal salvation, which as a Priest I have purchased them to by
my own blood, if ever they mean to attain it, I am that Prophet, Acts 3. 22.
which the Lord has raised up unto all people now, instead of Moses, who was
the faithful giver out of Gods will, mind, or Testament to Israel of old, whose
voice all must now hearken to in all things, what ever I say unto them, and
whoever harkneth no^ to me, shall be cut off from among the people: Is. 55. 4.
behold God has given me for a wi^nesse to the people, a leader and commander
unto the people.

Secondly, After he had thus showed his authority, and commission from God to
be the only Lawgiver, whereby to summon the sons of men to so much the stricter
attention to him, he next begins to act according thereunto, to act like him
self, to make out his mind to his disciples concerning them and all men most
expressly, and plainly about this matter of waterbaptism, and to give order to
them both when, and to whom, both in what time and to what subjects they should
dispense it, and likewise both how, and for how long he would have the nations
(as by command from himself, commissionating his disciples so to teach them) to
practice the same dispensation of water baptism; in the two following verses.
Going out therefore teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, Son and holy spirit, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you, and lo I am with you always even to the end of the world.

Where note first in general three things.

First, That he gives order to his disciples to teach the nations, and baptize
them in water in his name ver. 19. going out teach all nations baptizing them
in the name of the Father, son and holy spirit.

Secondly, that whatever order is given out by Christ to his disciples,
concerning this business of water baptism, as to the order of its
administration, and the term of its continuance, the very same and no other
does Christen join his disciples to give out to the disciples, that should be
successively in all nations, to be observed as his will concerning them v. 20.
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.

Thirdly, that what ever he gives out as his will concerning both them and the
disciples in the nations that they should make, he gives out as his standing
will and Testament to them, and their standing duty to him in all ages of the
world as well as that, even to the very end thereof, in these words v. 20. and
lo I am with you always i. e. in the observation of these things I command
you, to the end of the world.

Secondly more particularly yet, let it be observed what Arguments in
particular do most naturaly arise hence in proof of the continuance of water
baptism by comcommand from Christ to this very day, and that from several
clauses and passages of this Scripture severally considered.

First from these words Go ye out therefore and teach all nations baptizing
them in the name etc. it is very evident to the utter confutation not only of
those who are for infant baptism, as is showed above, but also of those that
are now for no water baptism at all, that our lord Christ expressly enjoines
these two things, viz.

1. That all those whom his disciples presume to baptize in his name shall be
first taught by them or made disciples, i. e. preached to or instructed in the
Gospel till they learn and believe it. for so Mark records the commission
whereby Matthewes meaning is much explaind Mar. 16. 15. 16. Go ye out into all
the world, and preach the gospel to every creature, he that believes and is
baptizd shall be saved etc.


2. That all those whom his disciples do teach till they have learnt the
Gospel, or by preaching to them have converted to faith in his name shall in
his name like wise be baptized, so inseparable has Christ made these two viz.
discipling and baptizing, believing and baptizing in his will and Testament to
us, that as he would have no creature in the nations be baptized without
precedent teaching and believing, so he would have no creature that is
instructed till he believes to go unbaptized; whereupon in one and the same
word of command he requires both, neither can any one abstract either from the
other (without such violation to the will and Testament of Christ, confirmd by
his blood, which woe be to that man, or angel that disanulleth in the least
particular) so as to take upon him to give a toleration to persons either to be
baptized before believing, or to content themselves with belief only without
baptism.

But first as express as it is the mind of Christ that one of these should be
done so express it is that the other should be done, and each in its proper
order.

Secondly, as clear as it is that these are commanded to be done by the very
persons he then spoke to viz. that they should teach and baptize, so clear it
is that the very same is commanded to be done in all nations, and among all
people by such persons as should be discipled by them in these words v. ^0.
Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you.

Thirdly, and as long as it was his mind the one should be used viz. teaching and
believing, so long it was his mind that the other should continue, viz. baptizing
and being baptized, and that was that they should all abide in force to the
very end of the world.

Whence more formally we may argue thus, viz.

What Christ has conjoined man must not separate. Argu. 1.


But Christ has conjoined our discipling of persons, and baptizing them, as a
standing course to the end of the world, as Matthew. 28. 18, 19, 20. plainly
shows,

Ergo man must not separate these two.

In this very manner and form of words, word for word (little heeding how while
he declines the gulf of no-baptism, he runs against the rock, and makes
shipwreck of his infant baptism by the shift, and at once breaks the neck of
all his Arguments for it) does Mr. Baxter argue against these new No-baptists
in p. 341. of his Plain Scripture-lesse proofs for infants Church Membership
and baptism: whereby verily as he wounds both himself to death, and all those
that together with him do plead for the baptizing of such subjects, as they
never teach viz. infants whom themselves must needs acknowledge to be incapable
of conversion by their instruction, so all those likewise that plead for the
teaching of all nations still, and preaching of the Gosel to every creature,
and yet plead against any more baptizing of them in water, who are converted to
the faith by preaching; who tear the Testament of the Lord Christ to pieces,
and take what of it will serve their own easy turns, and reject what of it is
more tedious to the flesh, as the way of outward ordinances is, specially that
ordinance of water baptism, as a business long since abolished and out of
date, as being ended almost as soon as instituted, as bondage, as mere bodily
exercise, that profits little or nothing, as but indifferent at most, and so
may be done, and yet as well be let alone, as a low weak thing, as a foolish
matter to make such ado about, as needless for every one to submit to or make
use of, as that which some can live as well without as with etc. as if Christ
Jesus was a fool (for so all those do say in figures, though not in words at
length) to invent such foolish instruments, to appoint such simple tools to be
used in his house, such earthen vessels, such vessels as are not honorable
enough, nor fit in their conceit for the masters use, or for any thing but to
be thrown aside, as out of date, and not worthy to be now meddled with any
more: to which high Notionists, who camaelion like live up aloft, and yet feed
on nothing but the mere air of their own high flown fancies, I must needs say
thus much here, before I come to the other argument viz. that as wise and
strong as they reckon upon themselves to be, so that they can live to God and
thrive toward salvation as well without baptism, or any other ordinance as
those that use it, and as poor pieces of business as they deem these to be, and
unworthy of their condescension to them, as small, despised, homely and earthen
as they are in their eyes, For (...) (...) speak (...) now and ^ot to such
(...) ^re shy of ^he use of Christ's ordinances on an other account viz a
wretched conceit of such worth and weightinesse in them, that no men in the
world are now found fit to meddle with them, or are admitted by Christ to be
administrators of them, for born these ways does the devil deceive men by to
err from the plain way of Christ's truth.
yet they are of such precious and heavenly consequence as may well challenge a
right of continuance to the end, yea they are no less then the power of God 1
Cor. 1. 18. Romans 1. 16.
to salvation to every one that believes, the wisdom of God in a mystery;
(...) Cor. 1.. 1. 25 Argu. 2.
yea this foolish thing of God is wiser then man, and this weak thing of God is
stronger then man i. e. then all the gaudy forms, and new ways of man's
tradition, whereby the Rantizer, or those non-entities, and new-nowayes of man's
invention, whereby the Ranter has made void the commands of King Jesus, and
howbeit they count it their spirituallity, yet I cannot but count it their
naturallity, their carnality to call any of the ordinances of Christ, even that
which may seem to them the most empty (for here is the mystery of Christ giving
out heavenly treasure in earthen vessels) I say to call those lowness,
weakness, unprofitablenesse, foolishness.

As many as Christ commanded to be taught, preached to, and made disciples, are
commanded when discipled to be baptized in water in the name of the father, Son
and holy spirit,

But Christ commanded all nations, even every creature therein, that is capable
thereof, to be taught, preached to, and discipled.

Ergo, all nations, even every creature, none excepted, so soon as discipled,
are commanded to be baptized, etc.

The first proposition is most undeniably evident, for teaching and baptizing
are both concluded here under one and the very same numerical command, and both
instituted here de novo as parts of the will and Testament of Christ in one and
the same word of institution, and both enjoined to be used to one and the same
subject viz. all nations, every creature, therefore if every creature as far as
capable to be preached to by us, and we are capable to preach to him, is to be
taught, as is expressly asserted not only in the Minor but in the texts
themselves, then it must needs follow that every creature, after he is preached
to and converted to the faith by our instruction, is to be baptized, and that
no creature is exempted or excused from being baptized, any more then he is
from being taught and discipled, no not one, and consequently that baptism is
not a mere matter of liberty, and indifferency that may ad placitum be done by
us, or let alone, but a matter of absolute duty, of positive praecept, and
necessitate precepti (and therefore how far forth necessitate medit ad salutem
is worth examining) a matter of necessity if not of equal necessity with that
of repenting and believing, for if it be his voice and command equally with the
other (and we see it is in one and the same place, and phrase given out as his
will together with the other) then why it should not be equally obeyed, and
that sub paena, fith he is that Prophet whom God has now raised up unto us,
whose voice whoever harkneth not to in all things whatsoever he says, shall be
cut off from among his people, no man is able to give a solid reason, nor yet
why any should shun to declare it, it being a a part of that whole council of
God, which the Apostle Paul durst not decline to declare the whole of, Act. 20.
27
any more then to declare the doctrine of faith, repentance and obedience in
other things; yea and such a weighty part of that council, and of such near
concernment, and great consequence unto us is baptism, that as it is said, even
that despised dispensation of water baptism, to be from heaven Mat. 21. 25
, and not of men, so they that own it are said to justify God, and they that
reject it and refuse to submit to it are said to reject the council of God
against themselves. Luk 7. 29. 30
And all the people that heard, and the Publicans justified God, being baptized
with the baptism of John, but the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the council of
God against themselves being not baptized of him.

And to prove it to be no matter of mere indifferency, but of duty to all
believers, I argue yet further from the forenamed Scripture thus.

That which is positively commanded to be done, and dispenst to all persons,
Argum. 3.
when once discipled, without exception of any, and without the least
intimation of a dispensation from Christ to any to omit it, is not a matter of
mere indifferency, but of absolute duty among all those persons that are so
discipled.

But baptism is positively commanded to be dispensed to all persons when once
discipled, without exception of any, and without the least intimation of a
dispensation from Christ to any to omit it, yea I may say as positively
commanded to be dispensed to disciples as persons are commanded to be taught,
discipled or to repent and believe the Gospel, and that is so positively that
he that knowing it to be Christ's will concerning him submits not to it, obeyes
not Christ in it, shall be damned. Ergo baptism is no matter of mere
indifferency but of absolute duty to all believers, or disciples.

The Major is most undeniable: the Minor also is most express and obvious to
every eye in the text it self, where its said (in one entire sentence by way of
positive command concerning both these) teach all Nations baptizing them, i. e.
all them that are taught and made disciples: and not only in this Scripture
but also in several other, which I may allege very subservient unto this as to
the proof of the second proposition. The first whereof is Act. 22. 16. and now
why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on
the name of the Lord, where it is not a little worth our noting in this case,
that Ananias does not only in one and the same sentence command Paul to be
baptized as strictly, as to call on the name of the Lord, but also checks him
in a certain round reproof, and angry expostulation, for his lingering, and
del^ying in this business, which he could not rationally have done if it had
been, no neglect of duty in Paul to be tardy to it, and a matter of no
necessity, but of such indifferen^y that it was, without danger of incurring
divine dispeasure, at Paul's choice whether he would be baptized yea or no.

The second is Acts 2. 38. the first place, wherein we read of any practicing
according to that commission that Christ gives out in M^. 28. that being indeed
the first time of its beginning to be put in execution, by Peter and the rest,
who, being empowered so to do, in obedience thereunto went forth and preached
repentance, faith, and baptism for remission of sins among all nations (pro suo
modulo) beginning at Jerusalem, as also they were required to do Luke 24. 47.
in which Scripture (I mean Acts 2.) to a people enquiring what they should do
we find Peter preaching positively thus v^z. repent and be bap^zed every one of
you in the name of Jesus Christ for remission of sins etc. where note that as
he join^s repentance and water baptism together, so in one and the same precept
and word of command he enjoines them both together to be practiced as the mind
of C^st, and that to every one then, and there present, that had not yet
performed these services, without exempting any one of all those thousands he
then spoke to one jot more from the practice of baptism, then of repentance it
self, which phrase, viz. Repent, and be baptized every one of you etc. he could
not warrantably have delivered himself in unto them in the name of Christ, if
he had not had clear commission from him by way of precept to impose baptism on
all men as the mind of Christ concerning them, and a duty to be practiced by
them all as well as repentance, without holding any one excused.

The third is A^t. 10. 47. 48. Can any man forbid water why these should not be
baptized, which have received the holy spirit as well as we? and he commanded
them to be baptized in the name of the Lord.

In which words I appeal to the conscience of every considerate man whether
Peter does not, not only command all those persons, and that in Christ's name,
who were then and there converted, to be baptized in water, but also assert it
to be beyond the power of the persons themselves, or any other to forbid it to
be dispensed to them, or to (...) them a dispensation to forbear it? for when
he queries who can? he means no man can forbid water why these should not be
baptized, (for an Interrogation affirmative concludes negatively) whereupon
(nemine prohibente) he commanded them (and what he commanded them was no less
then their duty and the positive will of God concerning them (for its said to
Cornelius v. 6. that Peter should tell him what he ought to do) and also no
less then what he was commissionated from Christ to impose upon them, or else
Peter deluded them to whom he spoke, for v. 39. he calls it the word of God
sent to Israel, and v. 33. they expected to hear not what he should please but
what was commanded him of God) he commanded them I say nemine contradicente in
the Lords name to be baptized; which Peter had no power to have done had it
been by the Lord himself left a d libitum unto them, yea had it been a thing so
needless, of such liberty, and such no-necessity as many make it now adays, I
would by Peter's leave, had I been there, and been one of those that were so
flatly commanded, have interposed, and forbid their baptism, or at least my
own, unless my flesh had had more mind to it then it had when I used it, and
have pleaded, as our Gentee^ spiritualists do against us, in this wise against
Peter, viz. you are much mistaken Peter in this matter, you go about to urge it
as an absolute duty and matter of necessity for us to be baptized in water, but
alas its no such matter, it is but an external dispensation, that may be done
indeed if any be not satisfied without it, but else may full as well be let
alone; we have the most substantial baptism already, even that of the spirit,
in which case the other is but mere superflu^ty to be used afterward, you
cannot make it such an absolute command from God to us as you seem to do, and
therefore whereas you ask who can forbid? even I can forbid, why I should not
be baptized as by positive precept from Christ, seeing I have received the holy
sp^it as well as you.

Thus verily might one have cavilled against Peter's command then, as the Ra^ter
cavils against Peter's command now, which is not out of date, nor has lost any
of ^s validity sure with lying so long unpractised, if baptism in water were
such an indifferent thing as it is now made by the new Spirituallists, who little
consider (but I assure them wise men will weigh it well though they do not) how
little their Logic and Peter's are like one another (whereby it may be gathered
what contrary spirits he, and they speak by) for whereas he reasons thus, viz.
these men have received the spirit, and have the most substantial baptism
already, as well as those that are baptized in water, therefore who can forbid
water why, or give any good reason to the contrary why these should not be
baptized? and accordingly commanded them so to be.

They contrarywi^e reason thus.

Viz. These men have the spirit, the most substantial baptism already, as well
as those that are baptized in water, Therefore who can command it as necessary
or give any sound reason why these should be baptized in water? and accordingly
forbid them so to be.

But whether it be right in the sight of God to obey them foolishly forbidding
it, as needless, at best but indifferency, or obey God by the mouth of Peter
commanding it universally to all men as their duty judge ye.

It Is clear therefore out of all these places that water baptism is so far from
being sinful that it is more then lawful, more then indifferent, yea a matter
of duty, and necessity, and such as it would become me^ to submit to as well as
Christ, who needed it not, as we do, if there were no other end, nor use of it
then to fulfill all the righteousness of his law, the least of whose
commandments whoever shall break, and teach men so, i. e. that they need not
keep them, the same shall be least in the kingdom of heaven, but who so shall
do* and teach, the same shall be great in the kingdom of heaven Mat. 5. 19
and to whom he that is faithful, though but in a little, is faithful in much,
and he that is unfaithful in but a little is unfaithful in too much Luke 16. 10.
, specially if that little be left us in way of command in his word as his
positive will concerning us, and no^ as a matter of such indifferency as that
it may, without sin on either side, be done or not door, which we please, for
such things only and indeed are indifferent, of which we may by the word say
as Paul says of meats and marriage viz. one believes he may eat all things,
another who is weak, eats, herbs, one man esteems one day above another,
another man esteems every day alike, let every man be fully persuaded in his
own mind; Romans 14. 2. 5.
so seek not a wife, yet if thou marry thou have not sinned; 1 Cor. 7. 27 28.
but so we cannot say, nor do the Apostles speak concerning baptism, viz. one
man believes that, having the spirit he may, but needs not be baptized,
another, who is weak, must needs be baptized, let every one do as they see
good, or are satisfied in this case, if they be baptized they have not sinned,
and if they never be baptized they have not sinned etc. nay both Christ and
they speak here in way of peremptory determination of all persons to one point;
for whereas if baptism were a matter thus left to our minds, Christ must have
said to his disciples go teach all nations, every creature, baptizing as many
of those you make disciples only as judge it needful, as have a mind to it,
not teaching them to observe that outward rite, any further then they please,
and Ananias to Paul, and Peter to those he preached to Act. 2. Act. 10. must
have said repent, and believe remission of sins, and call on the name of the
Lord, and if any of you be so mindeed, you may be baptized in water in token of
Christ's death, burial and resurrection, but those that seem to themselves to be
as well without it, may forbear, we have no power either to forbid it, or force
them to it; but they say clean otherwise viz. Go teach all Nations baptizing
them, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I command you, and now why
(...)? arise and be baptized, (...) away thy sins etc. repent and be baptized
every one of you in the name of Jesus, etc. who can forbid water why these i.
e. all these should not be baptized etc. all which if it do not import and
express water baptism to be every ones duty, and not any ones liberty only,
then my understanding stands under a cloud of utter darkness.

Yea verily it is very remarkable in my mind, and as well worth our heeding as
any thing else in this case; that when Paul, in his trembling and astonished
condition, enquired of the Lord what he would have him to do, the first thing
and well nigh the only thing that the word expresses that Christ by the mouth
of Ananias declared to him as his will at that time, which was immediately
after his conversion, was this duty of baptism: see Act. 6. 9. and the
trembling and astonished said Lord what (...) thou have me to do? and the Lord
said unto him arise and go into the City, and it shall be told thee what thou
must do, which passage Paul relating of himself Act. 22. 10. expresses it thus
viz. and I said what shall I do Lord? and the Lord said to me arise, and go
into Damascus, and there it shall be told thee of all things, which are
appointed for thee to do:

Now when he was come into Damascus, Ananias speaks thus to him v. 14. the God
of our fathers has chosen thee that thou should know his will.

But what part of Christ's will does the word say Ananias there makes known to
Paul in that place, as that which at that time he must do, and was appointed
that he should do? no more then what is expressed in these words Act. 22. v. 15.
16. thou shall be his witness unto all men of that thou have seen and heard.
And now why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized and wash away thy sins calling
on the name of the Lord.

And as Peter in his first preaching the praeceptory part of Christ's Gospel to
the Jews, when they enquired what they should do? and to the company at
Cornelius's house, and Ananias in his to Paul, when he quaeried what he should
do? did preach baptism as the will of Christ concerning them as well as
repentance, prayer and such like duties, so we shall find it was the constant
course of all other primitive preachers in their preachings of Christ to any
people, to hold forth baptism to them, as that which was to be submitted to by
them out of hand, after faith and repentance professed, and also the constant
course of persons converted to the faith without delay to submit to that
dispensation accordingly, for howbeit the very form of words, wherein they
spoke to them concerning baptism, and pressed it upon believers as their duty, is
not set down syllabically in every place, where its evident, yet most
manifestly evident, and past all doubt it is to any, but such as seeing will
not see, that in their doctrine, they delivered the mind of Christ to people in
this point of baptism, and commanded it too, even in those places, where the
Scripture does not express what they said, or else how it came to pass that
their converts were acquainted with it so as readily to embrace it, and some of
them to demand it, as we find they did, I know not, unless we shall imagine
they knew and owned it by some divine immediate instinct. Acts 16. 13. 14. 15.
^s said that the Lord opening the heart of Lydia so that she attended unto the
things which were spoken by Paul, she was baptized and her household, who
undoubtedly attended to the things that Paul preached together with her, does
not this palpably presuppose that baptism was one of those things spoken by
Paul, and pressed upon that Auditory, or else how came she to know it? and also
to what purpose did she perform it? likewise Act. 16. 30. 31. 32. 33. to the
Jailer asking Sirs what must I do to be saved? its said that Paul and Silas
preached the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house: but what word
of the Lord was it that they spoke to them? indeed the sum of their doctrine
is not set down, but that the doctrine of baptism was some of it, as well as
faith, which is expressly set down, as that which concerned them in the first
place is clear, or else its a mystery to me how he and all his, who are said v.
34. to believe in the Lord together with him, should come to understand that
they ought to be baptized, much more to submit to be baptized straightway: so
Act. 18. 8. its said that Crispus the chief ruler of the Synagogue, and all his
house and many of the Corinthians, hearing the word, believed and were
baptized, which how or why they should suffer themselves to be, if the word
they then heard (none of which is set down) did not hold forth baptism as well
as faith I cannot possibly conjecture: in like manner we read Act. 8 4. that
Philip went to Samaria and preached Christ to them, and v. 12. that when they
believed the things spoken by Philip pertaining to the Kingdom of God, and the
name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women: yea and this not a
service they submitted to on their own heads, in their own names, as that
which, had they been so pleased, they might as well have forborne, but v. 16.
they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, its said also v. 35. of the
Eunuch that Philip preached unto him Jesus, not one jot of Philips sermon unto
him is set down, but the next news we hear is this v. 36. that coming to a
certain water in the way, the Eunuch desired to be baptized, saying see here is
water, what hinder, why I may not be baptized? does not all this plainly
import, howbeit what Philip preached to the Samaritans and the Eunuch is not
extant expressly in any particulars thereof, yet he preached the ends and
^uses of baptism to them, and pressed the practice thereof upon them? how else
could they have known it? why else did they both do and desire it? we see then
how the first preachers of the Gospel Ananias, Philip, Peter, Paul are said all
along to preach Christ, and Jesus, Act. 8 3^.
and the things concerning the kingdom of God and the name (...) Act. 8 4.
Jesus Christ, Act. 8 12.
and the word of the Lord, Act. 8 14. 10 36. 18. 11.
and peace by Jesus and things that we must do, Act. 9. 6
and that are appointed for us to do, Act. 22. 10.
and what we ought to do, Act. 10 6.
and the things that were commanded them of God, Act. 10. 33. 48.
to command us in his name, and yet preached baptism still as well as faith,
repentance and salvation: and so he seems to me to this day to preach Christ
but by the halves, that preaches salvation by Christ, faith in Christ, and not
baptism in the name of Christ for remission of sins.

And as this doctrine of water baptism was thus universally preached in Christ's
name, as his will concerning those that were converted and discipled, in
obedience punctually to Christ's Commission in that kind M^. 28. 18. 19. 20 in
those primitive ages of the Gospel, so was it as universally embraced, and
obeyed by them that were made disciples in those days, not only before, but
also after Christ crucified: for as in the days before John the baptist was
beheaded, and before Christ crucified, all those multitudes of disciples, which
by each of them were made by teaching, were universally baptized either by
John, confessing their sins, or by Christ's disciples, who dispenst in Christ's
name, for he dispenst not himself, in Enon, or Jordan, or some other places
that were convenient Mat. 3. 5. 6. John 3. 22. 13. 4. 1. 2. so even long after
Christ crucified, raised, and ascended were the people, that were discipled and
converted to the faith, before ever they joined in visible Church Fellowship in
one body in breaking of bread and prayers, baptized all without exception: for
as its said Act. 2. 38. 40. 41. 42. of that first Church of the Jews, or
Hebrews, to whom that Epistle was after written, they were bid to be baptized
every one of them, so as many of them as did gladly receive the word of the
Lord i. e. as repented and embraced the Gospel, were baptized, and then
continued in the Apostles doctrine (who surely taught them all the six first
principles of the oracles or holy things of God at that time, Heb. 5. 12. 6. 1.
2. and what more they saw occasion for, for with many more other words then
those that are recorded did Peter then exhort that people v. 40.) and in
fellowship and in breaking of bread and prayers, so its said 1. Cor. 12. 13. of
the whole Church of Corinth in way of sacramental metonymy, whereby that is
very familiarly spoken of the thing signified, which can be spoken properly
only of the outward sign, et retro, by one spirit we are all baptized into one
body, Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, none excepted, and have been all made to
drink into one spirit.

Yea as these Churches in Judea, Jerusalem, and Corinth were all baptized
before built up in a body, so which of all the Churches were not, to whom the
Apostles directed afterward those several Epistles? All the Romans to whom Paul
wrote were baptized, Rom 6. 34.
all the Galatians were baptized, Gal. 3. 26. 27
the Ephesians, which at first were but 12 disciples that embraced the truth,
were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, the Colossians were baptized, Col.
^2. 12.
the Philippians were baptized, as we see by Lydia and the Iaylor Act. 16. 15.
22. 23.
and all those that believed with them, which was the beginning of the Church
at Philippi; and that the Thessalonians were not v Act. 12. 1, 2, 3. 4. etc.
baptized is more then brutish to imagine, for surely Paul and Silas that went
immediately thither from Philippi where the Iaylor and Lydia and many more were
baptized, had not got a new doctrine of no-baptism to preach before they came
to Thessalonica; nay it is evident by the Jews accusation of them Act. 17 6.
that what doings and disturbance they were occasion of through their preachings
and baptizings at Philippi, the same they were by the same means, no causes,
but occasions of at Thessalonica, therefore of them say they, these that have
turned the world upside down are come hither also, yea Paul himself hints that
to us, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 2. that after they had suffered and were shamefully
entreated at Philippi, they yet were bold to speak to the Thessalonians the
Gospel of God (the same Gospel sure that they preached at Philippi, for what he
did and ordained in one Church, the same he did, and ordained in all the
Churches 1 Cor. 16. 1) with much contention.

By all which foregoing considerations the Minor of the third main argument
above is cleared, which assure baptism to be commanded to all without
exception, therefore a duty from which we are not exempted.

What Christ commanded to be taught and observed not only in and among Arg. 4.
all nations of the world, but also in all ages and generations thereof even to
the very end, the same is not ad placitum, but de jure, not at men's own
pleasure, but of right to be taught and observed as Christ's will, and their
duty in all nations to this very day.

But Christ commanded Baptism in water to be taught and observed not only in
and among all Nations of the world, but also in all ages and generations thereof
even to the end.

Ergo Baptism in water is not at men's own pleasure, but of right to be taught
and observed as Christ's will and their duty in all nations to this very day.

The Minor, which only needs proving, needs none neither to him that will but
observe how plain it is to every man's understanding in the text.

For first if baptism be to be taught to, and observed as duty among all
nations and by every creature therein that hears and believes, as it is clear it
is both here (for teach them says Christ i. e. all nations to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you, and did he not command them in the very
verse above the observation of that administration of baptism?) and also Mark
16. 15. 16. (where he bids that the Gospel of salvation be from thenceforth
tendered on terms of faith and baptism to all the world, to every creature
capable of being preach to) then of necessity in all nations and generations to
the worlds end, for all nations were not then extant, but many nations are
risen since, that the world then knew not, all the world, every creature was
not in actual being at that time, neither could possibly be all baptized unless
baptism abide in its right in all ages unto the end, by all nations, every
creature, all the world, Christ denoted all people of the earth that then were,
or thereafter should be, whom, as they should successively arise, and grow into
capacity for it, he would have to be in their several generations successively
taught and baptized.

Besides how plainly does Christ express his meaning to be that this course of
baptizing in wa^er should be kept a foot in all ages and generations v. 20.
where after his precept to observe that dispensation he adds this promise of
his presence, And lo I am with you always i. e. in your faithful observation
of all these things (for if men be not found in this way he is disingaged) even
to the end of the world Amen.

Whence the argument in form may be thus.

What way of outward administration Christ not only required to Arg. 5.
be observed to the end, but likewise promised his people to be present with
them during their due observation of to the very end of the world that must
stand of right to the very end of the world.

But Christ has not only required that outward administration of water
baptism to be observed to the end of the world, but likewise has promised his
people to be present with them during their due observation of it to the very
end of the world.

Ergo that administration of water baptism is of right to stand even to the
very end of the world.

The objections that are usually made against what is asserted hitherto
concerning the needfulnesse of water baptism to all, who will not be under a
just account of rejecting the counsel of that Prophet and rebelling against
the command of King Jesus, among which I shall set down none but such as to my
own knowledge have been made, and among them I shall not fail to set down (if
not all) yer at least those that by the opposite party in this point are called
and counted the principal, for so is one parcel of the ensuing reasons styled
in a certain copy of them, which was given to me lately while I was at the
press, viz. The principal Reasons why believers need not be baptized (whereby
you may guess how little worth answering the less principal are) are on this
wise.

Ranterist.
The Baptism mentioned Mat. 28. 18, 19. 20. was not water baptism, but the
baptism of the spirit.

Baptist.
Your blind boldness, and buzzardly blindness in this I inwardly blush at,
when I (as I hope your self will also, when you) consider, 1. that it was a
baptism enjoined, and commanded to be dispensed, and that 2. By mere men, Who
never were yet since the world stood so highly prerogativ'd from the Father, as
to be made administrators of more then water baptism, or to be baptizers with
the spirit, for that was ever yet, now is, and ever will be the peculiar
prerogative royal of Christ's own royal person, never to be impar^ed to any
other; to give, i. e. to baptize persons with the holy spirit, the father by
him, and he immediately by himself without imparting any of that power, which
he only had to do it, to others to give it in his name, is the sole giver of
every good and perfect gift Iam. 1. 17. So Luke 9. 13. Your heavenly Father
will give the holy spirit to them that ask him: So Act. 5. 32. the holy spirit
which God has given to all them that obey him: 2 Cor. 5. 5. God who has given
us the earnest of his spirit: 1 Ephesians. 13. 14. sealed with the holy spirit of
promise which is the earnest etc. The Baptism with the spirit is the inward
seal upon the heart, that only God sets, and not any mere man, mere man is
commissionated and impowerd from God to dispense no more but the outward sign,
i. e. water baptism, which is not the seal of the New Covenant, as the Priests
call it, for that's the spirit, which God only gives throw Christ the Son, for
him only has God the Father sealed i. e. authorized, honored with that
privilege, viz. to be under himself the sole dispenser of the spirit John 6.
26. which wherever its given gives gifts in such wise as seems good unto him, 1
Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. There are diversities of gifts, but the same
spirit, all these works that one, and the self same spirit distributing to
every one severally as he will, There are differences of administrations,
diversities of operations, meaning internal administrations and operations upon
the soul, for there be outward administrations and operations ad extra, as
preaching, praying, water baptism, laying on of hands with prayer, breaking
bread, in which men act to God ward in order to his acting toward us in the
other, for men may promise us the spirit, and show us what to do, and baptize
us in water in order to our having the spirit, and pray for us that we may
receive the holy spirit etc. and minister to us outwardly in the ordinances of
divine service, which this new Testament has, which in respect to the old
Testament is called the ministration of the Spirit, because God gives down to
them that wait on him sincerely and believingly in these outward ways of the
Gospel, which are (to see to) but foolish instruments, earthen vessels, in some
measure here the heavenly treasure of his spirit, and hereupon as they hold
forth the word of the gospel, in the hearing of which the spirit is received,
as it was not in the hearing of the law (for the spirit was not the promise of
that Covenant of Circumcision, but the old Canaan, for I will circumcise thy
heart etc. was a Gospel promise though made in the time of the law) and in
these respects, viz. as preaching, and dispensing gospel ordinances they may be
styled (and in such a sense only are they so styled, 2 Cor. 3 6.) Ministers
not of the Letter, i. e. the Law, but of the spirit, i. e. the Gospel; But
thereis but one and the same Lord, and it is one and the same God who works all
in all. All in All is Christ's own glorious title, Paul and Apullos and the
Ministers by whom we believe may work, and do all that is to be done without to
all men, they may baptize in water by commission from Christ (for so he himself
baptized not but his disciples, viz. John Baptist and the rest) and wicked men
may by his permission baptize, i. e. overwhelm us with suffering, shame etc.

But himself only baptizes us with that holy spirit of his, that must support
us under suffering, he sends the comforter: he was the only baptizer of them
upon whom the spirit fell in the Apostles ministration of baptism with water,
in which case the spirit was promised Act. 2. and of laying on hands with
prayer in which way, though not ever for God, whose ways limit us, not himself
was sometimes better then his word, and anticipated the disciples obedience in
these things so as to give his spirit beyond even Peter's expectation to persons
before baptized and prayed for, yet did not this disingage them from doing that
outward service, but the more engage them to be baptized Act. 10. 45. 46. 47.
48.
, yet ordinarily it was dispensed.

I indeed baptize you in water (says John) i. e. we men can minister no
further to you, being but messengers from him to do that, but he shall baptize
you with the holy spirit and fire Mat. 3. 11. so see how John peculiarly
indigitates him John 11. 33. as in sole right to that service, the same is he
that baptizeth with the holy spirit, and as John did baptize only with water,
so with no more then water did all the disciples and Apostles after Christ
crucified baptize; not with the spirit, (for that Christ only did in their due
dispensation of the other) they had no promise any where that I find of such a
privilege: I find it promised to them Act. 1. 9. that they should be baptized
with the holy spirit not many days thence, but never that they should baptize
with the holy spirit, Christ keeps himself the right of pouring that out upon
all men as they turn to him Proverbs 22. 23.

I am ashamed therefore at the cloudy conceits of such as say that was not
water baptism with which Christ commanded his disciples to baptize the Nations
after teaching Mat. 28. 18 19. 20.

And the rather because,

Secondly, its as clear as if it were written with a beam of the sun, that what
was done most immediately, and more remotely by the disciples in obedience to
that commssion, when once power was come on them to go forth (till when they
were to stay, and forbear their testimony Luke 24. 47. 48. 49. Act. 1. 8. which
was no more but teaching, and as to baptism the baptizing in water: for Act. 2.
38. Peter promised them indeed that they should receive, or be baptized with
the holy spirit in case they would repent and be baptized, but the baptism he
pressed them to, and upon which he promises the other cannot be that of the
spirit, but water, unless weel feign Peter to have spoken such Tautological
nonsense as this to them viz. repent and be baptized with the spirit, and then
you shall receive the holy spirit, and as the beginning of their execution of
Christ's commission was no other (save what they promised) as to their
dispensation of baptism, then teaching and baptizing in water, and after
praying for the Spirit with laying on hands, so were all their proceedings
suitable hereunto, for he is fast asleep with his eyes open, resolving to see
and say nothing in favor of water baptism, but to cry it down against light,
that shall say that those which are said to be baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus, Act. 8. 12. 16. Act. 19. 5. and to be commanded by Peter to be baptized
in the name of the Lord Act. 10. 48. were baptized by Philip, Paul, Peter or
any man else with any more then mere water baptism, for the baptism with the
spirit is in all these places spoken of as received from God in way of laying
on of hands in prayer, and preaching besides the other, as either preceding or
succeeding it, as the Lord pleased in his own season to dispense it.

Ranterist.
If it were water baptism that was meant Mat. 28. and that was practiced by
Peter, Philip, Paul and the other primitive ministers, yet that water baptism
was no other then the baptism of John only, and not of Christ, that was ere
long to cease, and to vanish before the baptism of Christ i. e. that of the
spirit, when that should come in, and not to continue as a standing
dispensation to be used and practiced to the end.

John the Baptist Mat 3. 11. opposes his baptism to the baptism of Christ,
which could not have been done, if the baptism with water was an inseparable
companion of Christ's doctrine: how could John say verily I baptize you with
water, but he shall baptize you with the holy spirit, if Christ had been
commanded to baptize with water as well as John? if so, the words of John would
have run thus, verily I baptize you with only water, but he shall baptize you
also with the holy spirit.

Baptist.
Here again I cannot but profess my to be ashamed at this curious conceit of
yours, who distinguish the baptism of water, and that of the spirit into John's
and Christ's, and oppose these two one to the other, as if the one of these were
destructive to the other, as if that of John's were his own, and none of
Christ's, when yet that is so undeniably evident as it is, that this of water,
as well as that of the spirit, was given out by Christ himself so plainly as a
part of his will and testament for its most certain that this was the will of
Christ, and tendered to all the world as so, and so to stand in all ages and
generations of it to the end, yea a special part of his testament as well as
preaching, says repentance, prayer and the rest, and that since as well as be
fore the Testators death, Mat. 28. 18. 19. 30 Act. 2^ 39. 8. 12. 16. 10. 47 48.
16. 15. 33. 18 8. 19 5. 22. 16. af ter which death of the Testator no man ever
knew so much as a man's testament altered or disanul'd in one tittle of it,
without gross and palpable injury to the Testator.
to abide together with teaching, believing and repenting to the worlds end.

You talk as if the baptism with water was an ordinance of John, a baptism of
which not Christ, but John was under God the main Moderator pro tempore while
it stood in force, as if John had instituted, and ordained it, and Christ put
an end to it, as if John were the Author of it, and Christ the finisher, to
cause it to cease, whereas nothing is more clear then that Christ himself was
both the Author and finisher of it in another sense, i. e. he that first
ordained and appointed it to be administered even by John himself, and after
John's decease, yea and after his own death and resurrection too, gave order to
its continuance, and for the observation of it among all Nations now, as
thitherto it had been observed only among the Jews: I say its clear that the
baptism with water was Christ's baptism, and howbeit it be called John's, as John
was the first minister, and messenger from Christ to begin it, (for behold I
send my messenger and he shall prepare my way before me says Christ of John
Mal. 3. 1,) yet Christ himself was the chief Author of it, in whose name and
not in John's it was begun and dispensed ever, even in that jnncture wherein
John himself was living and verst about it, and before Christ had so specially
commanded the continuance of it in all Nations to the worlds end, in his own
and the fathers and the spirits name as he does Mat. 28. 18. 19. 20. and ever
after that also as we may see, Act. 2. 29. where Peter preaching the same
doctrine that John himself did viz. the baptism of repentance for remission of
sins Mar. 1. 4.
, says repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of
sins, so Act. 8. 16. they were baptized with this water baptism in the name of
the Lord Jesus, so Act. 10. 47. he commanded them to be baptized in the name of
the Lord, so Act. 19. 3. 4. where after that to certain disciples who were
baptized with John's baptism, Paul had said John verily baptized with the
baptism of repentance saying unto the people that they should believe on him
that should come after that is on Christ Jesus, it is said, that when they
heard this they were baptized i. e. in water in the name of the Lord Jesus.

We see therefore that though its called the baptism of John as John began it,
yet it is that which Christ, who was no minister, servant, or disciple of John
(for John was his) so owned as his, as not only to honor it with his own
submission to it, though in no such need of it as we, and more above it then
any of us, to fulfill all righteousness of his own law i. e. the Gospel for
example sake to us, but also in his own ministry to give order to his disciples
to administer it to all the disciples they should make, and this not only
before as John 3. 11. John 4. 1. 2. but likewise after his own death and
resurrection, even when he was now ready to ascend, Mat. 28. Mark. 16. which,
sure he would not have done, if there had been such opposition as you speak of
between the baptism with water, that was called John's, and that bap^sm of the
spirit, which because he only baptizes with that, is called Christ's, that they
must not both abide together in the world to the end, but one vanish away
presently before the other, and it had not been the mind of Christ that water
baptism should be rather (as you deny it to be) an inseparable companion of his
doctrine, nay surely instead of confirming the doctrine and practice of wate^
baptism, as Christ did in his ministry, before his death, practicing it, i. e.
by the hands of his disciples on all the disciples which he himself made as
John 3. 22. 4. 1. 2. and after his resurrection, and immediately before
hisascension g^ving commandments to his disciples to observe it and teach all
Nations y in which juncture of time he spoke nothing to his discipies by way of
commandment or other wises but such thing, (...) pertained (...) the Kingdom
of God, and to his Church and Gospel Act. 1. 2. 3.
to observe the same as Mat. 28. 18. 19. 20. he would rather have confi^cated
it, instead of causing it to continue by giving new and fresh commission for
it, he would have caused it to cease by some intimation or other, that when the
holy spirit should be given, and men begin to be baptized therewith, then there
should be no longer attendance given to the baptism with water, he would have
said go teach all Nations (beginning at Jerusalem) that there must be now no
more bapzing with water, but that in the way of repentance and faith only
without that baptism, they shall be baptized with the spirit, and Peter knowing
his mind would have said to them Act 2 39. when they asked what they should do,
repent you of all your sins and believe in Christ in order to the remission of
them, but in the name of Jesus Christ be not baptized in water, as some while
since every penitent was used to be, for that was a dispensation and baptism of
John that had its time a while merely to prepare the way of Christ, but is now
abolished and out of date, we must forsake John now and not be baptized nor
walk after those customs, but expect a baptism with the spirit only, also
Act. 10. 47. who can require these persons to be baptized in water that have
received the spirit, and are baptized with the spirit as well as we?

Thus I say they would have said and done, as Paul when circumcision, and the
Law was to cease, as much as he condescended in the case of Timothy, yet never
commanded it to continue, but taught all the Jews that were among the Gentiles
to forsake Moses saying that they should not circumcise their children nor walk
after the customs Acts 21. 21. if there had been such opposition, such
inconsistency between the baptism in water, and that of the spirit that they
must not stand together, if baptism in water must not have remained rather in a
certain continual subserviency to the other, if it were not to be according to
Christ's will an inseparable companion of his doctrine, but we find not the
least hint or intimation of the mind of Christ, when expressed either by his
own mouth or the mouth of his Apostles, that were to deliver and command
nothing to people, but what they had received of the Lord Jesus, and what was
commanded them of the Lord, as concerning the cessation of that service, or any
toleration of any one person to omit it, but as we find it a part of Christ's
Gospel and Testament even from the very beginning of it which was in John's
baptizing with water, See Mar. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. the beginning of the Gospel of
Christ, Ioh. did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of
repentance for the remission of sin^.
So for ought I find it was as jure to continue as a part of his Testament
among other things, not a tittle of which Testament is yet annihilated, till
he, whose will and Testament the whole is, shall come to take account of all
men how as to the preceptory part of it they have observed it.

Whereas therefore you seem to be of this opinion that Christ was not
commanded, i. e. not commissionated from the Father to baptize with water as
well as John, because its said by John I verily baptize you with water, but he
shall baptize you with the holy spirit, as if Christ had had nothing to do to
meddle with that water baptism as any ordinance of his, or to give any order
about it, as if he had had no more power to dispense or enjoin that, then John
had power to meddle in Christ's peculiarity, or to take on him to baptize with
the spirit: I must tell you that Christ had command and commission from the
Father to that service of water baptism, though, it being the external
inferior matter, he committed the actual administration of it to his disciples
and Ministers, among whom I look on John as the chief, or else, since he
commanded others to do it, and so baptized per alios at least, if not per se
John 3. 22. 4. 12. his testimony of himself John 12. 49. 50. John 16. 31. is
not true, which indeed were blasphemy to think, for (...) there professes that
he spoke nothing of himself, but the Father which sent him gave him commandment
what he should say, and what he should speak, and that whatever he spoke even
as the father gave him commandment so he spoke, and likewise that as the Father
gave him commandment so he did: whereupon since he did by his disciples baptize
with water in Iudaea while John and his disciples in Aenon Ioh. 3. 22. 23. and
made and baptized more disciples then John (for all came and flockt to his
dispensations of water baptism at last, and left John, in so much as he in his
Ministry, even of water baptism, increased and John decreased John 3. 26. 27.
28, 29, 30) those words of John, as much as you think it absurd to understand
them so, must necessarily run so in any solid understanding, though the terms
only and also be not expressed, viz. I verily baptize you with water only, i.
e. I can go no further then to that outward administration of water, but he
shall baptize you also with the holy spirit, i. e. he is empowered to dispense
higher matters to you then water only, with which he baptizes too as well as I,
i. e. not himself but his disciples, viz. that baptism with the holy spirit: in
which words you cannot say properly that John opposes his baptism, to the
baptism of Christ, as if that which is called his were none of Christ's but
rather that John magnifies the person of Christ above himself, as who should
say, I can dispense no more then the bare outward sign, but Christ, who though
he came after me yet was preferred before me, in whose name, and not in my own
I baptize, and whose the baptism is that I dispense, and not mine, he is able
besides the sign to vouchsafe you the very thing signified thereby.

This baptism then of water in the name of Christ together with repentance from
dead works and faith in his name John Baptist was the first Minister to begin,
in which respect it is sometimes styled his, but he left it after a while to
Christ himself and his disciples to carry on, who all (...) Christ was actually
crucified preached and practiced the self same things that John did, viz.
repentance, and says in a Christ yet to suffer for remission of sins, and
baptism in water in token thereof, and saving some circumstantiall difference
the very same in substance even after Christ was crucified too. For herein
only the baptism with water which was Christ's, and of which John was but a
Minister (as we are) differs since Christ crucified from what it was before he
was crucified viz. that then it was the baptism of repentance and faith for
remission of sins by a Christ that was ere long to suffer, for so John preached
Act. 19. 4. and baptized Matthew. 3. 2. saying repeat, for the kingdom of heaven
is at hand, and Christ himself preached the v^ry same thing Mat. 4. 17. and
baptized i. e. by his disciples with the same baptism John 3. 22, 23, 26 -4. 1,
2. but now since the Son is lifted up and has suffered and is risen, it is the
baptism of repentance and faith for remission of sins by a Christ that is
already dead for sin, and risen again for justification Romans 4. 25. Act. 3. 18.
26. 10. 38, 39 40, 41 etc.

So that the baptism of John (for so that was called that was dispensed before
Christ had suffered, and was yet to come Act. 19. 4.) and that of the disciples
of Christ after Christ crucified differ not in substance, but only in this
small circumstance in which also the^r Gospel in point of faith did differ,
viz. that one was a baptism into Christ to suffer, the other into a Christ that
had suffered; and so they preached a different faith, a different Christ, and
yet all one and the same* yea so Christ's own ministry differed from it self
considered in this different time of before and after his death: for before
both he and his disciples preached the same gospel, repentance, faith and
baptism that John did, viz, of salvation by the son of God to suffer, but had
John lived till Christ had suffered, he would then have preached the same
repentance, faith, and baptism that Christ then did, and we now do, viz. of
salvation by the son of God that has suffered, and this is all the same
substantially, though circumstantially thus diversified from the other;
wherefore the word of the Gospel under John, and after Christ's death, is called
the very same word, and the word that Peter preached to Cornelius's house, is
said to begin from John's baptism, and as the word with which John came
preaching, so the baptism with which John came baptizing continued still, and
was preached and practiced by command from Christ by the mouth of Peter on
disciples believing in that very place Act. 10. 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. etc. to the
end, and this not, in honor of John (as in discourse with some it has been
frivolously answered me) but as a thing which ought to be done as in force a
new from the Lord Christ in whose name (which Peter abused to them, if he had
not warrant from Christ so to do) he commanded them all, and that in water, to
be baptized.

Ranterist.
You have spoken much concerning Christ's commanding the observation of water
baptism to the end of the world, and of Christ's promising his presence to his
disciples, in the observation thereof, to the end of the world, but you are
mightily mistaken in the meaning of Christ in that phrase to the end of the
world Mat. 28. 20, for he means no more thereby, but to the end of that age, as
Mr. Saltmarsh well observed, in his book called. Some glimps of that bright and
morning starr.
from the signfication of the Greek word (...), which properly signifies age.

Baptist.
That Mr. Saltmarsh has such a passage there I very well remember, and how
many have been stumbled thereby, and by sundry other fancies of his to the
embracing of such notions and principles, as from whence they have at last
commenced Atheists (he being in his time a man of such account among some, that
his sayings were received as oracles) I cannot but with some sadness consider:
and that the word (...) signifies age I dare not deny, but that it signifies
age in that sense, in which Mr. Saltmarsh (I hope) only mistook it, and most
of his admirers do yet miserably mistake it o^ do, I dare boldly and do utterly
deny, for first, where as they restrain the word (...) so as to say it sounds
forth no more then seculum i. e. some one particular age, or generation,
properly it rather signifies aevum age i. e. time taken together in the whole
lump of it, all time, or all ages collectively considered from that particular
age or time we speak of, even to the end of time it self, or at least of the
time of this world; neither does the spirit ever (for ought I find) much less
usually, use the word (...) but the word (...) when he means to express some
one age or generation only, specially in the writings of the Evangelists, Mat.
24. 34. Mar. 13. 30. Luke 21. 32. (...) this generation o^ age (meaning wherein
we see the signs of Christ's coming) will not pass or be ended before all be
(...) and* ^e come.
and also elsewhere, Ephesians. 3 2. speaking of ages divisim even all the several
ages to the very end of time, and age it self to the end of all (...) he says
(...) to all ages of the world or to all ages of time of times, even for ever,
But

Secondly, when he speaks of time or age in the whole bulk of it, of the world
in all generations of it, i. e. all the time of the world together, from the
time spoken of to the end of it, he uses the word (...) and that not only in
that 28. of Mat. 20. but also in many other places, as John 9. 32. (...) Act.
3. 21. (...) from the beginning of the world, or from the beginning of time 2
Cor. 4. 4 (...) the God of* this world, yea and of the very same Evangelist,
yea I shall show you no less then three or four places in Matthew, in every of
which I am confident your very selves shall say is not meant the end of that
age, that then was, but absolutely the very end of this world it self, wherein
we yet are, which yet draws very near to an end, in every of which places yet
there is no other phrase but the same that is used Mat. 28. 20 to express it by
viz. the end of the world, yea the very same greek phrase, which is surely
enough (if very common sense and reason did not also preach it) to evince that,
and no other to be the sense in Mat. 28. 20. those places are Mat. 13. 39. the
harvest is the end of the world v. 40. as the tares are gathered into the fire,
so shall it be at the end of the world, v. 49. so shall it be at the end of the
world, Mat. 24. 3. Lord what shall be the signs of thy coming, and of the end
of the world; I suppose no man that is well in his wits, will say of any of
these four places that they signify the end of that age or generation only,
or any other then the time of Christ's second coming, which is yet to come, and
when it comes shall put a period to this old world, wherein unrighteousness
yet dwells, and begin the new wherein dwells righteousness: (and as for them
that say he is already come the second time, and with that coming that is
enquired after, Mat. 24. 3. much more the rabble of that ruder sort of Ranters,
and ungodly Scoffers of the last times spoken of 2 Pet. 4. 5. that are
willingly ignorant, because of the tediousness of that thought c which how
near kin (...) ^o to (...) that signifies semper i. e. always, every
smatterer in (...) Greek may understand.
to them, that there is any more coming of Christ at all, some of which also
deny that there was any Christ, or any first coming of such a one at all) I
deem none of that deep dotage of the one, nor of those divellish dreams of the
other worth disproving:) nevertheless there is no other Greek phrase used all
along but the same that is Mat. 28. 20. which is rendered even to the end of the
world: viz. (...).
whereas therefore some say if water baptism were commanded by Christ as his
baptism, it was but for that age or generation, wherein the Apostles lived (and
to say nothing of the whimsical uncertainties that are among them that deny
water baptism, whose witness of it hangs not together, some saying it was John's
only, and never commanded by Christ, and that it was to end in Christ crucified,
some yielding that it was commanded by Christ, and practiced after his
resurrection only to do honor a little to John's ministry, and not disparage
it by too sudden abolition, some that it was pressed by Christ, and preached by
the Apostles as his, but to last only for that generation, and then of right
to end, some that it lasted de jure till the treading down, which was more then
one or two ages after that, and then it was never to be raised, as if men's
might destroyed the right of it, whose folly I shall show more anon) I still
contrariwise assert, that it was of right to stand to the end, and though
foretold that it should cease, and all other services, yet but for the term of
42 months only, and then to rise again Rev. 11. 1.

Ranterist.
You tell us much of Christ's sending, and commissionating his disciples to
baptize all nations, but that seems not to me to be true, because the Apostle
Paul the great Doctor of the Gentiles, who was sent topreach the Gospel, and
throwly to convert men Act. 26. 17, 18. and whose endeavor was to present men
perfect in Christ Jesus Col. 1. 29. does notwithstanding openly affirm, that he
was not sent to baptize 1 Cor. 1. 17. making that the ground of his giving
thanks to God for his baptizing of none but Crispus, and Gaius, and the
household of Stephanus: but had the Apostle been sent to baptize, though not
chiefly, it would have been his duty so to do, and consequently he should give
thanks to God for omitting a part of his duty which is absurd.

Baptist.
By that expression of Paul viz. Christ sent me not to baptize, but preach the
Gospel the latter clause of which as having weight in it, I suppose you
willingly leave out, he cannot rationally be understood to mean thus, viz. that
the Gosspel he preached had not baptism enjoined to be preached, and practiced
as an inseparable companion of it (for it is undoub^edly apparent by what is said
above that baptism and teaching, baptism and faith, baptism and repentance were
ever preached and practiced both together) but that Christ did not enjoin him
absolutely to the actual dispensing of the ordinance of waterbaptism always
with his own hands, but to preach the Gospel (mark that) to preach the Gospel,
i. e the baptism of faith and repentance for remission of sins, and to see that
the thing were done either by himself or some other, when persons believed, but
not to baptize necessarily in his own person, so but that the opus operatum, i.
e. the work it self might be as well done per alios, if not per se, even as well
by the hands of any one, as his own: and so indeed it might, for whereas in
these days there is such ado, and such stumbles in the hearts of many about a
right administrator of baptism, i. e. that may actually with his own hand
dispense it, as if he must be meliori luto some extraordinary kind of person,
of better mould then other men, some strange man, or miracle worker or other,
John did no miracle yet what he spoke was true, nor were any held excused that
believed not his baptism to be of heaven, but those are said to reject the
council of God against themselves that were not baptized of him.
yet thereis nothing more clear then this viz. that the bare administration of
it, being something a more servile work then ordinary, might be done, and was
of old (and why not now I know not) by the hands of any, at least any gifted he
disciple: neither do I find, but that people are minded willing ly many times
to puzzle and wind themselves off from submitting to the administration of that
despised and to the flesh unpleasing service of baptism, though convinced that
it is their duty, by pleading that they cannot find no fit administrator, as if
Christ had administrations in force but had made no provision of administrators
whereby they might be at all dispensed.
that the word speaks one tittle about the quality of the administrator, but
only of our submission, ex officio, to the administration: its said by way of
narration they were baptized in Jordan Matthew. 3. when they believed they were
baptized Act. 8. 12.-10. 15. 33. 18. 8. and by way of precept repent and be
baptized Act. 2. 39. arise and be baptized Act. 22. 16. and by way of promise
he that believes and is baptized, in the passive still, shall be saved: but
never required by whom in particular the thing shall be done, so as to say
repent and let such, or such a one baptize you, as if we should be better in
having it from some hands rather then from others: neither does the efficacy of
baptism to us depend one straw upon the quality of the person administering be
it Paul, Apollos or Cephas, or any other disciple inferior to them in capacity
or office, as Ananias or Philip, but upon the quality of the person or subject
to whom its administered, which if it be a person professing to repent and
believe, and so doing also as he professes, it matters not so much who does it,
so the thing be done: nay the validity of the baptism depends as not upon any
other qualifications of the person baptizing, so not on his being baptized, or
not baptized himself, that does it, specially in such a case or juncture
wherein at first, or after long neglect of it, there is none but unbaptized
persons to begin it which may serve to the satisfaction of such as think that
after the long cessation of true baptism that has been in the world there must
be an utter omission, and no resurrection of it again for ever because none but
unbaptized persons to begin it, for John himself the greatest administrator of
water baptism that ever was, either was not baptized himself at all, or else by
some that were never baptized, or else by some of those which himself had first
baptized, which still makes the case the same, and evidences that unbaptiz ed
persons may possibly be right ad ministrators, and that the non baptiza tion of
the person that does it nulls not the dis pensacion of it to believ ers.
nor yet do I find, but that in the primitive times the simple act of baptizing
the believers when once converted was any other but an act so inferior,
servile and subservient to that of preaching the gospel, of preaching
repentance, faith, and baptism in Christ's name for remission of sins in order
to conversion, which more specially belonged to the messenger-ship, that it was
(unless any desired the Apostles to do it themselves, or when the multitudes
to be baptized were so great that it was fit that every he disciple, that had two
hands, as I may say, should be assistant) committed mostly to more inferior
persons, common disciples, who as they might baptize, and preach too
occasionally, so when any were converted by either themselves or the Apostles,
did attend more to the bare act of dispensation then the Apostles did: we
cannot think that Peter himself, nor the eleven did baptize all the three
thousand without the hands of many other of the 120 to help at least, though in
that case the Apostles baptized some also it is like.

Moreover we see Philip baptized the Samaritans and the honorable Eunuch, yet,
though an occasional preacher of the Gospel, he did it in the capacity of a
disciple only, for his deaconship did not make him ere the fitter to baptize:
and Ananias baptized Paul, who is styled but a certain disciple: and the rest
of the disciples that together with Philip were scattered abroad by the
persecution that arose about Steven went every where, even as far as Antioch
preaching the Lord Jesus, and turned many unto the Lord Act. 11. 19. to the
end, and baptized them surely as Philip did, for that business was the
foundation of the famous Church at Antioch, before any such great
administrators as Apostles came near them, for though Barnabas, who together
with Paul was sent forth afterward from that Church with prayer and laying on
of hands, from which time they both were visibly, and in foro Ecclesiae
Apostles, and were so called and not before Act. 13. 3-14. 14. was sent to
confirm and comfort them, and exhorted them to continue in that faith which
they were baptized into before; yet he was but in the capacity of a teaching
disciple only yet, and not an Apostle: nor do I believe that Peter baptized
them with his own hands Acts 10. but by some of them that came with him from
Ioppa, only he bid it should be done, as that which no body could forbid, and
commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord, but by whom it was done we
know not.

The father sent Christ to baptize, i. e. to give order for the baptizing of
the disciples he should make, or else he could not be truly said both to
baptize, and yet also to speak and do no more then the Father that sent him
gave command for, as he is Ioh. 3. 22. 4 1. 12. 49. 40. and yet in another
sense it may be said Christ was not sent to baptize i. e. personally to
dispense the ordinance it self, for if he had been sent to baptize with his own
hands he had not fulfilled his message, for howbeit its said he baptized more
then John, yet he himself dipenst baptism to none with his own hands, John 4.
1. 2. but by the hands of his disciples.

When therefore Paul says he was not sent to baptize, he means not that
baptism was none of those things he had in commission to meddle with (for had
it been so, he had meddled beyond his commission in baptizing those few he did
baptize with his own hands, which were absurd to think) but that he had not
such a positive command to dispense it after he had preached the Gospel to
conversion so himself, but that others even inferior persons might baptize the
disciples of his converting as well as himself: he means not that baptism, was
no part of his message, which he received in charge from God to deliver and
declare among men as his will (for he says God sent him to preach it, not to
baptize but to preach the Gospel says he, and what was that but the Gospel of
repentance and baptism, the baptism of faith, and repentance for remission of
sins among the nations) but that there was no necessity that himself should
administer it, when it might be done by others, not that it was not needful to be
done, but that it was needless he personally should dispense it, so it might be
done by another.

Neither does Paul make that the ground of his giving of thanks to God that no
more but Crispus and Gaius, and the household of Stephanus etc. were baptized
(for then he had thankt God that the Corinthians had most of them neglected
their duty in that point of baptism, which its evident he preached among them as
well as faith, or else sure none of them at all would have submitted, Act. 18.
8. but that he himself had with his own hands baptized but some of them, least
(perceiving what a foolish dotage on his person was in the hearts of many of
them) any of them, at least his party (for some doted too much on Paul, some on
Apollos, some on Cephas i. e. Peter) should either think the better of their
baptism as long as they lived, because he dispenst it, or else think the worse
of him for it, i. e. that he had baptized in his own name: this is the clear
sense in which Paul speaks and not the other, 1 Cor. 1. 14. 15. 16. 17. viz.
that no more then such and such were baptized by his hands, not that no more
then such and such of them (for they were all baptized by one or other) were
baptized at all; for that many more then those he there names as baptized by
him, were baptized by one or other (for all Crispus's house, and many more of
the Corinthians besides Crispus's his own person, whom only with Gaius and
Stephanus his house, he here names, believed and were baptized as well as he
and they) is evident Act. 18. 8. yea verily and elsewhere that all the
Corinthians were baptized, for 1 Cor. 1. 13. Paul speaking to the whole Church
of Corinth (none excluded) says thus were ye i. e. ye O Corinthians, that were
all baptized, baptized in the name of Paul? and 1 Cor. 12. 13. speaking to and
of the whole Church again, together with himself, he says, we are all baptized
into one body, and have been all made i. e. in the supper, to drink into one
spirit: all the body of them therefore were baptized.

Ranterist.
It appears that some of the believing Romans, who were beloved of God and
called to be Saints Romans 1. 11. and who had from their hearts obeyed the form
of doctrine delivered unto them Romans 6. 3. were nevertheless unbaptized, as
many of us as have been baptized into Christ, etc. which words plainly
intimate, that some of them were not baptized, see Ioh. 1. 12, to as many as
came to him gave he power, these words plainly intimate that some of these did
not receive Christ, as appears by the words immediately foregoing, its also
evident that some of the Church of the Galatians were not baptized, for the
same expression is used concerning them, Gal. 3. 27. from which two instances
it is apparent, that baptism is neither necessary to make a Saint, or to render
him capable of Church Fellowship.

Baptist.
[As many as] is a phrase that where its used does not always, nay does never
of it self necessarily express and imply [not all] or [but some onely] of the
things or persons spoken of in the words that border about it, but as it may
happen pro re substrata, according to the nature of the matter in hand, and
according as the sense thereof is manifest by the foregoing and following
sentences expressing or implying it; so that sometimes you shall find it
signifying, but some only or a part, exclusively of others or the rest of the
body spoken to, or spoken of thereabout, and sometimes no less then the whole
of it, neither is it apparent whether [a] or but [some onely] is the sense of
this term [as many as] where ere it is used, but as it is made appear by the
context, or some circumstances in it, and not a jot less then this is said by
your self in that very objection of yours I am now answering to, for of John 1.
12. as many as received him, to them gave he power, these words plainly
intimate (say you) that some of them, i. e. the Jews whom its said he came to,
did not receive Christ, and for my part I grant they do so signify in that
place: but why? or how does it appear that they must needs signify there that
but some of the Jews received him.

It appears not by any usual or constant sense of the words as mazy as, as
if they always sounded forth but some, and never all of such or such subjects
as are spoken of, but it appears (say you) by the words immediately
foregoing: in which verily you say right, for the words foregoing do plainly
show what the sense of these words As many as is in this Scripture, for
forasmuch as its said plainly above, that he came to his own, and his own
received him not i. e. for the generality of them rejected him, therefore its
undeniably evident that here the words, as many as received him, do intimate
that some did not receceive him; but if you should take these words, as many as
received him abstract from what is said above viz. that his own, for the most
part did not receive him, then they were not necessarily to be so understood,
neither could they simply of themselves intimate so much: and as these words as
many as, considered abstractively from the context or speeches adjacent, are
not of themselves terms so necessarily exclusive of some, as they are
conclusive of some, so considered in a right reference to the rest of the words
preceding and succeeding among which they have their place, they will be found
sometimes conclusive of no less then all those persons or things there spoken
of, e. g. if I were speaking of the whole company of men in the great ship or
Royal Sovereign (as Paul does to the whole Church at Galatia) and say, you are
all in a pretty safe condition, for as many of you have been admitted into that
strong ship cannot likely be sunk: does not the word as many of you signify
all the men he speaks to, even the whole company of them that are in the ship,
and not some of them only? so and no otherwise is it to be understood in these
two Scriptures, viz. Romans 6. 2. Gal. 3. 27. where you would needs have these
words viz. as many of us, and as many of you as were, as have been baptized
into Christ, necessarily to intimate no more but that only some of the
believing Romans, and some of the Galatians were baptized, and to be conclusive
of some in each of these two churches, and exclusive of the rest, even of them,
as being not baptized, whereas there is nothing in the world more plain then
this, that these words Romans 6. as many of us Gal. 3. as many of you, as have
been baptized etc. if considered with that due relation they bear, and stand in
to the words foregoing or following, do intimate to us that the whole Church of
the Romans, that were to reckon on themselves as dead to sin, and bound to live
to it no longer, (and that certainly was no less then the whole) were
baptized, and that all the Churches in Galatia, or all the believers among the
Galatians were baptized.

Yea if the scope of the Apostle Paul in both the places be observed, we shall
find that he makes this no other then an argument, and uses it as a certain
medium or motive whereby to persuade the Romans that they were all to die to
sin, and now to live to it no longer, and to prove the Galatians, even all of
them, to be, visibly to us at least, the sons of God by faith in Christ,
because they were all of them baptized into Christ, and thereby had visibly put
him on.

First take notice that the business he would persuade the whole Church at
Rome to, and prove to be the duty of them all is this, that they should now die
to sin, have no more to do with sin, and live to God, now how does he prove
that, and go about to persuade them to it? which is his business throwout that
whole chapter Romans 6. no otherway (as I find) but by imminding them of it, that
by their being buried with Christ in baptism this not only was signified to
them, but also became the duty of them all, and that so strictly that howbeit
before not so obliged, yet from thenceforth they must crucify the old man, and
utterly abolish the body of sin, and live to righteousness: what? shall we
(says he, for so his sense is) continue in sin, i. e. we that are dead to it,
and have been all baptized into Christ in token of it? God forbid: know ye not
that every one that's baptized into Christ, is baptized into his death? yea
therefore it is that we, i. e. all we still, himself, and the whole Church to whom
he writes, are buried with Christ in baptism into death etc. to show that as
Christ dyed, and rose again, so we also should walk in newness of life, for if
we, i. e. all we have been planted together i. e. in baptism the lively
resemblance of it, in to the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the
likeness of his resurrection, etc and so he goes on moving them all now to
lead a new life, and to be servants to righteousness by the consideration of
the great engagements to Godward that lay upon them all since such time as they
were baptized: and forasmuch as you say they had all obeyed from the heart the
form of doctrine delivered unto them you therein contradict your self, and
confess no less then we assert viz. that they were all baptized: for that
form of doctrine that was at first delivered to them was the form of doctrine
spoken of Heb. 6. 1, 2. even the six first principles of the oracles of God, of
the doctrine of Christ, which as they are here called a form of doctrine so
there are called the foundation or ABC of a Christian, and of the Church, as
also Ephesians. 2. 20. the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, i. e. the first
doctrine of Christ, on which they built the Church, of which baptism is there
said to be a part: yea and that very phrase of Paul Romans 6. 17. viz. ye were
the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine,
which was delivered to you, is no other then a further prosecution, and
inculcation of the former argument upon the whole Church of the Romans still,
and is as much as if the had said ye were once, i. e. before your baptism the
Servants of sin, and then nothing but sin could be expected from you, but now
the case is otherwise, you have all obeyed the form of doctrine delivered, i.
e. have professed your repentance from dead works and faith, and been baptized
into Christ, and thereby listed your selves visibly under him as his Soldiers,
and are hereby become Servants to righteousness, therefore now you must not
let sin have dominion over you: This verily is the very meaning of the Apostle
in the whole chapter, yea and in those very words know you not that as many of
us as have been baptized? viz. not to have us suppose that but some of them had
been baptized, but to give them to understand that as all of them had been
baptized, so as many as are baptized into Christ are baptized into his death,
in token ofit, that they should now all become new creatures: if we speak his
mind in a Syllogistical form it runs thus viz.

As many of us as are baptized must know this that we are baptized into Christ's
death, and therefore must die to sin and live holily.

But we have been all baptized or buried with Christ in baptism into his death.

Therefore we must all die to sin and live holily.

If this were not his sense, but we must take the words as many of us as have
been baptized to be conclusive of himself, and but some of that Church, and
exclusive of the rest of them as to baptism, then I testify they are much more
exclusive of many of them from that duty of dying to sin, which he there
presses upon the whole Church, by the consideration of their being baptized:
yea if that phrase as many of us as have been baptizd does intimate to us that
not all, but some only of the believing Ro^s had bin baptizd, then it must
needs intimate to us that not all but some of the believing Roms were engaged
by their baptism, and pressed by Paul in that chap. from the consideration of
their death, and burial with Christ in baptism, to die to sin and live to
righteousness, which no rational man can imagine, but rather as they were all
urged by an Argument drawn from their baptism to live to God, so they had
assuredly been all of them baptized.

And the same may be said of that same phrase as it is used to the Galatians Gal.
3. to whom Paul's drift was to prove what he had said of them all in the verse
above v. 26. viz. that they were all the children of God by faith in Christ:
and how does he prove it that they were so? no otherwise but by this Medium,
viz. that they had been all baptized: you are all the children of God by faith
in Christ, for as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have visibly
put him on, and thereby declared you have faith in him, which having, you are
the children of God: in form his Argument runs thus, viz.

As many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ, and are
thereby apparently declared to be the children of God by faith in him.

But you have been all baptized into Christ etc.

Ergo, etc.

This must needs be his sense here too, or else if the term as many of you as
have been baptized must not be taken as conclusive of all the Galatians to whom
he writes, but exclusive of some of them from baptism, it must be exclusive of
the same persons from being proved by Paul's Argument drawn from their baptism
to to be the children of God: as many as received him to them gave he power to
be come the Sons of God, is as much as to say, he gave power to become the sons
of God to no more then such as received him: so as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ have put on Christ, and are thereby visibly declared to be
the children of God by faith in him, though it do not signify that all the
Galatians had not been baptized, but some of them only, yet it signifies this
however that no more then such as had been baptized into Christ, had put him on
and were thereby declared to be Gods children, and consequently that if but
some of the Galatians were baptized, but some of them only appeared to be Gods
children: which were absurd to think and would render Paul as contradictory to
himself in the verse above, where he says ye are all the children of God, so
very ridiculous in his Argument; and render his proof as pedling as if he had
said thus by way of position, viz. you are all, even every one of you, the
children of God, and then by way of proof thus, viz. for some of you have been
baptized, and by that baptism of yours are declared so to be, though the rest
are not.

Ranterist.
You make baptism I perceive very needful but the Apostle Peter who very well
understood the Commission given to him and the rest of his follow Apostles
Matthew. 28, 29, 20 Mark 16, 15. 16. when he speaks of the baptism that saves
1 Pet. 3. 21. le^st any should think that he meant the baptism of water,
whereof we speak, by which the filth of the body is put away, he excludes the
putting away the filth of the flesh, and places baptism wholly in the answer of
a good conscience toward God, neither can any man truly say that by putting
away of the filth of the flesh is here to be understood the putting away of the
filthy works of the flesh for then could it neither be excluded from salvation,
which is promised them which mortify the deed of the flesh, but walk after the
spirit Romans 8. 1. 17. nor opposed to the answer of a good conscience, which
springs from the putting away of dead works, such as the works of the flesh
are, for he only is truly said to have a good conscience, who is not conscious
to himself of walking according to the flesh.

Baptist.
That by the words putting away the filth of the flesh, is meant that bare
outward dispensation of water I freely do, and every one must grant, and
therefore what is spoken by you in proof of that might well have been spared:
also that the bare subm^ssion to that outward dispensation of water is not
that, which simply of it self, and abstract from the inward i. e. the answer of
a good conscience does save us, must needs be granted also: but what of this?
will it therefore follow that it is to be omitted, and not made use of at all?
in reason surely it cannot be so assertter: for as the bare outward hearing
ofthe word without doing it, will do us no good but rather hurt, and yet that
outward hearing is an ordinance at no hand to be neglected, but necessarily to
be used in order to the doing of the word, without which we had beuer never
heat, for we shall not save, but deceive our own souls Iam. 1. 22. and shall
perish in the end Mat. 7. 26. and as bare outward fellowship in breaking of
bread is so far from saving, that we eat and d^ink judgment to our selves
unless withal we d^cern the Lords body, and be patt^kers of the thing
signified, and yet that outward service is needful to be performed: so though
water baptism does not save us ex opero opera^, and unless it be answered wi^h
in by the answer of a good conscience, yet what consequence is there from hence
that it need not be done at all? neither does Peter altogether exclude the
patting away the filth of the flesh, as not to be pract^sed, and place the
business of baptism wholly in the answer of a good conscience, as you here say
he does, but rather places the baptism that saves in both these As Christ also
does Mar. 16. 16. saying he that believes and is baptized shall be saved: for
true, he that believes not, whether he be baptized or no, shall be damned.
, not in either without the other, yea in that he says thus, baptism does also
now save us, not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a
good conscience, he includes the baptism with water, as that, which is to be
done, but not to be rested in as available to salvation, without the other.

Ranterist.
There is no man sent by Christ to baptize, so that were I never so willing to
be baptized, yet there is none to baptize me: for though it should be granted,
which nevertheless is false, and cannot be evinced out of the Scripture, that
the Apostles were sent to baptize with water, yet this does not warrant others
to do so likewi^, unless they can prove that whatsoever was spoken to the
Apostles was spoken to them, and by this account they must go into all Nations,
and make them dis^iples having first stayed at Jerusalem ^ill they have been
^dued with power from on high, for both things are injoined to the Apostles by
Christ.

Baptist.
That the Apostles were not sent to baptize in water in such a sense as Paul
sales 1 Cor. 1. Christ sent not him to baptize in i. e. to dispense that
ordinance necessarily with their own hands, so but that when they had preached
and converted persons to the faith, others might help ^o administer it, I
granted above, but that they were not sent to preach the Gospel i. e. the
bapts^ of faith and repentance for remession of s^s among all Nations, as far
as they were capable, and that baptism in water was not a part of that Gospel
ministration, which was committed to (...), to command all Nations to observe,
and to see dispensed, on all that should be discipled therein, this I utterly
de^y, and the contrary to it is so clearly ^vinced in the word, that he that
runs may read it, for either Christ commande^ them Mat. 28. to te^ch bap^izing,
not with the spirit, but in water, or (...) P^ter miserably mistook his
commission that in obedience thereto presses 1000* of people at once, enquiring
what they should do, to be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, promising
only, that so doing they should, not from him sorely, (...) from Christ
receive the holy spirit, Act. 2. 39. and also concerning a people that were
already baptized with the spirit, asks who can forbid water why these may not
be baptized? commanding them, who were ready to hear no more then what was
commanded him of God to deliver to them, Act. 10. 23. to be baptiz^d in the
name of the Lord: and if by the Apostles you mean the eleven only, that were
within hearing, when Christ spoke, as it is to him, that is not afraid of cold
water, undoubtedly true, that these were, so as u^deniable it is that others
were sent to baptize in water as well as they viz. Philip that baptized the
(...), and Eu^uch, Paul that baptized so many of the Corinthians as he did, and
Ananias that baptized him, or else they made and preached a Gospel of their own
heads, another Gospel, and not Christ's, which if they did, they made more have
then good speed to themselves, for such as teach for doctrines of Christ their
own traditions, and run before they are sent, do both worship God in vain, and
shall neither of them have any thank from him for their labor: and that what
was spoken to those 11 Apostles themselves as to the point of baptism, was
spoken also to us, even to such in all Nations, as being once discipled are
after that enabled from God to preach the Gospel, is no less evident then all
the rest Matthew. 28. 19. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you, among which water baptism was one v. 18. and whereas you say
upon this account we must go into all nations and make them disciples, who
doubts but that it is our duty so to do to the utmost of our power (and they
could do no more) for that's commanded, and baptism too, to be observed to the
end; but for their staying at Jerusalem till they were endued with power from
on high and beginning first to preach there, that did concern them only as a
special circumstance for that time, not pertaining to the substance of the
service, nor required of all the Apostles themselves, and administrators of
baptism then, (for if it had Ananias, Philip, Paul began at the wrong end of
their business, when one of them began to preach the Gospel at Samaria, the
other at Damascus, not going up to Jerusalem first Gal. 1. 17.) and if not of
them why it should be of us I know not: Nevertheless as to the substance of
that command I grant that every one is to tar^y till he be endued more or less
with power, i. e. boldness, wisdom, knowledge, utterance, resolution, self
denial etc. before he goes out as Christ's Messenger to preach to the nations:
but being so endued, and furnished must out 1 Pe^. 4. 11.
(for ought I know) among all people, as he has ability, and occasion
beginning at the place where he is, and proceeding to spread the Gospel afar
off, if he find not wo^k enough nearer home.

Ranterist:
Could it be proved, as it cannot, that there are some sent to baptize yet even
then will it not follow that I, and such as I am ought to be baptized by them,
for we do not read that any of the Apostles, or Apostolic men did ever baptize
any but such as are newly converted to the Christian Religion, but I and such
as I am have from our infancy embraced the Christian Religion, and (...) ^er,
now if our Adversaries did rightly infer that because there is neither p^cept
no^ example in Scripture, for baptizing of infants therefore it is a needles^
thing, in like manner I may as tru^y conclude, for as much as their is neither
precept nor example in Scripture for baptizing such as have been bred up in the
Christian Religion and never professe^ any other, I and such as I am have no
need at all to be baptized.

Baptist.
That some are sent to baptize is proved above, and sure enough, if it be (as
we see it is Act. 2. 39. 10. 47, 48. men's duty to be baptizd, or else Christ has
required a service of every man, and that sub poena too for he that (...) not
to his voice in all things whatever he says shall be cut off from among his
people Act. 3. 22, ^3.
and yet though never so willing to be baptized, left them in no possible
capacity to perform it for want of provision of administrators: but that you
and such as you are, yea and that though some are sent to baptize, have such a
Supersedeas from being baptized as you pretend to be vouchsafed you by Christ
Jesus, because you have been long of it, and been bred up in the Christian
Religion is such a strange piece of business as I know not in any wise what to
make of, who, in forohominum, and ecclesiae, at least, take baptism to be the
visible badge that so distinguishes between those that are of the Christian
Religion, and other people, that who so shall say he is of the Christian
religion, and yet never was, nor will be baptized, must excuse me if, according
to the tenor of Christ's Testa meant, I own him not as yet to be a Christian.

What you call the Christian Religion, in which you say you were bred up, I
know not: if you mean the doctrines of faith, repentance, and good manners,
alone as yet, and abstract from baptism, this (whether it be a great while, or
but a little while since you began to put it in practice, the matter is much at
one, for degrees, as to the length or shortness of the time since we were
converted, do not vary the nature of the case) this I say is so far from
exempting, that it is the only thing engaging you to baptism, and howbeit you
say there is neither (as I am sure there is not for baptizing infants) yet you
cannot possibly, but see that there is both president, and precept for the
baptizing of all believers, and of all in any Nations that are discipled: so
that if you have been converted not lately but long ago, and remained till now
unbaptized, you have so much the more need to hasten to it, and instead of
being held excused from now doing it at all, because you did it not when first
you should, to be ex^uscitated in the words of Ananias to Paul saying, and now
why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on
the name of the Lord.

But if by the Christian Religion, which you say you were bred up in, you mean
either that Christian Religion of the Rantizer that teaches men to change the
ordinances of Christ, that of baptism specially, as to its form and subject,
and to make void his command through his tradition of a new baptism to all, or
that Christian Religion of the Ranter that so rebels against that law of
Christ that he will give way to have now no water baptism at all, these two
Religions, as Christian as you count and call them, are both but Antichristian
with me.

Ranterist.
You make such a deal of do about water baptism as so needful, that there may
be no Church Fellowship held without it, but for ought I see y^ it is a matter o^
no such weight, but that we may serve God as acceptably to the full without it,
for in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith, which works by love Gal. 5. 9. circumcision is
nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping the commandaments of
God 1 Cor. 7. 19.

Baptist.
It Is true, that when Pau^ spoke this, which was when there was an abolition of
circumcision, so far as was consistent with the Jews ability to bear it, and
when it was now de jure to grow out of date, then circumcision was nothing, and
uncircumcision nothing, so that it was altogether needless to be circumcised,
but as nothing as it is now, yet so something was it once, when that testament
it was the sign of stood, that every soul, of whom it was then required, that
was not circumcised was to be cut off from having fellowship with that Church
and people, and as nothing as this baptism or no baptism is with you now, yet
no less then this at least must we say of the unbaptized, that every soul that
shall refuse to be baptized, is to have no fellowship with Christ's Church, and
people: Acts 2. 41. 42.

Secondly, as nothing as circumcision, and uncircumcision, baptism or no
baptism are with you, yet faith which works by love is something, as Paul
himself also does seem to hint, and the keeping of the commandments of God,
which love to the Lord Jesus he that says he can express without keeping his
commandments, among which baptism in water is not the lea^, and without
counting those commands of his not too grievous to submit to, makes either
Christ a liar, or elle himself, Ioh. 14. 23. 1 John 2. 4. 5. 1 John 5. 2. 3.

Thus far concerning water baptism, to which in the primitive times there
were, and in all times also, where in it is or shall be truly dispenst, and
sincerely submitted to, there assuredly are, or will be two other baptism^
concomitant, viz.

First, a baptism with sufferings.

Secondly, a baptism with the holy spirit, to support under those sufferings.
in order to the being baptized with the last of which baptisms, there was then
an ordinance, or administration of Christ viz. prayer and laying on of hands,
which was practiced toward all believers after baptism in water, which as it
was kept on foot from the Apostles days and downward among the Churches of
Christ in after ages, and is, as to the substance of the service, kept on with
far less corruption and alteration, then that which yet cleaves to their
baptism, among all but the Presbyterian part of the national priesthood and
people, so that it is of right to be used in order to the self same end, and in
the self same manner now as then it was, because the present use, and practice
thereof is so openly (not to say obstinately) denied not only by the Ranter,
who rases the whole foundation, and the Presbyrerian and Independent Rantizer,
who raze down that, or at least do not raise it, but also by several societies
of persons baptized, who to the great grief of such congregations as own the
whole truth, and are built upon the whole foundation or beginning doctrine of
the Prophets and Apostles, do yet ignorantly withstand it, and some, even of
these, bitterly band against it. I shall the Lord assisting in all possible
meekness, brevity, and plainness make good unto them; and that in this one
single long-winded syllogism only (least the press which now presses on apace
after me, and is at the very heels of me all along at my penning of this whole
business called Anti-ranterism, should overtake me, and stand still for want
of such supply as it expects hourly from me, least also I out run too much (as
I have almost done already) the bounds prefixed to this interposed Treatise)
the Minor proposition of which argument being proved, and cleared from those
clouds of objection wherewith some strive to darken it, will both evince and
evidence the continuance of that service also in its right use to this day so
sufficiently, that howbeit much more might be spoken, yet no more shall at this
time at least by me.

Whatsoever was in the primitive times taught, practiced, dispensed or
submitted to, owned or observed as a command of Christ, as one of the oracles
or holy things of God, as a part of that foundation on which the true visible
Church is Major.
built, as one of the very principles of the doctrine of Christ, as a practical
part of the Law, Will, and Testament of Christ concerning them in order to
their receiving the holy spirit of promise according to the promise, at their
first beginning to be disciples, at or about the time of their baptism and
before actual fellowship in the visible Church, in all the Churches, and among
all baptiz^d believers, even men and women without exception of any, without
the least hint of any limitation of it to those times only, and without the
least intimation to us in the word of Christ that it was his will it should then
cease, and has also plain injunction form Christ for its continuance, for its
being taught to, and observed by the disciples, that should be successively in
all the world through all nations and generations of it to the end, and has
also the same ends, grounds and reasons why it was to be used continuing still
to this day as much as then, is certinly in the same manner, as then, to be
observed to this very day.

But on this wise is that service of prayer and laying on of hands, not only
on officers, Deacons, Elders, messengers in order to their receiving of the
holy spirit to empower them in a fuller measure for those several functions,
but also on common disciples men and women in order to their receiving the holy
spirit in such manner and measure as Christ Jesus shall be pleased to impart it
in, to comfort Minor.
them under sufferings, and make them sit for fellowship in the body or visible
Church.

Therefore that service of laying on of hands with prayer on common disciples,
men and women, as well as that on officers in order to their offices, is now to
be observed as in former days.

The first proposition is so undoubtedly true, that if any should be so
irrational as to deny it, (as I judge none will, but the Rakesham Ranter that
regards neither God nor devil, and reckons on all Christ's commands as not worth
a rush) I shall be more rational then to believe him to be a man fit to reason
with, or that it can be to any purpose in never so reasonable a manner to
bespeak him.

As for the Minor wherein it is affirmed that the business of prayer and laying
on of hands after baptism in water upon every disciple man or woman is such as
was taught, practiced, dispensed, submitted to, ownd, and observed as an
ordinance, and command of Christ etc. as it follows in the Major, that remains
yet to be cleared, which by that time I shall have done in each of those
particulars that are there asserted of it, either expressly, or by such plain
and legitimate deduction^, and inferences from the Scripture as may be justly
satisfactory to any sincere souls that love truth, and allow others to draw
inferences from the word (without which who can prove that he shall be saved?
for no man can of himself by name prove expressly that he shall be save (the
Scripture promising life to neither Peter not Paul by name, save as they were
believers) but only by an inference from the Scripture; and in the balance of
right reason, comparing Scripture with Scripture, or by arguing in some such
manner out of it viz. he the believes and is bapt^zed, continuing in that his
faith and obedience till death, shall be saved, M^k 16 16. Romans 2. 7. H^b. 10
35. 38. but I believe and am baptized, and continue in that faith, and G^d
essisting will never draw back, Ergo I shall be saved. No condemnation to them
that walk not after the fl^, but after the spirit, so dying, but I walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit.

Ergo so doing, so dying, there is no condemnation to me, and so (consequently
still) I shall be saved, Romans 8. 1.


) as well as themselves, and by discovering the weakness of such exceptions as
are ordinarily made against the present use of this rite or service, it will be
more then high time for me to quit this subject also: where is therefore
contrary to what is asserted in the very front of the foregoing argument, viz.
that laying on of hands was taught in the primitive times, I find it intimated
to us by way of query, that some, who even therefore as well as for other
reasons by them rendered cannot practice it, are in no wise satisfied that such
a thing as laying on of hands on all baptized believers, was ever taught by
either Christ or his Apostles; witness a paper newly extant, subscribed with
15. hands, and sent to my self in particular by one of the subscribers, while I
am just beginning this very treatise of Anti-ranterism (which occasions a more
distinct handling of this point of laying on of hands then I otherwise
intended) styled. Questions about laying on of hands (with the grounds why they
are demanded) lovingly propounded to all those churches of Jesus Christ in
London or elsewhere, or to any one member of the body of our Lord, who pleads
or preaches for the necessity or usefulness of laying on of hands to be
practiced by all baptized believers.

The ad* query of which is on this wise viz.

We desire to be directed by them unto some place of Scripture (if they know of
any) where our Lord Jesus Christ or any of his Apostles or disciples preached
this doctrine viz. that all baptized bellevers ought to practice or submit unto
laying on of hands.


in proof of this that laying on of hands was taught, I send such as doubt of
it first to the name of doctrine of Christ, by which in common together with
the other five principles of it, it is denominated Heb. 6. 1. 2. leaving the
principles of the doctrine of Christ, not laying again the foundation of
repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, and of the doctrine of
baptisms and of laying on of hands, which denomination of doctrine of Christ
could not possibly belong to it properly, but that it was somewhere, or at
sometime or other taught by either Christ or his Apostles or disciples, in the
judgment of any that are but so far learned as to know whence the word
doctrine is derived, which, as (...) in the greek is of (...), so is of doceo
to teach: but secondly, whereas it is desired that we should (if we know of any)
direct to some place of Scripture, where ever Christ, or any of his Apostles or
disciples did preach this doctrine that all baptized believers ought to
practice or submit unto laying on of hands, for my own part I shall direct the
enquirers to several Scriptures, in one of which as it is express enough, so
in the rest its plain enough to such as are not more resolved ^o proceed in
propounding questions, then, when they are answered to be resolved, that some
or other of the Apostles or disciples of Christ did teach and preach that
doctrine: the first of these is Heb. 5. 12. where to that Church of the Hebrews
or Jews the very platform to all the rest, which, (as to its more complete
outward form and order, and that denomination of the Church, to which God added
daily such as should be saved,) had its first being, and beginning under Peter's
teaching Act. 2. it is said thus viz. whereas for the time ye ought to be
teachers, ye have need to be taught again, which be the first principles of the
oracles of God.

Where note first from the words taught again, that they were taught once
before all the principles of the doctrine of Christ, whereof this laying on of
hands is said to be one: and not only so, but secondly, from these words you
ought to be teachers, that by this time they should have been of ability to
teach these principles to others, which also shows that these principles ought
all along still to be taught:

Moreover if it be queried where or by whom these Hebrews were at first taught
this A B C, these principles of the oracles of God there spoken of, is it not
as clear as the sun to any serious, understanding, considerate spirit that it
was by Peter at Jerusalem in his first preaching there in obedience to Christ's
commission, Mat. 28. after power was come upon him from on high, in Act. 2.
which I direct to as a second place wherein we may find it preached? did not
Peter there lay this foundation of the principles of the doctrine of Christ
among them in preaching, as they did themselves in practicing, Heb. 6. 2. and
howbeit the whole form of the doctrine he there delivered is not set down, as
none of the doctrine that Philip preached at Samaria is, nor of that Paul
preached at Philippi Act. 16. 14. nor at Corinth Act. 18. 8. yet is it not by
sundry passages as evident that he taught that principle of laying on of hands
among all the rest, as it is (and how evident that is, is showed above) that
they in those other places preached baptism? shall we think that Peter taught
the principles of the doctrine of Christ, all which he was to lay as one
foundation among them, by the halves? did he build them upon one part of the
foundation, and not on the other part? did he constitute them partly upon it,
and partly beside it? did he teach them all the rest of the principles (every
of which its said Heb. 5. 12. they had been taught) viz. faith, repentance,
baptism, resurrection, and judgment, and did he leave out that one only of
laying on of hands, specially since its said that with many other words he
exhorted that people, who are said there also to continue in the Apostles
doctrine? what man that devotes himself to the comparing of Scripture with
Scripture can imagine it? and if not, why not be satisfied that it was preached
by some at least of Christ's Apostles to all baptized believers? A third
Scripture I direct the inquirers unto, is Act. 8. 5. 12. 14. 15. 16. 17. whence
first its evident from the Apostles administering, and the Samaritans submission
to it, that the doctrine in the purport and tendency of it, was first declared,
(unless we shall judge the Saints at Samaria were such idiots as to act by
implicit faith, as men were not to do, but by comparison of what they said with
the Scriptures, under the ministry of the Apostles themselves Act. 17. 22. and
to yield blind obedience to they knew not what, the Apostles also justifying
them in it, which if they did, then you that profess your selves to be yet
ignorant in that service, and that you know not the meaning of it may submit to
it as safely, though as senslessely, as they, from the hands of such as do;
which yet when all is done I am sure you may not: but

Secondly, more evident yet if you weigh some passages of that text it self,
the words whereof are on this wise viz. then went Philip down unto Samaria and
preached Christ to them, v. 5. and when they believed the things spoken by
Philip pertaining to the Kingdom of God, they were baptized both men and women,
when they at Jerusalem heard that Samaria ha^ rec^ved the word of God, they
sent unto them Peter and John, who when they were come, prayed for them that
they might receive the holy spirit, for as yet he was fallen upon none of them,
only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, then laid they their
hands on them, and they received the holy spirit.

Its said that Philip preached Christ, and spoke of the things pertaining to
the the Kingdom of God, and that they received the word of God, which they did
not surely, so much as to believe what was to be done, till he had preached it,
now can any rational man think, that he preached Christ and the things
pertaining to his kingdom, and the word of God, and not preach so much as all
the principles of the oracles of God, not so much as all the first Rudiments or
whole beginning word of Christ? but left out imposition of hands only among
all the rest, as none of the word of Christ, nor of the things pertaining to
his kingdom as not to be preached, no not in that juncture wherein immediately
after it was to be, and accordingly was, so universally submitted to by them,
and dispenst unto them? or if you say they received not that word of laying on
of hands from Philip* but from Peter and John.

I answer, it is true practically from the hands of Peter and John dispensing it,
but by faith, so as to believe it to be a practicable doctrine that was their
duty to own, from the mouth of Philip dispensing the doctrine, of it, or
suppose that Philip spoke nothing of it till Peter and John came, which is non
supponendum, yet is it likely that the Apostles that were sent to them from
Jerusalem, though nothing is said of that they said, that therefore they said
nothing to them at all? yea will right reason ever receive this for truth, that
the Apostles were sent to Samaria upon the account of some service (whether
solely that of prayer and laying on of hands it matters not so long as that was
one part of it at least) and yet neither acquaint them (whether before
acquainted with it or no) to what end and purpose they came, and what was the
end and purport of that service they only or mainly came for? he that can
receive this let him receive it, for my part I profess I cannot.

A fourth place from whence it is easily gathered that the doctrine of laying
on of hands in order to their receiving the holy spirit, was wont to be
preached to all baptized believers is Act. 19. 1, 2. 3. where Paul speaking to
the whole company of disciples that he found at Ephesus, the number whereof were
then but about twelve, among whom the doctrine of laying on of hands in order
to the receiving the holy spirit had not been preached at the time of their
baptism, seems to reprove and blame the neglect of it, enquiring whether they
had not received the holy spirit, supposing surely at least that the promise of
it had been to them, and prayer made for them in the usual way, with laying on
of hands that they might receive it, but marveiling much that they, being
baptized believers, had not been informed about these matters, nor had so much
as heard of the holy spirit, have you received the holy pirit? (says he) no
nor so much as heard of it, (say they) no? unto what then were you baptized,
(says he) if at least you have not so much as heard of it? as who should say,
who baptized you I wonder, and did not so much as instruct you about the
spirit, nor, laying on their hands, pray for you that you might receive the
spirit? this plainly shows that by right they should all about the time of
their baptism in water have heard of the holy spirit, and in what way it was to
have been expected by them, even that of laying on of hands, none of all which
they having so much as heard of as yet, Paul therefore after some words of
fuller information to them, and such other passages as fell out thereupon laid
his hands on them verse 6. in order to their receiving the holy spirit.

These Scriptures (what they are to others I know not) are to me a clear, and
safe conduct into the belief of this truth, that the doctrine of laying on of
hands with prayer in order to receiving the holy spirit, both was in the
primitive times, and was to be, preached to all baptized believers, as that
which was no less then their duty to own and submit to have dispensed to them.

And as it was so universally taught, and preached, so was it as universally in
those times practiced, dispensed, submitted to, ownd and observed in all the
churches, and among all baptized believers, even men and women without
exception: This is evident out of the four forenamed places viz. Heb. 5. 12. 6.
1, 2. Act. 19 6. Act. 8. 12. 15. 16, 17. Act. 2. 40, 42.
in the first of which it is not only express that they, i. e. all that Jewish
Church had been taught this principle among the rest, but also that it had been
practically owned and observed among them as well as all the rest: for as its
said there of all the principles together that these Jews had need to be
taught them again, so that they should not now lay them again, but go on to
perfection, which shows that as these principles had been all preached to them
all, so all these Jews or Hebrews did once lay them all as a foundation at
their first beginning to be a Church, and therefore this of laying on of hands
among the rest.

In the second we read that Paul laid his hands on all the baptized believers
that he found at Ephesus, being then no more in number then about 12. speaking
(as it were) by way of blame, and reproof of those by whom they were baptized,
that this was not also done by them at their baptism, in order to their
receiving the holy spirit, much more in that they were not so much as informed
that there was a holy spirit to be expected by them ver. 32. 3. which may serve
also as an Argument to them, that say, as some of the inquirers do, that the
reproof of the omission of any service does evince that that service ought to
have been performed, and as an answer also to the fourth question of the
abovenamed enquirers with the ground thereof which is this viz. because many
blame and reprove baptized believers because they do not practice, sub mit to,
or come under laying on of hands. Therefore we desire to know of them, if they
can tell of any of the servants of Christ, that ever did reprove or blame any
sort of people, whether baptized or ^ot, because laying on of hands was not
practiced, or submitted to by them.


In the third place we find it most expressly asserted that Peter and John
prayed for them that they might receive the holy spirit, and laid their hands
on them i. e. all those men and women (for that's the only substantive to this
pronoun them in that place, of whom its said before that they were baptized in
the name of the Lord Jesus: which word only they were baptized intimates to us
thus much also, viz. that though they had submitted so far as to baptism, yet
they had not practiced all that was to be practiced by them, but that some
other service was yet behind, which ought to be performed toward them, viz.
that of laying on of hands.

In the fourth its asserted also most plainly that all the three thousand
believers that were baptized did gladly receive the word, i. e. the word that
Peter preached to them, who exhorted them with many other words then those that
are there specified, viz. repentance and baptism, and that they continued in
the Apostles doctrine, of which word and doctrine, if we may judge the word or
doctrine of Christ and the Apostles to be one and the same) laying on of hands
was part as well as faith, repentance, baptism, resurrection, and judgment,
Heb. 6. 1. 2. besides, if the word and doctrine of Christ that was preached and
practiced at Jerusalem was the self same word and doctrine, that was after
preached and practiced at Samaria, then we may safely gather that whatever was
preached and practiced by them at Samaria had been preached and practiced by them
at Jerusalem before, from whence they came immediately to Samaria, where its
easy to be discerned by any but such as will bend their brains to multiply
impertinencies, and to make bluries to themselves, and others in businesses
that are beyond doubt to impartial inquirers, that they laid hands, praying for
them that they might receive the holy spirit, on all those believers there that
were baptized, whether men or women without exception, if we may as warrantably
understand the men and women, that are said to be baptized v. 12. to be the
same persons that are said to be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus v. 16.
and the same persons that are denoted by that pronoun them v. 14. 15. 16. as I
am sure we cannot warrantably, because not congruously, do otherwise? for who
else can be meant all along but the very same (and not some of them only, but
even all the some, even the men and women, that are related above to be
baptized?) for whereas its said ver. 12. when they believed, they were baptized
both men and women, and v. 16. that the holy spirit was fallen upon none of
them, only they were baptized, must not they and them there be taken for all
those that are said to be baptized above? and so consequently when it is said
ver. 15. that they prayed for them, and ver. 17. that they laid their hands on
them, does not them denote out the very same?

Yet this cannot be digested for truth with some of the inquirers, for it was
asserted as his opinion (the rest assenting to it by their silence) by one of
those with whom we had some discourse at Ely house March 27. 1653. (whether the
same be the sense of all those that sent him I know not) that Peter and John
did not with prayer lay hands on all the baptized believers at Samaria, but on
the men only, and not on the women. As if women were not under the promise of
the holy spirit, repenting believing, and being baptized, as well as men: when
as Peter says Acts (...). 39. to the whole multitude of women as well as men,
repent and be baptized, and ye shall receive the holy spirit, for the promise
is to you and to your children, and them that are a far off even as many as the
Lord shall call: as if John Baptist also did not speak promiscuously to the
multitudes of both men and women, and to the women as well as the men whom he
baptized, when he said I indeed baptize you with water, but he shall baptize
you with the holy spirit: and if baptized believing women be under a promise of
being baptizd with the spirit as well as men pro. 1. 23. then why they should
not have hands laid on them, and be prayed for that they may receive it as well
as the other, according to the promise, he is a wiser man then I am that knows
any reason.


And whereas in proof of the contrary I asserted that the pronoun them in v.
14. 15. 16. 17. does relate to not the men only, but the men and women, even
all those that are said to be baptized, as the adaequate substantive with which
it did agree: it was answered by him to this purpose (a pretty put off I
confess, but nothing to the purpose) viz. that the Scripture had expressions
both particular, indefinite, and universal, that the word them here, as it was
not a particular, so it was not an universal (for then it would have been said
all them) but an indefinit expression, signifying some only not all, whereby
he bewrayed his too little acquaintance with one received rule among the
Rationallists, viz. that an indefinite proposition, or expression in a
necessary matter is equivalent ever to an universal: howbeit my reply to him
then was not so, but on this wise, viz. that if we must take them but
indefinitely only, for some and not all the persons or things before spoken of,
unless that particle all be added to it, then we had consequently no clear
command from Matthew. 28. 19, 20. to baptize all that are discipled, and
converted to the faith, for by the pronoun them, that is there used also, we
must not mean all them, but some of them only in the nations that are
discipled, because its not said all them, but merely them, but I entreated him
from his conscience to tell me whether he did think, that when Christ says Go
teach all nations baptizing them, teaching them, he meant that they should
baptize all them, or but some of them only in the nations that were discipled,
his return was that if there were not other places that did more clearly prove
it that Christ commanded that all should be baptized then Matthew 28. he could
not see it fully commanded there: and being desired to assign any place,
wherein Christ did more universally command baptism then there, he directs us
to Luke 7. 30. where its said the Pharisees rejected the Counsel of God against
themselves in not being baptized: whence he gathered that baptism was the
Council, and consequently the commandment of God to all men, because they are
here reproved for rejecting it, which if it be a sound Argument to prove
baptism to be the command of God to all men, because the pharisees in
particular (for the Pharisees is but a particular expression indigitating one
single sort of men among all the rest, and not so much as an indefinit, much
less an universal) because I say the Pharisees in particular are reproved for
refusing to obey it, how much better may we collect that both baptism, and
laying on of hands with prayer for the spirit, are commanded by God to all men,
because we find all those, save Simon, (witness his giving them his holy
spirit) recorded as most highly approved of God, that at any time did reject
neither, but silently submit themselves both?

Those passages between that my beloved friend, and my self I could not
conscientiously neglect to set down, least I should seem to love any man more
then the truth, for the sake of which principally, and partly for his also, and
theirs he walks with, whom I love in truth, as far as they love the truth, I
write this, that he, reviewing here his own empty evasions, may more evidently
discern himself to be mistaken in many things, then he may be capable to do in
a discourse by word of mouth, and that they remembering, how they in proof of
baptism it self to be Christ's command to all believers, a^e necessitated to use
such cloudy inferences and deductions, as those above, may excuse us more then
many, if not most, of that party do, if in proof of laying on of hands to be
the duty of all baptized believers, we take the like liberty to our selves in
order to their satisfaction, to use more clear inferences and deductions, then
those, out of Scripture, and out of Heb. 6. 2. it self, as twill appear that we
do, to reason it self rightly acted in comparing of Scripture with Scripture,
which I for my part refer the enquirers unto as the sur^st rule to try the
spirits by, and to try all inferences, or deductions by, because the best of
men are liable to mistakes, and sure enough to fall into them, if ceasing to
exercise their reason in deducing, inferring, and gathering one thing out of
another, they will receive not^ing for truth, though otherwise never so plain,
even to common sense and reason, unless they find it in so many words in
Scripture, as it is by us expressed in: and this is all that I shall trouble my
self to say in reference to the seventh and eighth questions of the late
Enquirers with the grounds thereof, which are laid down in these words. s Viz.
seeing that many draw inferences and deductions, as they call them, from Heb 6*
2. to maintain one laying on o^ hands only, and none of them upon the
forementioned considerations, neither in the end, purpose or event: Therefore
we desire to know whether you judge it a command of our Lo^d Christ, that any
man's inference or deduction should be of a binding ^orm in point of faith and
obedience? and because we have* seen some (...) our darly beloved brethren in
the Lord, to the grief of our hearts much offended at us because we believe not
the inferences or deductions, as they call them, from Heb. 6. 2 Therefore we
d^e ^o know of them what they will re^er us to as the sure rule to try
in^erences or deductions by, because the best of men are liable to mistakes?


And now further to prove the Minor of the forecited syllogism in some other
particulars of it that remain unproved, viz. that laying on of hands was not
only taught, and practiced, dis^enst and submitted to, ownd and observed among
all baptized believers in the primitive times, but all this as by command from
God.

I argue thus viz. Either by command from God or without it; But neither
without nor against command from God, Ergo by it: the consequence of the first
proposition is most clear, for whatever Gospel administration was never
commanded by God to be dispensed, is practiced (if practiced at all) as a
tradition of men, and without, nay against Gods command, whose command it is,
witness his reproving and threatening of lost labor to those that so do, Mat.
15. 9.
that no man shall presume to teach for doctrines of his the traditions or
commandments of men: the Minor is as clear that the Apostles did not teach for
doctrines of Christ any traditions of their own, for as Paul who was one of
them that practiced laying on of hands, says of himself 1. Cor. 11. 23. that
he received from Christ that which he delivered unto the Church at Corinth, so
may we say on the behalf of all the rest, as concerning what doctrines they
delivered, and dispensations they practiced to the Churches: for surely as
Christ the great, and immediate messenger from the father could do nothing of
himself, was not to do his own will, but the will of his father which sent him,
nor to speak or do any thing, but as the father gave him commandment,
confessing that even his doctrine was not his own, but his that sent him, John.
5. 30. 8. 16. 17. 12. 49. 50. 14. 31
so they that were the great, and immediate messengers from Christ might speak,
and do nothing in things pertaining to him, but as God by him gave
commandments unto them: Act. 1. 1. 2 3. 10. 33.
neither were any doctrines they delivered among the Churches their own, nor
any other then the doctrines of Christ, whereupon though as Christ's doctrine
and commandments a^e called his, because he preached and gave them from God,
and yet were not his own but the fathers, so theirs are called the doctrine and
commandments of the Apostles, as they had them immediately from him, yet are
they not their own, but the doctrine and commanof Christ, Act. 2. 42. 1 Cor.
14. 37. Ephesians. 2. 20. Heb. 6. 1. (...) Pet. 3. 2. Jude 17. (...)
and had they done any thing more then they had order for from him, who from
him were to give order to the Churches, either in the point of laying on of
hands or any thing else, they would surely have heard harshly from him for it,
and been reproved by the spirit in the word, but as to this service of prayer
and laying on of hands on all baptized believers, in many places he is recorded
as approving of them in all they did.

Moreover, that laying on of^hands was taught, and practiced not of their own
heads, but (as it is asserted in the argument) as a practical part of the Law,
will, and Testament of Christ concerning baptized believers, as one of the
oracles or holy things of God, as one of the very principles of the doctrine of
Christ, as a part of the foundation, or beginning word of Christ (as well as
baptism) or of the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, on which the true
visible Church is built as upon a certain basis, and from which the whole
building growth up an holy temple in the Lord toward perfection, an habitation
of God through the spirit, being first fitly framed together by a joint,
uniform, visible obedience unto that one whole form of doctrine For there was a
certain form of Christ's doctrine delivered by the Apostles to persons as from
him, which they were to obey, and after obedience unto which (and not before)
they were counted unto Christ, as now his servants, which till they had obeyed
they were co^ted none of his, but unto sin, as its servants, standing in
several particulars, whereof its most evident that water baptism was one (for
obedience in baptism, and obedience to that form of doctrine delivered are both
urged as arguments and ^gagements to the Romans now to reckon on themselves, or
from thenceforth, i. e. their obedience thereunto as (in foro dei, ho^inum, et
ecclesiae) Christ's servants that had formally owned him) and whether the rest
viz faith, repentance, laying on of hands, belief of a res^ection and
judgment, which are Heb. 6. all called the foundation which was at first to be
laid altogether with baptism, called by the name of the form of doctrine Romans
6. 17. which was at first to be obeyed by every beginner in Christ's school, is
worth our serious consi^erations.
whereof, I say this laying on of hands was a part, and was practiced at their
first beginning to be disciples at or about the time of their baptism, and
before actual fellowship in the visible Church, this all is clear enough of it
self to him that consults Heb. 5. 2. 6. 1. considerately comparing them with
Ephesians. 2. 20. 21. 22. Romans 6. 17. Act. 2. 42. 8. 12. 14. 15. 16. 17. 19. 2. 6.
out of all which places, at least collectively consulted with, we cannot but
see that after baptism, and before fellowship in one body, or building in
higher things there was this of laying on of hands, practiced, owned, observed,
as one of the first principles of Gods oracles, of Christ's doctrine, Antecedent
to fellowship, and laid as a part of that first form of doctrine that was
delivered and obeyed (after obedience to the whole of which they were counted
babes in Christ, new born, begotten to him, belonging to him, and in present
capacity (as no fleshly babes are) to be added and admitted into his Church)
and as one piece of that foundation or word of the beginning of Christ (...)
Heb. 6. 1.
, on which the Church it self is built, and therefore necessarily precedent
among persons to their fellowship together in it, for the foundation must ever
be wholly laid even in every part of it (and therefore why not in laying on of
hands?) before there can be any firm, or any but a deformed or defective
building: no more therefore as unto that:

Again that it was dispensed together with prayer for it on all baptized
believers in order to their receiving the holy spirit it is not denied by any,
for ought I know, as indeed it is undeniable to all, Act. 8. 15. 16. 17. 19. 2.
6.

And further, there is not the least hi^ of any limitation of that doctrine of
laying on of hands on all baptized believers to those times only, or
intimation in the word of Christ that it was his mind there should then be a
cessation of it, any more then there is of baptizing all believers, or any
other ordinance, or outward administration, or any other of the principles of
Christ's doctrine, if there be, I desire of the Enquirers, who use inferences
themselves, and yet allow not us to speak any thing, as to the continuance of
this ordinance, but some express tex^ of Scripture, to show some Scripture (if
they know of any) that speaks expressly (or if it be but consequentially, it
shall serve my turn (though from us it will not theirs) so the consequence be
legitimate, and truly rational) of the continuation of all other the principles
of the doctrine of Christ, and the cessation of only this of laying on of
hands on all baptized believers: for what we are sure was in use among all
baptized believers in the primitive times, it concerns them that call for a
cessation of it alone, among all the principles of Gods oracles, to show us
some plain word of Christ, for the right of such a cessation of that only, and
no other before they blame us for calling on them for a continuance of that
still: but for my part as I find none, so I suppose they may look till their
eyes are weary before they can out of Christ's testament, not a ti^le of which
is yet disa^ul'd, produce any text tending to such a purpose.

And because I have inser^ed and asserted no less in the Minor of the Argument
I am yet in proving then this viz. that as there is no intimation of any
^essation of laying on of hands on all baptized believers till such time as the
work of baptizing all believers it self shall cease, but also a plain
injunction from Christ for the continuance of the one of these as long as the
other, and for a continual teaching and observation of both as well as either
among all the disciples that should be in all nations to the worlds end, I Will
direct the enquirers to a plain tex^ of Scripture for it, viz. Matthew. 28. 20
whence suppositis supponendis taking it for granted, till I shall see more then
ever I have yet seen from them, or I believe eve^ shall see from any to the
contrary, that the dispensation, practice, use and observation of laying on of
hands among the Apostles, and the primitive baptiz^d believers, who expected
that whatever the Apostles delivered to them was first commanded them of God,
Act. 10. 33. was no other then what God commanded then to them all, it is as
plain as the high way that the very same is commanded to be continued
downwards, even to be taught to, and observed by all that ever should be
discipled in the nations to the worlds end* for on the very day in which Christ
was taken up after that he through the holy spirit had given commandments to
the Apostles, whom he had chosen, being seen of them four^y days after his
resurrection, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God
(among which I quaery, of the Enquirers whether laying on of hands were not
one?) he expressly charges them, that whatever he had taught and enjoined them
to observe; they should teach all the nations, i. e. the disciples and baptized
believers in all nations to observe the very same, promising his presence in
the observation of the same among his disciples, not to the end of that
generation, or age only, but (...), as I have showed above, to the end of the
very world it self.

Going out teach all nations baptizing them, i. e. that believe, teaching them
i. e. the now newly baptized believers, to observe all things, whatsoever I
have commanded you, and therefore laying on of hands surely, it being one of
the principles of his doctrine, and l^ I am with you, i. e. not your persons
only but your party, not your selves only whilst you live, but your
successors also, in what age soever they shall live in the observation of what
I have commanded you, and shall command them by you, always to the end of the
world.

Finally that laying on of hands on baptizd believers has the same ends,
grounds and reasons why it was to be used, continuing still to this very day,
as much as as in the primitive times, is as evident as all the rest: for as the
grounds and reasons why they observed such a service then were, and could be no
other then the manifestation of it to them from Christ to be his holy command,
mind and will concerning them, and to be a certain outward administration of
his own choosing, which though as despicable a dispensation, and as weak, low,
foolish, earthen, and empty a thing to see to as wash in Jordan, yet was to be
done, since the Lord had bidden it to be done, as well, yea rather then if it
had been some greater matter, if to no other end, then merely to testify their
love to him, and themselves merely to be his disciples, servants, and friends
by observing whatever he commanded John 14. 15. 21. 23. 15. 14 1 John 5. 3. how
much more when it was a way, and order of his own appointment to be observed,
and to wait upon him in, together with prayer and supplication, in order to
such a glorious and profitable end, and purpose to themward, as this, viz. that
they waiting on him in that his own way, might (as not only they did, but all
others shall, that wait on him in the same in sincerity according to their
faith, or else its possible that we may fail of it as they also might and did)
in his measure manner and time receive his holy spirit.

Now (I say) as these were the ends, grounds and reasons, why among baptized
believers this of laying on of hands was observed then, so there are the same
ends, grounds and reasons, why the same service should be observed now,

For first we have it manifested as sufficiently to our Reason and
understanding (unless we will darken the council of God to our selves by a
number of needless queries, superfluous scruples, and words without knowledge)
either expressly or by infallible inferences, and undeceivable deductions in
the word to be an urepealed, undisannulled dispensation and part, and principle
of Christ's doctrine, will and Testament, as they had, and as baptism it self,
which the Enquirers walk still in the practice of, is manifested so to be:

Secondly, we are also as much required, and have as much reason as they to
manifest our selves to be lovers of Christ, to be his disciples, servants, and
friends by our readiness to do whatsoever he has commanded.

Thirdly we are in as much liablenesse as they to be the least in the kingdom
of heaven, if we break one of the least of Christ commandments, and teach men
so i e. that they may do so too and so the Enquirers seem to me to do while
they teach men that as yet have not, that they need or ought not to submit to
prayer and laying on of hands for the holy spirit, and un^each such again as
have been taught it, till they disown that first principle o^ the doctrine of
Christ after they had once, even practically owned it.
, and as much capablenesse of being greatest in the kingdom of heaven, if we do
the least of Christ's commandments, and teach men so i. e. that they must do so
too.

Fourthly, we have as much need of the holy spirit now as they had to perform
the same good offices for us as he did for them viz. to comfort and support
under sufferings, to lust against our flesh, to lead us into all truth, to
bring to our remembrance the things that were spoken by Christ, which many men
would fain have to be forgotten, to help to mortify the deeds of our bodies to
seal us up to the day of redemption, to reveal unto us, that we may rejoice
therein, the things which are freely given us of God, which are the same he
gives to them, and to gift us likewise with such gifts as he, not as we shall
please who would fain be our own carvers, and either have such visible gifts,
as some call them, as he was pleased to give them, or else we will be blind,
and not see, nor believe, though we see it, that he gives any gifts of his
spirit now at all;
(for beggars must not be chusers) for fellowship in the body, that we may be
an habitation of God through the spirit, and to gift some also, even such as he
pleases, for the work of the ministry, and the edifying of the body in the
several offices he has given to it for the service of it, and the truth viz.
messengers, elders, deacons etc. for all this he did for them. John 14. 17 28.
Gal. 5. 17. John 16 13. R m. 8. 13. 1 Cor. 2. 12 1 Cor. 12. 7. Ephesians. 4. 11. Ephesians.
4. 30. a Ephesians. 1. 13. b Act. 2. 39. 40. c Prove. 1. 23. Joh. 7. 38, 39. Luke 11.
13. Act 5. 35.


Fifthly, we are as much under the promise of the same holy spirit of promise a
being baptized believers, as they were b for the promise of it was to them that
were far off as well as to them that were nigh, whether in respect of time or
place, and therefore to us, yea, and to all men on the same terms on which it
was tendered to them. c all that repent and are baptized, all that turn at
Christ's reproof, all that believe, all that ask the father for it, all that
obey him to the worlds end have on these terms a promise of the holy spirit as
well as all the baptized believers of the primitive times, and why the baptized
believers of these times should have all these ends, grounds and reasons why,
and in order to which laying on of hands with prayer was dispenst on all
baptized believers then, continuing till now, and yet that dispensation cease
and not continue in its use; and that they should have the promise of the same
spirit, and yet not be bound to wait on God, and seek it in the same way is a
very riddle to me: I confess there may be through the unbelief of baptized
believers, who will not take Gods word in his word, but say show us a sign that
we may see and believe, show us such visible gifts, show us miracles, the gift
of healing, and in particular that gift of tongues John did no miracle but all
the the things which John spoke of this man are see true. Joh. 10. 41. John 7.
48 (...) ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe. John 20. 29. Thomas
because thou have seen thou have believed, but blessed are they that have not
seen and yet believed. Herod hoped to have seen some miracle done by Christ,
but he would not so much as answer him, Luke 23. 8. 9. He did not many mighty
work there, because of their unbelief Mat. 13. 5. Lord why could not we cast
him out, Jesus said because of your unbelief.
; which thou gave to baptized believers in the primitive times, in this way
of prayer and laying on of hands, and we will submit to it, and believe it to
be thy will and command to us now, else not: I say for their unbeliefs sake
that obey not, and their too too great defect in faith that do draw near to God
in prayer and laying on of hands, there may be, and that justly, and I think
is, a cessation of Gods giving out such measures and full manifestations of his
spirit as else he would, yet some gifts he gives now, and that there is warrant
to expect, by any promise thereof, some particular gifts that God, for signs of
confirmation of the Gospel doctrine to be from heaven in the first giving of it
out and removing the old testament, gave in the primitive times, as miracles,
tongues, this I deny, but that he gives not the gift of the spirit, and the
graces of it, which was the thing mainly promised, and not so much in plurali
the gifts of it, as men count gifts distinct from the fruits of it Gal. 5.
temperance, love, joy, peace, etc. as if these were not the spirits gifts, much
more that the promise of the self same spirit it self (though it appear not in
every individual gift that we out of curiosity desire to see) does not cease to
us, and that there is no cessation of that outward administration of laying on
of hands with prayer on baptized believers, which Christ then was sought to in,
for the fulfilling of his promise, this I dare, and do still affirm, and
testify, neith^r do I judge any man is capable by the word to give any sound
reason why it should cease, it being a principle of the doctrine of Christ,
till all the principles of the whole foundation spoken of Ephesians. 2. 20. Heb. 6.
1. 2. on which the visible Church is to be built, and all ordinances do cease
also together with it at Christ's next appearing.

Thus having sufficiently proved the Minor of the forenamed argument in each
particular of it, in which as nearly as I could well crowd them together are
coucht as many, if not all such particulars as are needful to be proved to the
evincing of the continuance of this doctrine and dispensation, of laying on of
hands to the end,

I shall hasten to an end both of this subject, and of this system also: but
because I find some things put in by way of positive exception, and objection
against this truth, from the mouths of some, as well as something by way of
query from the pens of others, who also in that way have appeared against it so
newly at the the press, viz. the late Enquirers abovenamed, a remnant of
whose Questions remain yet unanswered here, though not so unanswerable as some
do deem them, I shall add a word or two more toward the removeal of these two
sorts of blinding bushes, whereby I fear many may be infatua ted so as to turn
aside from the way of truth in this particular, and so leave both it, and them
unto the Lord.

First then whereas by word of mouth some tell me, That Laying on of hands was
a way peculier to that juncture, designed of god to the time then being only,
wherein the Apostles (say some and othersome the Lord) gave the holy spirit in
some visible eminent, and extraordinary gifts thereof, as tongues prophecy,
miracles, healing etc. simply to this end that these might be a sign to confirm
it visibly to the eyes of people, that the doctrine they taught and practiced
in the principles, and other parts of it was from above, and no other then the
oracles of God.

First, I grant that in the primitive times, there were, and that in the way of
prayer, and laying on of hands, given (not by the Apostles, though, for (as is
showed above) they were not baptizers with the spirit) but by the Lord only,
whose only prerogative that is to baptize with the holy spirit, sundry gifts,
as healing, etc. which may be called extraordinary, and rare respectively to
these times, wherein they have bin seldom or never seen, or heard of, as I
know not that that of tongues now adays ever was, though as to that of
healing, and that of discerning of spirits, and some other manifestations of
the spirit given to profit withal, as a word of wisdom, and a word of
knowledge, it is within a little of past doubt to some that such as these, as
the Lord pleases, are some less, some more frequently given now among them
that walk in truth (though what gifts some have seen and been sensible of in
others or themselves, it is not so fit to boast of, as to be silent.)

Secondly, I grant that many of this sort (and hapily many more then either
are, or need to be, or shall be given now) were given then ^o confirm the New
Testament doctrine in the first delivery of it to the world, in the room of the
old one, to be of God, of some of which there may be a cessation, the end they
had such special respect to then being sufficiently accomplished, and the word
being now committed unto writing Mark 16. 17, 18, etc. Heb. 2. 3, 4.

But thirdly, that either such gifts of the spirit as these were either the
only or the chief kind of gifts of the spirit that were to be, and were
expected, looked after or given in that way of prayer and laying on of hands, as
a service destinated pro tempore only in order to the receiving of such, or
that these gifts were so extraordinary in respect of the eminency or excellency
of them (because more visible and ad extra) beyond such as may be warrantably
by promise expected, and are in that way assuredly and ordinarily given at this
day, these two I see no warrant to subscribe to: for as it is most sure that the
promise was (so far as I find) in terminis nor only, nor so often of these
things (though I deny not but these were at that time, for ends that concern
not these times promised too) but of the spirit to several other purposes (as
above) the holy spirit, the spirit in the fruits, and graces, and comforts of
it, the gift of the holy spirit we find it all along almost in no less then
scores of Scriptures, whereof some few are more plain: so assuredly the holy
spirit in that way of prayer and laying on of hands was given to baptized
believers Job. 1. 16. ^f his ful^es we have ^ll received grace for grace John
16. 7. 13. 2. Cor. 13. 14. the communion of the spirit be with you all: Gal. 5.
22. 2 Cor. 5. 5. God who has given us the earnest of his spirit. Ephesians. 1. 33.
14. in whom after ye believed ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise,
which is the earnest of our inheritance etc. whereby you are sealed to the day
of redemption Ephesians. 4. 30.
in other gifts then these viz. the graces, comforts and fruits of it love,
joy, peace, assurance etc.

In respect of which in case those outward gifts of the spirit should all have
failed, or shall fail now, yet that dispensation is not therefore rendered
empty, useless, and out of date, but remains rather more gloriously useful,
then as to external gifts of tongues and such like, continually even unto the
end: yea also if we speak of gifts merely external, and visible, as some call
them (though for my part I judge the spirit is as visible to us and manifested
to be in men by the fruits, and graces, as by those things that are more
commonly, but not more properly, then those, called gifts) I suppose his senses
as well as his reason does not a little fail him, that descerns not, not only
those most excellent ways of grace, as love, joy, etc. 1 Cor. 12. 31. but even
the best and most excellent, and profitable outward gift of the spirit, even
that of prophecy, or speaking to exhortation, edification, and comfort (for
that is the gift of prophecy if any doubt it (as some do, and say prophesy is a
gift of speaking infallibly by revelation from God, as it is spoken of 1 Cor. 14.
1. the 2. 3. 4. 5. verses of the same chapter confute him, where prophecy, as
it is determined to be a far more eminent and profitable gift, and greater and
more desirable then tongues, which is so talked on, so it is defined to be no
other then speaking to exhorration, edisication and comfort; and also v. 31.
32. 33. where its said, you may all prophecy one by one, and the spirits of the
prophets are subject to the prophets, which shows it was no gift of speaking
infallibly, but only preaching, because its supposed that they may be out, and
err in their prophecy, and must submit to correction, in case they do, from
the other prophets:
, and the best outward gift that we can covet or compass) given unto baptized
believers, whom we pray for and lay hands on at this day, to whom nature, and
University Nursery never gave it.

And if any say, we see such a kind of gift as you call prophecy given also to
others Obj.
as well as such as submit to it.

That's nothing to us what God does whose word binds us to such or such a way,
Ans.
but not himself, we are quaerying what we are required to do by him, upon the
account of which we may by promise expect the holy spirit, not what God does;
God often anticipates his own promise, and is better then his word as Act. 10.
47. he gave the spirit before baptism which is promised only to baptized
believers, Act. 2. 39. yet that does neither give us disingagement from Gods
outward way, nor warrant us to expect the spirit out of it, but engage us so
much the more unto it ver. 48.

If God will give any other men his holy spirit out of that way, I am glad
(since it pleases himself) he is so good to them: but as that assures me not
that I (specially if enlightened about his way, yea then assuredly I shall not)
shall have it so too, so sure I am that in his way I shall obtain it, and if
any have been so highly favored of god, as that he mercifully meets them out
of his way, that does not exempt them from coming into it, but much more
oblige them, if they had no further need of it (as Christ had none of baptism,
save to fulfill all righteousness) even merely upon that account to meet him
the more cheerfully in it: for thus it becomes us me thinks, as well as it did
Christ himself to fulfill all the righteousness of his law.

If any say, I deny not the dispensation of laying on of hands in its due
season: Ob.
even in this age, on baptized believers for the spirit, but as they were bid
to tarry at Jerusalem till they were endued with power from on high Luke 24 50.
Act. 1. 4. that they might have some men fit to go forth, and by laying on of
hands give the holy spirit, being gifted and fitted by it, and filled with it
first themselves; so we must wait in prayer only, for a first giving out of it
as Act. 2. 1. till power come down on some to make them fit administrators of
this dispensation to others, and then act in it.

I say this only in short, first their expectation that some men shall, and
thoughts Ans.
that of old some men did baptize with the spirit is a gross mistake, for the
most they could do was but to pray for it, and barely lay on their hands,
Christ did the one and they the other.

Secondly, if we must wait, as they did till the day of Pentecost, then we must
till that time forbear all baptizing in water, and suspend all preaching to the
world as well as laying on of hands, but this though the Apostles did so in that
juncture, and intertime between Christ's ascension, and the descension of the
holy spirit, yet our Enquirers, among whom some of eminency object as
abovesaid, which I much marvel at since this objection supposes a continuation,
or resurrection of that same ordinance of laying on of hands in the last days,
after a whiles waiting for administrators: but the questions subscribed to, are
all or most of them such as suppose the Enquirers to be much in the dark and in
doubt about it, what kind of laying on of hands that is, that's called a
doctrine of Christ Heb. 6. 1. whether ever such a thing was, or is ever to be
dispensed to all baptized believers etc. as if they could not tell almost
whether there be, at least appointed by Christ, such a manner of administration.
do in this time (I suppose) baptize, and increase their number by preaching
the Gospel to the world.

Thus far as to the objections: now as to what further obstructive interposal
is made in way of question by the Enquirers, some of whose queries viz. the
second fourth, seventh and eighth, I have taken notice of above, I shall now
remove it by saying a little to the residue viz. the first, third, fifth, and
sixth.

The first which with the ground thereof is on this wise viz. Seeing we are
denied communion by some of those Churches, or by some members thereof, who
hold the necessity of all baptized believers to practice, submit to, or come
under the laying on of hands. Therefore we desire them to acquaint us what we
are commanded to say, or do, that we may be found faithful in that point; or
otherwise, to be discovered disobedient unto a command by the Word of God,
which is the only director here, and that which shall be our judge at the last
day.


is rather a curious querk, then a solid question, so frivolous as is scarce
fit to be answered with any thing, but not a word: yet a word nevertheless
even unto that.

First, whereas they ground it upon our denial of communion with them, we
desire them to know that we may more justly put the business of our
non-communion with them upon their score, and lay the denial of it at their
own doors as their doing, not ours.

I say not ours, who earnestly desire to have communion even in one body with
them, and all men in a way of conformity to the word of Christ, which gives
neither example, nor toleration, so far as I know, for any mixed communion in
one Church of persons, whereof some own all the principles of the doctrine of
Christ, and some not only own not, but deny either all, or any of them; if it
does show us where? but theirs who deny a part of that very beginning of the
word of Christ, or first form of his doctrine, all the several parts whereof
collectively taken make that very foundation, upon the whole of which, and not
part of it only, every right visible Church is built, and constituted, and
besides which there can be no orderly either Church or communion.

Secondly, whereas it is asked what persons are to say or do, (at the
administration of laying hands) that they may be found faithful in that point?
I say that according to Act. 8. 15. 17. the administrators are to pray for the
baptized believers that they may, according to the promise Act. 2. 39. receive
the holy spirit, and after that to lay their hands upon them, which is easiy
enough (I wot) to be understood without expressing what part of the body hands
are to be laid on, whether the head (the place of our imposition, which if
hands be laid on it is laying on of hands is it not?) or any other part which is
the wise query of some also, and as learned a question as if one should ask,
whether at the supper we must put the elements to our mouths with the right
hand or the left? or in baptism ask, how the baptizer must handle the person
baptized, and where he must take hold on him, when he dips him? and if he have
not express Scripture concerning such nicities and trifles as these, suspend
the dispensation of both the supper and baptism, because Christ is some what
short in his word, not expressing punctually enough, how his ordinances shall
be dispensed, nor what is to be said and done by persons at the doing of them,
so distinctly as they would have him.

But foolish and unlearned questions avoid knowing that they do gender strifes
2 Timothy 2. 23.


? and (as at baptism the believer is without gainsaying it, to yield his body
to be baptized so) at laying on of hands, the baptized believer is to say
nothing against it, but to give way to have (...) done accordingly.

The 3d. question with the ground thereof, which runs thus, V^. Seeing there be
ma ny that do desire bapti zed believers to require that hands should be laid
on them. Therefore we desire of them to show us some place of Scripture (if
they know of any) that does express such a behavior either of the
administrator, or the person on whom hands were laid.
is even as superfluous, impertinent, vain and frivolous as the former; for
(howbeit neither am I one of those many that have ever yet formally, and in
terms desired baptized believers to require that hands should be laid on them
yet) laying on of hands on baptized believers either is Christ's mind, or it is
not, if it be not, and the Enquirers ever prove it is not, we will freely give
them leave to require us to let it alone, but if it be, (as it is proved to be
above out of Act. 8. 16. 17. 19. 1. 2: 3. 6. where it is so pla^n as to need no
deduction) then as I shall desire them to have us excu^ed (for such a behavior
as to reprove their backwardness, and summon men to show their forwardness to
own Christ's ways may become any administrator whatsoever Act. 23. 16.)
if henceforward we desire baptized believers to require it to be dispenst to
them, so I give them to understand that, it being the mind of Christ, though
(as baptism also is) one of his too too despised dispensations, as stout, and
loath to stoop to it as some baptized believers seem to be, it is no
disparagement to the best of them, that are yet (as those Act. 8. 16.) only
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, but a behavior that may well enough
beseem them to require it.

The fifth question is ushered in by an introduction, consisting of nothing but
division and subdivision of laying on of hands into different kinds, according
to the difference of the administrators, of the persons to whom, of the
accounts or ends upon which, and in order whereunto administered, as it follows
in their own words thus viz we do or may read of laying on of hands upon
several occasions, differ ing one from the other,

First, in the qualification of the administrator, as Luke 21. 12. compared
with Mark 16, 18. the one being wicked, the other Godly.

Secondly, differing qualifications in persons on whom hands were laid,
sometimes before baptized, and sometimes after baptism, Act. 9. 17. and Acts 8.
17.

Thirdly, hands were imposed upon several accounts (or ends;) sometimes to be
brought before Rulers, as Luke 21. 12. sometimes to heal the sick, Acts 28. 8.
sometimes te cure the blind, Act. 9. 17. sometimes to set men apart to
administer temporal things Acts 6. 6. sometimes to set men apart to administer
spiritual things Act. 13. 3. these were gifted, before hands were laid on them,
Sometimes hands were imposed, that men might be gifted, 1 Timothy 4. 14. sometimes
hands were laid on by men gifted, to give the holy ghost to them that were not
set a part to Office, as many of themselves say from Acts 8. 17.

After which their question with its ground comes in thus. Viz. Seeing many
plead ^aying on of hands to be practiced or submitted unto as a foundation,
principle, or a beginning doctrine that by all baptized believers. Therefore we
desire to know, if any of them can inform us, which of all these layings on of
hands forementioned is calle^ by Christ, or his Apostles the foundation,
principle, or beginning doctrine, by some text in Scripture.


To all which viz. their introduction, ground, and question I answer as
follows.

First, I deny not but that hands were laid on men then by several sorts of
admini^rators, godly and wicked i^ it be not somewhat an improper phrase to
style wicked men in their wrathful and cruel handlings of the Saints
Administrators o^ any doctrine of Christ that is styled imposition of hands, as
to me it seems to be, unless we^l allow the name of an Administrator also to
the devil himself, when he tempts the Saints, and puts forth his hands against
them to smi^e them with any misch^efs in either body o^ sp^it, as by Gods
permission he did Job, Job 1. 12. Job 2. 6. 7.
in the several seasons of before and after baptism, to and upon several ends,
purposes, and accounts, though all the several ends and cases you here
distinguish by do not make so many several kinds of imposition of hands
neither, so substantially distinct each from other as you would seem to make
them; for imposition of hands on baptized believers before admission, and after
that before ordination to office, were one and the same in kind, distinguished
only by the different capacities of membership, and ministership, eldership,
messengership, to each of which laying on of hands was Antecedent, yea these
were one, and the same kind of imposition of hands, used all in order to one
and the same end in general viz. receiving the holy spirit, or, as occasion
was, more and more of the spirit, in a measure answerable to their places,
diversified only by the different degrees or stations in the Church to which
they were thereby visibly designed: but what if there were never so many kinds
of laying on of hands, is it therefore so impossible to determine (as by your
query you seem to imagine) which among all the rest is meant in such or such a
place? shall we think the Apostles meant to deliver the mind and doctrine of
Christ, and that in the very principles or first rudiments of it too, which
ought to be the plainest, in such obstruse, dark and ae^igmatical ways that
men should scarcely be capable possibly to know what they meant? there is several
sorts of baptism spoken of in the Scripture, is it therefore so difficult (if
men be not willing (as some are) to puzzle themselves besides the practice of
water baptism) to know when he speaks of water, when of sufferings, when of the
spirit?

But to the question^ith some will needs, though needlessly, query which of all
these layings on of lands the Scripture speaks of is called the foundation,
principle or beginning doctrine?

I answer that laying on of hands that it was dispensed with prayer on baptized
believers, not as yet to be set apart to office, mentioned Act. 8. 15. 16. 17.
not in order to gifted men's giving it (for though you will mistake us do whatwe
can, and bring us in as confessing it here, yet we ever utterly deny that any
men were ever so gifted as that they could give it) but in order to Gods
giving, and our receiving the holy spirit from the Lord, that laying on of
hands I say is it which in Heb. 6. 1. 2. is called a principle, a part of that
foundation of Christ's doctrine on which the visible Church is built.

In proof of which let this Argument be considered viz.

Its none of all the other kinds of laying on of lands mentioned by you, thas
is meant Heb. 6. 2. therefore it must necessarily be that.

Most undoub^edly ^s not that mentioned Luke 21. 12. where its said
prophetically, as concerning the wickeds persecution of the Saints, they shall
lay their hands on you etc. which we read of also as fulfilled accordingly, and
spoken of historically Act. 5. 18. they laid their hands on the Apostles, and
put them in prison etc.

F^rst, because that is not simply a laying on of hands, but a laying on of
violent hands; and so it should be ^ead (if the word there used were rightly
(...), and translated into its true English out of the Greek) for it is not the
same, but a word of a far different sense from that which is used every where
else, where this (...) of imposition of hands is spoken of, for one ^ounds
forth as much as a violent handling, the other a gentle putting, or laying our
hands upon the persons. (...)*


Secondly, as for that violent laying on of hands in way of persecution whereby
the saints suffer, that's included in the doctrine of baptisms immediately
foregoing, it belonging to one of the three, viz. the bitter baptism of
sufferings, as a branch thereof, so that it were but confusion, and tautology
to express that ore again, as if twere another doctrine which was but a part
of the doctrine going before, by another name, and such a one too as is never
given it in the original, viz. of impoi^ion of hands.

Thirdly, whatever doctrine is called a principle or part of the foundation of
the doctrine of Christ Heb. 6. 2. the same is called Heb. 5. 12. one of the
principles of the oracles or the holy things of God.

But the laying on of violent hands on the saints in way of persecution, is one
of the principles of the devils doctrine, and a principal part of the very
foundation of his kingdom, yea one of the most wicked things that the devil
does or delivers, a^ Christ's doctrine, to his disciples.

Nor was it a laying on of hands, (though such a one was used some times) in
order to healing the sick or curing the blind, that was taught as a principle,
and practically ownd, and laid as a part of the foundation among all the
Hebrews Heb. 5. 12. 6. 1, 2. for they were neither all sick surely, nor all
blind, when they past under this dispensation so as to have all need to have
hands laid on them all upon such acco^nts, as healing or curing.

Nor was it in order to ordination of them to offices, that they might be
gifted, and sitted by the spirit thereunto, for the laying on of hands there
spoken of, was laid as a principle, as a part of the foundation on which the
Church stood, but the laying on of hands to set apart men to administer either
temporal things, or spiritual things in the Church is no principle, nor
beginning thing, nor foundation an^cedent to the Church* as every foundation
must be to the building, for the visible Church ever since the first Apostles,
whose doctrine was the found^tion to it, was antecedent to its officers, and
not they to it: the churches were first collected, and constituted upon the
foundation or first form of doctrine delivered by the Apostles, and then
offi^ers were ordained in every Church; for the true visible Church may be
without officers, though not without ordinances, but Church officers cannot be
chosen, nor ordained in it till there be a Church: besides this imposition Heb.
6. 2. was learnt, owned and laid by the whole body of the Church, whom he
reproves, saying ye might have been teachers, but ye had need to be taught
again, which be the first principles of the oracles of God, but they were not
all at first surely by laying on of hands ordained to office.

As to the sixth question of the Enquirers which is also the last that I am to
speak to, having spoke to the seventh and (...) above, which with the ground
thereof runs thus Viz Seeing that H^b 6. 2. (...) of the laying on of hands as
pl^al, as the doctrine of (...), and does not speak of any one laying on of
hands sore* mentioned particularly, nor of any other by distinction, neither of
any end, purpose, or eve^. Therefore we desire to know what safety it is for
any man t^ conclude that Heb. 6. 2. is meant bu^ of one of them only.
it is grounded upon such a gross and grievous mistake, that I am almost
amazed that of the fifteen hands that subscribe to those Questions, not one of
them did find occasion to subscribe his dissent to this, for whereas it is
supposed, and proposed so publicly for truth by the Enquirers, that Heb. 6.
2. speaks not of any one layi^g on of hands only, but plu^ally, as of the
doctrine of baptisms, its most palpably apparent to such as are not a sleep in
their reading of that text, that it speaks in the singular number, of one
laying on of hands alone, and not of layings on of hands, as it must have been
expressed, for so you a^e fain to express it your selves, when you speak
plurally of it in your fifth question, had he meant more kinds of imposition of
hands then one; for though hands be the plural number, yet laying on, which is
the phrase you speak to, or else you speak nihil ad Rhombum, is a substantive
of the singular number, both in the English, and in the Greek, and suppose the
spirit had spoken plurally of more imposio^s of hands then one? must that that
was Act. 8. 17-19. 6. on baptized believers be ever the more excluded, or the
more incuded rather in all likelihood among the rest? and because the Apostle
does not speak particularly enough, nor See Mr Blackwoods last book newly
extant even whil^st I am writing to you on this subject s^iled (...) soul
searching catechism p. 58 in p. 54. 55 56. 57. 58. 59. of which he treats
totally of this (...).
distinguish, nor express plainly enough what he means by showing the end,
purpose and event of the imposition here spoken of, therefore belike he meant
that no body should ever own this principle at all: but the truth is he speaks
of no more impositions then one, Therefore, to conclude with the Enqui^ers
question propounded thus to themselves, we desire to know what safety it is for
any man to conclude that question to be worthy of an answer, that is so falsely
grounded as this of the Enquirers is, and to conclude that Heb. 6. 2. is meant
of more layings on of hands, when it expressly speaks but of one?

And so de^ Friends, whom I love too well to spare speaking plainly to you in a
case, wh^rein upon occasion of your putting on too too rashly in print little
less then against it, a precious truth of Christ lies at stake between us,
since you are pleased to urge and importu^e us so earnestly at the close of
your question^ by the opportunity that you have thereby put into our hands to
justify our practice, viz. laying on of hands upon all baptized believers, as
we love the glory of God, and the promoting of that, which we so highly esteem
and hold to be truth, as we will declare our love to the truth by countenancing
men, who diligently make search after i^, as we tender the union and communion
of the Churches etc. that we would discharge our duty, and try if we could make
it appear by the word of God, which I confess with you is able to instruct us
in all things (and therefore though much might be said from the constant
practice of the Churches in, and bo^dering upon the primitive times, to the
further clearing up of the truth in this point, yea men far better studied that
way then I am, who yet see sufficiently to my satisfaction, ^ell us, that all
Antiquity teaches laying on of hands after baptism Viz. Mr. Co^on and Dr.
Holms, who (as is showed above in the 139, 140, 141. pages of this very volu^e
I am yet in hand with) borrowes Co^ons and Calvin's reading out of Antiquity
concerning the practice of imposition of hands to all grown persons before
admission to Church-^ellowship where by to prove infant baptism, which thereby
he (...) breaks the n^ck of.
yea and some that never practiced neither it nor true baptism yet I wave ^ll
such Arguments a^ of no weight without the word) Since also you promise us that
if we so do, then you shall acknowledge the truth thereof to the glory of God,
and your own shame in being ignorant so long, and speedily embrace it, if God
so assist you by his word, professing you will to that purpose expect our
faithful care to be expessed with chearfullnesse, without making delays, in a
matter of so great importance, which may unite and establish us in one mind,
hereupon I could not in conscience but take so much notice of your questions
(they meeting me also just in the mouth, whilst I was musing to say some
little, but not a quarter so much as here is, to evince the noncessation of
this service as well as that of baptism) as to give this transient answer as I
travel along, being bound also as you hint to me, to give to every one that
asks it a reason of the hope that's in me with meekness and fear: so desiring
the Lords blessing upon it toward you, and upon you in your examination of it,
and (as you have light) your execution according to it, that such excaecation,
as the Ranter who is run out of the reach of reason, has by little and little
queried himself into may never, overtake you, I remain both yours and every
ones servant for Christ's sake.

Thus much concerning the continuation of that practice of laying on of hands:
now as to the present use of the ordinances of breaking of bread, and
church fellowship, I shall speak but briefly to that forasmuch as these are
services the continuance of which to the end is denied doctrinally by none (for
ought I know) but the Ranter, that is run up above all, saving that the Rigid
Piesbyterians, though in words they own the supper, yet in works do deny it,
for many if not most of them live in the neglect of that administration of the
supper, in their parishes some four; some five, some six, seven, eight years
without any use of it at all, as if there were no such matter as that now in
being; for others, I mean a certain mixed sort of Independents that are rife in
these days, they own and practice it and Church fellowship too more then
enough, unless more orderly in respect of that Antecedency to these of all the
principles of the doctrine of Christ, which ought to be now as it was in the
primitive times, which times they pretend to reform by, taking in Omnium
generum, an Omnigatherum of persons, men and women, whom they take to be
believers, into fellowship in one visible body in breaking of bread and
prayers, some whereof, having renounced their Rantism as null, are truly
baptized; some as yet but merely Rantized, yet supposing themselves
sufficiently baptized because of that, which can be of no use to them as a
sign, for they remember it not; some hanging in the air between both, not
satisfied, whether they were truly baptized in infancy yea or no; some doubting
whether any water baptism at all be needful to be used in these times; some
convinced that they ought to be baptized, but not yet finding any
Administrator, that fits their fancies; some resolved to be baptized, but
Christ, who expects it from them, must wait their leisure, none reproving their
procrastination, nor saying to them, as Ananias, to Paul, and now why tarriest
thou? arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins calling on the name of the
Lord, or as Peter to the Jews repent and be baptized; Some resolving never to
be baptized, but roundly renouncing all water baptism as nothing concerning
them, yet leaving them at liberty to act according to their light, that have a
mind to submit to it, and who see it their duty as if the plain word of Christ
in this point of baptism were such a nose of wax, as might be molded, and
metamorphosed into any model according to every man's mind and temper, or quite
canceld, disanuld, melted into no word of Christ at all at every man's haughty
humor, that is loath to debase himself so far as to submission to it, as if my
Lord, and my Lady, and Sir such a one had more dispensation from Christ
thenevery ordinary body, to show for their non-obedience to that despised
dispensation; some of them, that are baptized, under prayer and imposition of
hands in order to their obtaining the spirit of promise; some not having faith
in the thing, whether that baptism with the spirit Peter speaks of Act. 2. 39.
and John baptist Mat. 3. 11. does belong to them or no, though there promised
to all that are, and shall be (repenting and believing) baptized in water, even
as many as the Lord shall call, whereupon the fourth principle of Christ's
doctrine, will not down with them, but when they come to that lesson in Christ's
A B C they must skip it, and take forth, and, because it likes them not, turn
ore a new leaf to the doctrine of the supper, and Church fellowship before they
are prefecty past their primmer: to all which confused pro and con
congregations, and mongrill kind of ministry, and people, that speak half in
the language of Canaan, and half of Ashdod, I Will here say no more but this viz.
si eo quo caepistis pede perrexerit is etc. proceeding as you begin, and
thriving to the hight of your principle throw the nations, the body of
Christendom, which was once an uniform, and more lately a triforme consisting
of 3 sorts of Christ'n creatures, under a 3soldCCClergy viz. papal, prelatical,
presbyterian.
may in time become that, which I judge also it must become for some small
season before the end, viz. a monstrous multiform, and at last an omniform
beast indeed.

But now as to the question, whether these two (for I must scarce speak of
these severally, but very succinctly, and as it were together) are of right,
and according to the mind, and word of Christ to continue to the end? in proof
hereof viz. that they are, I shall refer the Ranter, and the rest (if any other
besides him do deny it) but to two Scriptures, which prove each of these
respectively, and remove some few more of such exceptions as are made against
the present practice of both these two, and the other two parts of Christ's
outward worship and service I have already spoke to, and so put a period to
this discourse:

The first is 1 Cor. 11. 26. for as often as you eat this bread and drink this
cup ye show (or show ye, for the word may be read imperatively, as well as
indicatively) the Lords death till he come, in which words it is so clearly
supposed, that the ordinance of the supper is not according to Christ's will to
cease till the next appearing of Christ, that it were to suppose a man to be
void of sense, and reason to undertake to make it more evident to him by
framing any formal argument from the place.

The Second is Heb. 10. 25. not forsaking the assembling of our selves together
as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another while its called to day;
and so much the more by how much you see the day approaching, where it is also
most clear, and undeniable, that it is the mind of Christ, that the Saints should
keep together in one body in assemblies, and fellowships one with another, and
that his sheep should not live in such a straggling state and conditon, such
single fellowship between God and themselves only, as is now pleaded for by
many, that fall off from following or frequenting any societies at all, and
forsake such truly constituted Churches as they were once added to, which
argues apparently that (as we say of sheep when they keep not with the flock,
but are found squotting up and down here and there by themselves alone and
aloof from their fellows) that some ill disease and deadly distemper is growing
upon them, but that they should keep together in flocks every sheep following
the footsteps of the flock, which name of flock is that by which Christ often
denominates his sheep, as Luke 12. 32. Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2. to show that
he expects to find them in flocks and fellowships at his coming.

Ranterist.
Till he come is no other then till his coming into men by his spirit, or in
such full measures and manifestations of his spirit into men's hearts, that they
may be able to live up with him in spirit, so as no more to need such lower
helps from outward administrations, such carnal ordinances, such visible
representations of Christ to the bodily eyes such legal rites and mere bodily
exercises as baptism and fellowship together in breaking of bread are.

These things were used indeed, and ordained as milk for babes in that mere
nonage and infancy of the Church, when Christ was known as a child as it were,
but now we are to know Christ as a man grown in us, risen up in us, and to have
fellowship with him more immediately and intimately in spirit, and not in such
external, and mere fleshly forms; we are to live higher then on such low,
weak, empty, elements, and beggarly rudiments as these, which were used, and
imposed for a time to resemble Christ to us from without, but must be left when
once Christ, the substance, that was set forth by those shadows, is come into
us. Christ is now in the Saints the hope of glory, Col. 1. 27. So Heb. 6. 1. 2.
leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ let us go on to perfection,
not laying again etc. you see we must mind higher matters leaving these, which
were as a dark glass, or shadowy dispensation, through which the Church once
did see Christ, and knew him after the flesh, but now face to face, 1 Cor. 13.
12. and henceforth know we him so no more, 2 Cor. 5. 16. when I was a child,
says Paul, I spoke as a child, and did as a child, and thought as a child, but
when I became a man I put away child^h things 1 Cor. 13. 11. every one that
uses milk is unskilful in the word of righteousness, for he is a babe, but
strong meat belongs to them that are full of growth, who have their senses
exercised to discern between good and evil: Heb. 5. 14. that which is perfect
is now come, and therefore what is imperfect, and in part only, as ordinances
are, must be done away, and as for gathering of congregations, peoples
assembling together in the Church bodies to preach, pray, break bread to build
up one anoin the faith, search the Scripture etc. it was a way of God for men's
edification till Christ the morning star shined, to which men did well to take
heed, as unto a light that shined in a dark place, but now the day dawnes, and
the day star arises in men's hearts, yea the day breaks and the shadows fly
away; and Christ comes as a swift Roe, and young heart upon the mountains of
Bether; so that now we are to exercise our selves rather unto Godliness for
all bodily exercises as baptism, breaking bread and Church order etc. profit
little: besides it was said there should be a falling away from all those forms
of worship, and the way of ordinances, which was in the primitive times, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. and a treading down of the holy City and Temple, Rev. 11. 1. 2. as
to the form it then stood in, both which have fell out also accordingly, so
that there has been a taking of all that dispensation of ordinances in their
primitive purity totally out of the way, therefore now we are to meddle no more
with them at all; at least unless we had some extraordinary Prophets, as the
Jews had after the treading down of their temple and and worship, to satisfy
and show us that its the mind of the Lord we should set up that old fabric and
form again.

Baptist.
This is the old tune, which you, and your followers have been used to sing in
any time this seven year, which yet I could never learn to this day distinctly
to sing in after you, and I am persuaded never shall, unless I could hear more
clearness and distinction in the sound then yet I do, to whom, while I sound
how suitable your sense is to the sense of Scripture, you are Barbarians when
you speak thus.

That Christ now comes in the light and power of his spirit, as a swift Roe and
heart upon these mountains of division, that now are between the PPPriests among
themselves, and between others and them; and that abundance of light comes
dispelling that fog and smoke of men's traditions, which has risen out of the
bottomless pit, and of a long time darkened the Sun, and the air, and the
hearts of people, all this I grant, but that this coming of his does put an
end, a ne plus ultra to any one of his own traditions or ordinances that were
instituted by him, and in his name delivered to the Churches in the primitive
times, as a part of his will and testament then, this is as hard a lesson for
me to learn, as it is for some to learn that it is their duty to be baptized: for
assuredly nothing but Christ's own personal coming shall put a period to any one
tittle of his Gospel, will, and Testament, or of that outward dispensation,
which by appointment from himself was then in force; and therefore to neither
baptism, imposition of hands, or Churchfellowship in breaking bread, every of
which most undoubtedly was a part of the preceptory part of Christ's Gospel in
those days, and of that new Testament ratified in his blood, 1 Cor. 11. 25.
which gospel, testament and holy will of his, that he as a great Prophet left
in charge for all men to observe, when he went away Mat. 28. 20. Mark 13. 34.
Luke 19. 17. to the 28. (and not any new one delivered since) is the very same,
according to which he will judge all men at his return, any part of which
therefore in either promise or precept, suppose but the ordinances of it (for I
am sure it was a testament, and Gospel that had ordinances then) woe be to that
man or angel that shall once dare to declare as null: yea let no man slatter
himself, and delude others with pretenses of an Angelical, Seraphical life to
be led now in an higher kind of way then the Saints, and Churches did in the
primitive ages of the Gospel; for I tell that man that if he were not only
appearing to himself to be wrapped up above Paul, but really an angel from
heaven, and not Christ himself yet some Ranters are not ashamed to say they are
Christ, and God, and there is no other God then they, and what is in them, and
such like blasphemies, when reby they declare themselves to be that generation,
that are to rise in the latter days, and make the man of sin, even that wicked
one that shall exalt himself above all that's called God, saying of himself he
is God, given over to strong delusion to believe lies, that they may be damned,
because not receiving the love of the truth, that they might be saved, whom the
Lord shall destroy with the brightness of his coming 2 Thessalonians. 2. denying the
Lord that bought them, and bringing on themselves swift destruction. 2 Pet. 2.
2.
(who when he comes personally, shall say indeed unto his servants come up
higher) he must be A^hema, preaching, and holding forth other then what the
Apostles at first delivered to the Churches of Galatia, who received the Gospel
with the outward ordinances, and Church order thereof, Gal. 1. 6. 7. 8. 9. 11.
12. compared with 1 Cor. 11. 23. 24. etc. in which Scriptures its evident that
the whole entire Gospel, which was preached then by Paul, who received it
together with the ordinances of baptism Gal. 3. 27. and the supper, not of man,
but of the Lord, was strictly required to be kept, without harkening to any
other things, then what were then delivered, and received in the Churches,
though spoke by an angel from heaven, or their very selves, who at first
preached them, who, if ever any such thing should have fallen out, as their
falling off from that truth, and contradicting themselves, for so doing must
have been held accursed; yea if Paul himself should have come some 100s of
years after to the Churches of Galatia, and gainlaid what he had said before,
saying you received the Gospel from me at first with ordinances, but now you
may let the ordinances of it alone, its enough for you to believe only, and
live up to God in the spirit, he had condemned himself to cursing out of his
own mouth: if then the Apostles, that at first gave out the Gospel to the
world, were not, on pain of being accursed, to preach any other then what at
first they preached, what cursing att^ends thee (O wretched Ranter) that
deifiest thy self, and take upon thee not only to deny, but to defy the
Gospel of Christ in the ordinances of it, and the holy oracles of the living
God?

Thou tellest us of a coming of Christ by his spirit into the hearts of men,
after which, there need be no more use of ordinances, that when Paul says men
must continue breaking bread till he come, he means till he comes in spirit,
but I tell thee, if the right eye of reason were not utterly darkened in thee,
thou could^t not but understand, that till he come, 1 Cor. 11. speaks of the
same time as Christ himself speaks of, when he says to his Church in Thyatira
Rev. 2. 25. 26. which were then in a Church posture, and under the use of
ordinances, that which ye have already hold f^st till I come, and that that
time was no other then the end of this world, which he shall put a period to by
his personal coming, is cleared by the verse following, he that over comes,
and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations,
where by the end, as he means the same period he pointed at before, i^ that
phrase till I come, so he means the time of Christ's second coming to judgment,
to reign at the end of this world, mentioned Mat. 24. 3. and in scores of
Places more, and not the time of his coming by his spirit unto men, for so he
was come, and has come, more or less, well nigh as soon as, and even ever
since he went away, yea according to his promise he soon sent his spirit to
abide with his people, (in their observation of his commandments, and not
otherwise) as a comforter in the absence of his person, John 14. 15, 16. one
office also among the rest of which spirit when he should come (so far was he
by his coming from disingaging men from obedience to any one thing, that Christ
spoke while he was on earth) was because many would be very subject to to
forget, and be willingly ignorant of Christ's laws, to teach all things, and
bring all things to their remembrance, whatsoever Christ said unto his
disciples, while he was with them, John 14. 26. yea so he was come to his
disciples and the Churches, even unto Paul himself, and that very Church of
Corinth, whom he praises for keeping some ordinances he delivered to them, and
charges to keep that of breaking of bread till Christ come, long before he gave
this charge, and that in such a high degree, that they had even all the gifts
and manifestations of the spirit among them that might be 1 Cor. c. 12. c. 13.
c. 14. so that they had abundance of Prophets, and spiritual men among them, 1
Cor. 14. 37. that were higher in the spirit, (or if they were not Paul, that
was once in the third heaven was) then the spiritual men of this age, yea they
were a people in every thing enriched with all utterance, and all knowledge,
and the testimony of Christ was so confirmed in them by the coming of the
spirit, that they came behind in no gift 1 Cor. 1. 5. 6. 7. 8. yet were they to
wait (in the dispensation, and use of ordinances wherein they were) for another
coming of the Lord Jesus in which way Paul's hope was that Christ would confirm
them to the end, that they might be blameless (as else it seems they could
not be) in the day i. e. the great, and notable day of the second personal
coming of the Lord Jesus;

Thou talkest to us (alluding to Heb. 9. 10. where the ordinances of the divine
service of the law, or old testament are so styled) of the ordinances of the
Gospel, under the name of carnal ordinances, mere fleshly forms, but know oh
vain man, that the outward rites, or ceremonies of the Law are there called
carnal on such an account, as the ordinances of the Gospel cannot be so
styled, viz. not at all because they were services performed by the outward
man, but because the performance of them served, and sanctified no further then
to the purifying of the flesh, v. 13. viz. to the purging of the practisers
thereof, i. e. the Jews from such outward, fleshly impurities, as were
contracted in the time of the Law by such things Viz touching of dead bo dies
Number. 5. 2. eating^ or touching the carcases of any forbidden fishes, birds, or
beast, Lev. 11. 24. 31. diseases as the leprosy, Lev. 13. 8. running of issues
Levit. 15. 2. and such like.
and actions as did denominate persons unclean for the time then being, but
neither do nor can so denominate them now, that law with all the ordinances of
it being abolished.

Thou call Christ's ordinances, (being not a little deluded by some
expressions of Mr. Saltmarsh, who speaks of them in his books, as matters
pertaining only to John's ministry, whom together with his baptism, and all that
was done ad extra in the primitive time, he puts upon the account of the law,
as pertaining to it, rather then purely upon the account of the Gospel) but
know (fond man) that as John was a minister of the Gospel of Christ, and not of
the law, and his ministration of preaching, and water baptism the very
beginning of the Gospel of Christ (as I have showed above) Mark 1. 1. 4. so if
he, and his ministration of bap tism had related simply to the law, as they did
not, yet that of laying on of hands, and Church Fellowship in breaking bread,
were all given in charge by the new lawgiver Christ Jesus, and that of water
baptism too, for (as if he had foreseen that some should delude themselves and
others, so as to say it ended at his death) even that also was given a new
after his death, as his express commmand concerning all people to the worlds
end.

Thou speak of living higher then on such low, weak, empty elements, and
beggarly rudiments, but (to say nothing of thy abominable impudency, and the
desperate for if he that despised Moses law died without mercy, of how much
sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, that has trodden under foot the
son of God, Heb. 10. 29. therefore we had need to give the more earnest heed to
the things which we have heard, least at any time we let them slip, for if the
word spoken by angels was sure and steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation, which at first began to be spoken by the Lord, and
was after confirmed to us by them that heard him, Heb. 2. 1. 2. 3: whosoever
shall be ashamed of me or my words, of him will I be ashamed when I come in the
kingdom of my father with my holy angels, Mark. 8. 38.
despite herein done by thee to the son of God, whom thou treadest under foot,
whilst thou despisest his day of small things, and set light by the least
of his commands, and hurlst at thy heels the least jota of his law and
testament, or art ashamed of his words) to let pass that (I say) we give thee
to understand, that we live not on these ordinances we use, but only on our
Lord Christ in them, whose foolish, weak things, and earthen vessels they are,
by which he hands heavenly treasure to believing souls.

Thou tellest us that the use of outward ordinances was milk for babes in that
infancy or nonage of ^ue Church, (which is no more then what we say our selves,
of some ordinances at least viz. baptism and imposition of hands, which with
the rest of the word of the beginning of Christ's doctrine are so styled, Heb.
5. 12. 13. 6. 1. 2.

But what of this? is it not very fit therefore that they should still be used,
the Church being yet under age? unless thou will run necessarily upon the
utterance of one of the^e two absurdities, viz. that babes are not to be fed
with milk now, as heretofore, but are more fitly fed with stronger meat, or
else (which is as gross) that there are no new born babes now in the Church (as
before) at all, but that every beginner in Christ is now a strong man, a
perfect man in Christ, so soon as ever spiritually born.

Thou tellest us that to use ordinances is to know Christ after the flesh, who
from thenceforth was to be known so no more: but herein oh spiritual man, thou
bewrayest thy own fleshly, carnal, and most crude conception of that place,
whereby the words of Paul, though we have known Christ after the flesh, he
means not a knowing of him in the use of ordinances (for then when he says
henceforth know we no man after the flesh, it must have the same sense too, and
would suppose that till that time the Saints had known men in the use of
ordinances; besides, that the Church at Corinth knew Christ in the use of
ordinances long after this, is eminently evident in the Epistle of Clement the
Pastor, and the Churchat Rome, written to the Corinthians, upon occasion of
their disorder in church affairs, some 30 years after Paul wrote this) but he
means that they, from thenceforth that Christ died, did take cognizance of no
man as ere the better, upon the account of a mere fleshly descent, or birth of
any men's bodies, no not of Abraham's, as they had before, nor count men in
Christ, and Christians at such a rate as they were counted to God, as his,
under the Law, but only as new born, spiritually born from above, as new
creatures, as believing according to John 1. 12. 13. and Gal. 3. 26. 29. if
Christ's by faith, then Abraham's seed and heirs etc.

Thou tellest us that ordinances are as it were a dark glass, through which we
are to behold Christ, till we come to see him face to face, a certain shadowy
dispensation, till the substance it self comes; childish things that must be
put away, when once we become men, things imperfect, and in part only, which
when that which is perfect is come must vanish, and be done away and such like:
and all this, as it is nor more, nor less then we say our selves, so it is even as
much as we need desire thee to say as to the evincing of what we contend for:
for since we yet see not face to face (1 Pet. 1. 8. in whom though now ye see
him not, yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable etc. when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3. 2. i. e.
then, and not before) and since that which is perfect, i. e. the substance is
not yet come (for as we that remain, and shall be alive at the coming of
Christ, shall not prevent, or, as to perfection, be before hand with them that
are asleep in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15, 16, 17. so they i. e. that are long since
dead both in and for the Lord, without us shall not be made perfect, Heb. 11.
40.) since we are not all yet come to be men at age (to the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ) therefore (ad hominem) till then we must
look through the glass, till then the shadow, and that which is in part, and
imperfect, (as being indeed most suitable to an imperfect state) must stand,
till then the outward work of the ministry in point of offices, and ordinance,
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the body, must remain,
Ephesians. 4. 11. 12, 13.

Thou tellest us (mistaking the sense of Paul Phil, 3. 13. 14. Heb. 6. 1. 2.)
that higher things, perfection are now to be minded, and pressed after, and these
to be forgotten; that those are principles of Christ's doctrine, which were once
eyed and laid as a foundarion, but must be left and not laid now any more: But
(contrary to what David says of himself Ps. 131. 12.) thine eyes are so lofty,
thy heart so haughtily exercised in minding the things thou call high, some
of which are too high, and others too low, and base for any Christian to be
busied in, that thou mindest not the words of Paul to all Saints Romans 12. 16.
where he says, not minding high things (for so the greekwords truly translated
are * (...).
) but together with high things, minding low things: it is confessed that in some
sense we are to forget, or not to mind what is hehind, but to mind, to press
after, to reach forth to things that are before, to leave the principles, the
foundation of Christ's doctrine, and go on to perfection, but not in thy sense
(o Ranter) who hereby take upon thee to buryall manner of observation of
these things (even by any) under utter oblivion, to prohibit all present
practice of principles by so much as babes, to raze the foundation so as to
declare it not sit to be laid at first now, as of old it was, no not by very
biginners in the School of Christ: but in the spirits sense, who in those
places, means no other then thus viz. not that the babes in Christ must not use
milk in these times, as well as in the primitive, not that the beginner in
Christ's School is not now as well as then to learn his letters, and to begin
first in his ABC, not that those, that will begin to build themselves an holy
temple in the Lord, an habitation of God through the spirit, must not now lay
any foundation at all, but that having laid the foundation they should not
think that their building is at an end, but build up higher, grow up higher in
Christ thereupon, that they should lay the foundation so sure at first that
they should not have need in respect of their non proficiency or relapses into
sin, to be laying these i. e. faith of remission, repentance etc. ore and ore
again, but to proceed to perfection: that babes should not remain always
babes, feeding on nothing but milk, but growing in grace, and in the knowledge
of Christ, and in ability to bear stronger meats, higher doctrines: that the
young Scholar should not remain always a novice, an ABC darian, no further
learnt then in his horn book, but according to the time he has had, learn to
read perfectly that he may be able to teach others, rather then need to be
taught his letters again: this is the spirits sen^, for otherwise its ever
necessary that babes have milk, and absurd that a Scholar should be bid to
forget his letters, and how to spell, that builders should leave laying any
foundation, when they begin: nay verily the most studied Scholar must first
learn, and then remember his letters, or else he cannot possibly read: babes
must be fed with milk at first, or else they will not thrive to be perfect men:
builders must lay a foundation, and have an eye to it too all along in their
building upward, even till they come to the very top, observing how all the
whole fabric that they work after, does square and keep touch with that, or
else they may chance to make such a crooked fabric, as will fall to the ground
at last: yea perveniri ad summum nisi ex principiis non potest.

Thou tellest us (as concerning the outward ordinances of the Gospel) that
bodily exercises profit little, but art wretchedly ignorant of it as indeed I
find thee to be of the whole Scripture, which though Paul bids Timothy give
attendance to the reading of 1 Timothy 4. 13. 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16. 17. yet thou have
left off to read, dissuading others also from the reading of it, as
unprofitable, as no other then the writings and inventions of men, to keep the
world in awe, so that it cannot come to enjoy that liberty (alias license for
lewdness and fleshly lusts, which thou promisest, and pleadest for) and that
makes thee to be such a weather cock, such a well without water, such a
wandering star althou art, such a cloud tossed to and fro with a tempest, because
thou have no steady rule to steer by, no whither go thou to talk with, or
to take heed to, to recall, or to fix thee to any one point, but only the
whisling, multifarious fancies, and foolish sigments of thy own aerie brain,
and unconstant spirit.
that by bodily exercises which profit little, Paul means not at all as thou
do, the ordinances of Christ, or any ou^ward parts of his worship, and will
revealed in his word, for that is, though not the greatest, yet a great part of
godliness it self, which according to the true signification of the word (...)
is a right serving of God according to his own will in his word of truth, where
he requires us to serve, worship, and glorify him in our body, as well as in
our spirit 1 Cor. 6. 19. 20. but such bodily exercises, and old wives fables,
as abstinences from meats, lent'n, and good friday fasts, and such ordinances,
as touch not, taste not etc. which men subject themselves to after the
commandments, and doctrines of men, of Popish Priests, whose Religion stands
mostly in such matters 1 Timothy 4. 3. 4. 7. 8. Col. 2. 20. 21. 22.

Thou tellest us (as one of the main grounds, whereupon there must now be no
more walking in ordinances, and that way of outward service that was at first)
that it was foretold 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. that there should come a falling away from
it, and a treading down of all that outward form, which then was: which (to say
nothing how probable it is that that prophecy 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. and several more,
do point more at that falling away that thou (oh false prophet) shall cause in
the very last days, then at that which by the proud P P Priesthood has been
made before thee) I declare to be such an absurd and senseless consequence, as
is more worthy of a silent sleighting, then a solid answer; for if that be of
force to prove a disannulling of that administration, then its of force much
more against the acting of faith it self, for as its not said there from what
the falling away should be, so its expressly said elsewhere there should be a
departure from the faith, 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2. so that if the foretelling that there
should be a falling away from the truth of ordinances, prove that therefore
there must be no practicing of them now at all, then there being a prophecy of
a falling away from the right belief of the Gospel, will evince that there
ought now to be no right believing, and so belike we do as ill in believing the
Gospel now, as in practicing the ordinances of it: but this will not not hold,
and therefore certainly not the other.

More over (that thou may see how contrary thou art to the Apostles, not in
thy actings only, but in thy arguings also) consider that whereas thou
admonishest men thereupon to be careless as concerning ordinances, they even
from their own predictions of a falling away from the purity of the primitive
way, stir the Saints up to so much the more dilligent and strict attendance to
it, Jude ver. 3. 4. from the very consideration of a future falling away
exhorts the Saints, not therefore to let go, but earnestly to contend for that
faith, which was once delivered to the Saints; and I appeal to the
understanding of any one, that has not shut up his eyes from seeing and
searching after the mind of God in the Scripture, whether Paul does not charge
Timothy 1 Timothy 4 16. 5. 21. 6. 13. 1 Timothy 3. 14. (to whom he had told it before
in 1 Timothy 4. 1. that there should be a departure from the faith) even therefore
(as he would answer it before God) to observe those things concerning outward
discipline, and Church order, offices, and ordinance in point of laying on of
hands, and other things, of that kind as well as other, that he in the name of
the Lord had commanded him, and to keep them without spot and unrebukeable even
to the appearing of Jesus Christ, and not only to continue himself in the
doctrine, and things that he had learnt from Paul, among which many were
instructions for the right ordering of Churches 1 Timothy 3. 15. but also to take
special order for the continuation thereof downwards to succeeding generations
without the least hint of any term or period of time, wherein they of right
should cease: the things which thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the
same commit thou to faithful men, that shall be able (i. e. after thy decease)
to teach others also, 2 Timothy 2. 2. and not only so, but whether he does not in
that very place thou alledgest viz. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. even therefore enjoin the
Saints to hold fast the traditions or ordinances (for so the same word (...)
which is used here, is truly enough rendered 1 Cor. 11. 2.) because he had told
them above that there should come one, that should delude many with lies?
whereas if Paul had argued as thou O Reasonlesse do, he must have said thus
viz. there shall come a falling away from the purity of ordinances, by a wicked
one that shall tread them down, therefore be not too stuff in standing for
them, but let go the ordinances which have been taught you whether by word or
Epistle: Peter also foreseeing, and accordingly foreshewing, that there should
come scoffers in the last days walking after their own lusts, not Christ's
commands, wills the Saints that should be in those last times, as Malachi did
the Jews, after a long deformation, to remember the Law of Moses with the
statutes and judgments Mal. 4. 4. in which we now live, to look back to and be
mindful of the words that were spoken before, by the holy prophets, and the
commandments of the Apostles of the Lord and Savior, 2 Pet. 3. 2. as Jude also
does in the self same words, and upon the self same account Jude 17. And this I
find to be the course of the Apostles all along, upon foresight of the dark and
declining time, to refer the Saints of the last times to their primitive
orders, and by Arguments drawn from the steadfastness of the word of the old
Testament, in every tittle, to show much more a steadfastness in the new, and a
liablenes to punishment for every transgression, and disobedience to this, as
there was for that, Heb. 2. 2-10. 28. every jot of which was so steadfast, that
even tith of Mint, Annis and Cummin, which the Pharisees did ill indeed in so
doting upon, as to neglect the weightier matters of judgment, mercy etc. was
nevertheless not to be neglected Matthew. 23. 23. on pain of being accounted
Robbers of God Mal. 3. 8. and howbeit the greater, and higher things of the
Gospel, as faith, holiness of life etc. are not to be forgotten, while we
attend to lesser and lower, yet how the law of Christ was so steadfast as that
of Moses, if it ly in the power of man or Angel to disannul the least particle
of it, till Christ himself, who is the only abolisher of old dispensations, and
establisher of new, do, by his own next personal coming, put an end to this,
as he did by his first coming unto that, I am not able to imagine.

Thou tellest us, Suppose the Saints and churches ought to have held fast their
administration of ordinances (...) ^his day, yet what of that? the Churches
have lost, and let go that first outward form of service, and Iezebel the whore
has got into the Temple, and filled all with Idolatry, and trod all the true
way under foot, and instead thereof set up her own ordinances, and traditions,
the Clergy has corrupted and depraved all that first face of outward worship,
therefore ^s now no more to be meddled with for ever, there must be no more
raising the holy City in that form and way, wherein it stood before, no more
Churches, nor ordinances: but did every any rational spirit argue thus, viz.
because the true appointed way of Gods worship was lost, when it should have
been, therefore it must not be found, recovered, nor returned to again when it
may be? surely the same rule, reason, warrant and command by which the Church
was bound to have stood in the way of truth without falling away, by the same
is she now bound to rise from whence she is fallen, or else I know not what
Christ means when he says to the Church at Ephesus Rev. 2. 4, 5. Remember from
whence thou art fallen, and repent and do thy first works etc.

Secondly, by the same reason and ground that the Jews returned from Babylon
to Jerusalem, and built the holy City and Temple that was the type, when by the
enemy Typical of our Gospel Babylonians, the Priesthood and his people, that
have led the Church captive from her own border for a time times and a half
even 70 years it was trodden underfoot, and began again to practice the word,
worship and ordinances of the old Testament, so long abolished, agreeably to
Gods will, by the same I say, may the Gospel Church, having now both light and
liberty so to do, return from under the power, and tyranny of mystery Babylon,
and betake her self to her own border from whence she was driven, to her own
City, Temple, form of worship, old Church order, ordinances, and service, which
were all by violence trod down, and caused to cease for a time, times and an
half, for 42. months or a 1260. years, as that which by the might of men
suppressing it, has lost not a jot of its right, as that which is required of
us now, as the other was of them, till Christ by his first coming put an end
to that administration, as he shall by his second unto this.

Thou tellest us no, there is not the same reason, Because,

First it was foretold that they should return again after a set period of
time, and how long Jerusalem should be trodden under foot, even for seventy
years, and after that be built, and her old form of worship restored.

Secondly, they had extraordinary prophets Haggai and Zachary to attend them,
and dictate to them the mind of God in those things they did from God.

But I tell thee (and thou would see it thy self but that thou art minded to
be blind) First, those Prophets spoke nothing as by command from God to them,
then what they had a written word, and Testament for out of Moses and the other
prophets, whom if they had in the least contradicted, they must have been
rejected, as extraordinary as they were; neither were they inciters of them to
any ^ew thing, nor yet to any thing save what they stood bound to do before,
and had done still, had those prophets never came near them, viz. to build the
house of the Lord, and set up their old worship according to the Testament of
Moses, those Prophets were sent because of their sluggishnesse, and
backwardness to act in it, their preposterous care first to build, and ceil
their own houses, and let the Temple ly wast the while, and to quicken them to
that duty of buildi^g Gods; for duty all the world may see it was, or else how
could the neglect thereof have bin punishable, and punished, as it was, with
drought, and blasting of all their endeavorsto be rich, before those Prophets
spoke to them? Hag. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, those Prophets came but upon
occasion of their frustrating Gods expectation, who looked that they should
have begun to build the Temple of themselves, but because he took them tardy in
that work, was put to it further then they had thank for, even to send men of
extraordinary spirits to stir them up, as he may do (if yet he do not) and that
not without need, to us in these days, considering our untowardnesse and
averseness to repair the breaches, to build the old wastes, and the Church
desolations of many generations, and our subjection to slight the clear
commands of his first Apostles: it had been more thnnkeworthy, and more
accep^able to God if the Jews had acted by the Law of Moses, and according to
the written rule of the other Prophets, then it was to forbear, and to say that
time was not a time, wherein to build the Lords house, and so it will be
thank-worthy in us, seeing (as they had Moses and the Prophets, so) we have
Christ, and the Apostles, to hear them, and to act still according to their old
commandments; but to sit down, under a written Testament, in mere speculation
and contemplation, suspending all execution of Christ's Ancient known will,
unless there be some strange, and unpromised manifestation of a new, or of
that old a new, by some extraordinary messengers, or by some sent unto us from
the dead, is that which God will con Christian men no more thanks for I think
at the last, then he did the redeemed Jews, upon whom the like pretense was
charged, and punished by him as iniquity Hag. 1. 4. Again, are there not
promises, and prophecies of the like things to us in the New Testament, as
there were, in the like case of treading down their worship, to them under the
old, and as, if not more clear, then they had of a restitution? was it not as
distinctly foretold, for how long our Gospel Babilonish captivity, and treading
down of the holy City, Temple, and true worship should last, viz. for 42.
months, or a 1260 years, as theirs was for 70 years? after which, its most
evident therefore it must rise again, or else the spirit could not have
determined the time of the treading down by a certain term of 42 months, but
would surely have said thus, the holy City shall they tread down for ever, or
to the end of all time: for if the old Jerusalem, the Jews, their Temple and
worship, even the self same that was trodden down (for a resu^rection, or
restoration is of the self same thing still (and not another) that was trodden
down or decayed) had never been in the mind of God to have been raised again,
and restored, the time of its laying wast could not properly be prefixed by
such a period, nor be styled a 70 years devastation: also was is not foretold
to us, that the little book of the New Testament, that was to be shut up by
that smoke of traditions, and fog of errors, that should arise out of the
bottomless pit, by means of the star, or Bishop of Rome, that opened the pit,
should be opened again, and prophecyings be out of it, before the world? Rev.
9. 1. 2. 3. 10. 1. 10. 11, yea is not the Gospel in that primitive purity, and
plains from the simplicity of which all people have been bewitched by the
whores sorceries, begun again accordingly to be preached, though as yet by too
few practiced; is not that little book now open in the hand of the Angel Christ
Jesus? and are there not prophets that, having eaten up that little book, as
E^ekiel did his role, and Jeremy did the words of God when he found them Ezekiel
3. 1. 2. 3. Jeremy 15. 16. are paind within to speak the word to Peoples,
Nations, Tongues, and Kings, as they were, though for so doing they are like
them also viz. men of strife and contention to the whole earth? who so far as
they encourage us to no more then what there is a written word for, must be
heeded by us in these days, as those Prophets were by them? and is there not
now a written Testament, a sure word to give heed to, and be a rule to us in
our raising of the A^tient form, and order of Churches and Ordinances, even the
Testament of Christ himself, who was as faithful to deliver his will punctually
to his house, as Moses was to a tittle to deliver the old will of God to his?
Heb. 3. 5. 6. in which word of his are we not bid (as they Zach. 2. 6. 7.) to
come out of Babylon, and be separate? 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15. 16. 17. Rev. 14 18 9
10. 8. 4. 5. and is there not a reed given, and a command to rise and measure
the City and Temple, and worshippers in order to building again of what was
ruined, as the plummet was then in hand of Zorobabel? Zach. 4. 10. we have for
ought I see, as plain promises, prophecies, warrands, and grounds, as they had
to build, when they came from Babylon, if we have eyes to see them, unless
nothing will serve to the satisfying of us as indeed it will not to the
satisfying of some) that our acting in the old way of Christ is his mind, and
will concerning us now, but miracles to confirm us in the belief of it: by
whose leave I must rather call for miracles from them, to confirm it, that
their leaving that old administration of ordinances and beginning to act in
that new way of no ordinances is of God, for, as for the doctrine we practice,
it was at first confirmed by miracles, as Gods manner ever is at the remove of
any old Testament, or will of his, and establishing a new one in its stead, but
theirs, though a new one, nor yet committed to writing, was never yet confirmed
by miracles at all; and suppose they had had more extraordinary Prophets, then
we have, at the restoring of their ruins after the Babilonish wastings, yet
lets know what extraordinary Prophets they had to build upon, for the
re-edifying of their daily sacrifices and religion, when trod down for a time,
times and an half also, by Antiochus, that most lively type of Christ's
Churchwasting enemies under the Gospel? of whose violent ablation of all, and
lawful restoration of all again by the Jews, according to the old pattern
(excepting what corruptions, were afterward among them, which yet did not
disannul the right of the remaining of any truth may) be read at large 1 Mac.
1. 2. Mac. 7. 2. Mac. 10. which all stood in force, notwithstanding that
falling away, even till Christ himself, who also confirmed, and practiced to a
tittle according to Moses Testament, during his life, at last put an end to it
by his death.

All thy arguings therefore ((...) ^ertine) from a falling away to no return,
from a treading down of the true way of ordinances to no erecting it again, are
but a sort of sorry sh^s, whereby thou fencest off that part of Christ's Gospel,
which I confess from some experience in my own crooked, deceitful, yet
self-searching heart flesh and blood takes no delight in: for if we consider
things under the Gosp^l with that relation, and propo^tion they stand in to
things under the Law, which were Types and shadows of them, then we must
conclude th^e is a certain space, or intertime between the last period of the
42 months, or of the time of treading down of the true Gospel worship by might,
and Christ's coming to abolish, and take away their right (as there was after
the Babilonish captivity a space of 70 weeks) in which the Saints according to
the call, and warning g^ven them to worship God aright, and decline the beasts
worship, and come out of Babylon, Rev. 14. Rev. 18. are obedient, and continue
in the word of Christ's patience, under all the malice of the beasts
worshippers, and in the observation of the commandments of God, and the faith
of Jesus, and of all the works that Christ left in charge at his departure, to
be kept in memorial of him in his absence viz. baptism, the supper etc. that
so, when the Lord shall come as a snare, and as a thief on all that are
disobedient to his voice, and contentious against any tittle of his truth, they
may be found, as Noah, and Lot (till whose separation the d^om determined could
not fall upon the wicked Gen, 19. 22.) out of Sodom Rev. 11. 8. in Zoar, in the
ark i. e. Christ, and his true ways, Ordinances and worship, which are to
them, as those of old to the other, a little Sanctuary Isa: 8. 13, 14. Eze. 11.
16. 1 Pet. 3. 20, 21
; and being found so doing, as Christ required, keeping his commandments, may
be blessed, and have right to the tree of life, and to enter in through the
gates into the City Rev. 22 14. 15. and be entertained with well done good, and
faithful servant, thou have been faithful in a very little, and over a few
things, have thou authority over much, over many things, enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord, Mat. 25. 21. Luke 19. 17.

Thou tellest us that the day star arises, and the day approaches, and
therefore now there need be no such heed given to the edifying one another in
Assemblies, by the use of Ordinances, but whether we shall believe thee (o
perverter) who say we must give attendance to these things so much the
less, or Paul, who says Heb. 10. 25.
so much the more as we see the day approaching, let any judge, but thy
besotted self, who speak all allong, by a spirit most contradictory to, and
yet can not be persuaded, but that in all thou speak answerably to the
word.

Thou tellest us that Christ is ^ow in his Saints the hope of glory, but thou
tellest us no news in this, for I know not when he was otherwise, while they
walked not after the flesh, but after the spirit, in obedience to his voice, in
holy confirmity to his will, and word, and in fellowship one with another, in
the use of all his holy ordinances, but as for thy self (o spiritualist that
separatest thy self sensual, not having the Spirit, though pretending to have
it in a higher degree, then any that live in bondage unto Ordinances, I know
not how to believe he is so much in thee as the hope of glory, for every one
that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, as Christ is pure 1 John 3. 3.

Thou tellest of seeing face to face, of present perfection, and manhood, and
that that which is perfect is come, and that thou live already with God, in
God, in full and actual enjoyment of heaven and all heavenly happiness, God
dwelling already in thee, and thou in him, in the very substance, which was
once shadowed out by the childish things called Ordinances, in the secret
chambers of the most high, in the heights of God, in the very bosom and inmost
embraces of the father, in a high degree of godliness, spirit, and glory; But
(to let pass how thou contradictest, confutest, and give thy self the lie,
when thou expressest all this sometimes by no higher a term then Christ in thee
the hope of glory, for hope that is seen is not hope, for what a man sees why
does he yet hope for? but if we hope for that we see not, then do we (not say
we have it, but) with patience wait for it, as not yet actually enjoyd Romans 8.
24. 25.) we know well enough (forthy own practice, and sometimes thy own speech
bewrays thee)* what thy (...), perfection, and godliness is, thy
spiritualnesse is to fulfill the will of the flesh with out scruple, ^o feed,
and feast it without fear, to swaggar and swear, and revil and roar, and rant
and whore, and in all this to have no more conscience of (...) then a very
bruit: thy perfection is a mere defection from the truth, thy fullness of age
to discern between good and evil is a faculty to discern, that there is neither
good nor evil, thy Godliness to be (as Paul paints thee out 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2.
etc.) a lover of thy self, coveteous, proud, a boaster, a blasphemer,
disobedient to Gov^rnours etc. incontinent, fierce, a despiser of those that
are good, treacherous, heady, high-minded, a lover of pleasures more then God,
and to have a form, or pretense of godliness, whereby with the more advantage
to creep into houses, and lead captive to thy lust silly women laden with lust,
but to resist ^he truth, and deny the power thereof, and instead of denying all
ungodliness in such a sense as the grace of God teaches men to do, i. e. to
have nothing to do with it, by a principle of grace turned into wantoness, to
deny that there is any ungodliness at all.

Nevertheless know this that the Lord com^eth with 10000 of his Saints to
convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, which
they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly
sinners have spoken against him, Jude 14. 15. and though thou, being willingly
ignorant of any such personal coming of Christ (Oh Ranter) and ungodly
scoffer of these last times, that walk after thy own lusts in sensual*
las^vious, and polluted ways, since thy forgetting the words of the Aposties
of our Lord, and thy unlawful separation from the true Churches, Jude 17. 18.
19. since their lawful separation from the false 2 Cor. 2. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18.
say where is the promise of his coming? and because all things continue as
they were 2 Pet. 3. 2. 3. 4. 5. please thy self in believing he will never so
come; yet he will so come in like manner i. e. visibly, personally, bodily (but
far m^re gloriously) as he went away Act. 1. 11. and be revealed from heaven in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God (them specially that
know no other God but themselves, and their belly Phil. 3 19.) and on them that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. 8. 9. who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction: yea while thou dreamest (oh filthy
dreamer) despising government (even ecclesiastical and civil) defiling the
flesh, having eyes full of adultery that cannot cease from sin, (and yet cannot
commi^ sin, because with thee there is now no sin) promising men liberty whilst
thou thy self art a servant of corruption, and a slave in chains to Satan,
acting and ranting in every particular, even to the life (I should say rather
to the death, for it is to thy own) according as thou art punctually painted out,
and prophesied of all along by Peter 2 Peter 2. c. 3. and Jude in both their
Epistles, who speak both the same things, which either speaks, and no other
then the self same, which thou do; yet thy judgment now of along time
lingreth not, and thy damnation slumbreth not, 2 Pet. 2. 3. for thy Lord (O
evil servant) that art not found so doing (as some few will be) as he left in
charge when he went away* but say in thy heart, my Lord delays his coming,
and thereupon beginnest to smite thy fellow servants, that keep close to the
masters will, that they may be without spot as his appearing, and to eat and
drink with the drunken, thy Lord I say will come, to thy cost, in a day when
thou look not for him, in an hour that thou art not aware of, and cut thee a
sunder, and appoint thee a portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth Mat. 24. 46. 47, 48, 49, 50, 51. yea, O thou unprofitable
servant, thou shall be cast into utter darkness, Mat. 25. 30. yea, thou
fearless feaster, and feeder of thy self against the day of slaughter Iam. 5.
5, 6, 7. thou fruitless, twice dead, brutish Creature, the very mist and
blackness of darkness is, against that time of Christ's coming reserved for
thee for ever 2 Pet 2. 17. Jude 13.

ANTI-SACERDOTISM.
Sacerdotale delirium dilineatum, The dotage of the Priests discovered, OR
Editio nova auctior, et emendatior.

A new Edition, With no small Addition In way of Emendation, Amplification, and
truer Application of the third part of that trebble Treatise, which is extant
about the Ashford Disputation, ENTITLED.

A pathetical exhort^on to the Pastors to oppose the growth of Anabaptism, or a
short discourse concerning the means of opposing heretics in disputation and
preaching.

In which new Edition, as Christ's true Clergy, alias, the Churches that are
commonly, but not properly, called ANABAPTISTS, are cleared not to be such, So
(exceptis excipiendis) the Pope and his C C Clergy are cleared to be such
themselves, (viz. self-loving and ambitious, vain-gloryous and covetous,
illiterate and sottish, impure and carnal, cruel and bloody, lying and
blasphemous, profane and sacrilegious, Heretical and Schismatical) as Dr.
Featly in his remarkeables, and that fraternity, by whom he, though dead, yet
speaks, in their patheticals have proclaimed the said ANABAPTISTS to be.

MAL. 2. 1, 2. 7, 8, 9. O ye priests this commandment is for you, etc.

AND now O ye Disputers and Scribes of the Ashford Disputation, I might say not
a little, and will say something (how much I know not) in discovery of your
sacerdotall doings (not to say dotings) in the third piece of your pedorantical
paper, wherein the only truly baptism, Church and Ministers of it are both
declaimed against under the hateful names of Heresy, Schism, Heretics, such
as from no other principles then self conceit, Ambition, vainglory and
covetuousnesse design the propagation of errors, by certain hypocritical
pretenses, obstinate, impudent, and audacious deportments, Seducers, whose
society is to be shuned etc. all which will fall to the share of the silken
snapsack to carry in the end.
for thus, and much worse, to the rendering of us odious among your Gentry and
Vulgar, and the hardening of their hearts against the truth, are we, whom you
style Auabaptists, bespattered by you Antibaptists in that Triobulary Treatise,
entitled p. 20. A short discourse concerning the means of opposing Heretics
both in Disputation and preaching, alias in your title page, whereby it is
evident both what, and whom you mean by the words Heresy, Heriticks viz. us
and the way we walk in) Apathetical Exhortation to the Pastors to oppose the
growth of Anabaptism, the drift of it whether it be more to decline, or desire
any more disputation with them, one can hardly discover, so doubtful is the
sense of the Scribes that scraped it, sometimes as it were decrying disputation
as dangerous, and that from which it is scarce possible to expect any good, and
superscribing it self thus, viz. Why Heretics are not to be disputed withal:
sometimes as it were disputing for disputation again, as if it meant to move
the Ministers, though worsted, by no means to give out, and to make it good
that much good may be expected from it, like Caesar at Rubicon with one foot
out, saying yet I may go on, the other in, saying yet I may go back, bespeaking
its patrons to be in a twitter, in a temper between Hawk and Buzzard, afraid to
dispute too downrightly for disputation least that should engage them another
time, ashamed too directly to dispute down disputation, least it be thought
they have no mind to it any more.

But, to come to the thing it self, I confess you have spoken Bonum, but not
Been, Rectum, but not Recte; it is a moddle of (for the most part) right, good,
true, and honest matter, only made use of either very simply or very subtly,
to a bad end, viz. the provoking of the Priesthood (no need to bid mad folks
run) to preach up a false, and oppose the practice of the true baptism.

Secondly, most miserably misapplied (if ^cientiously and not cunningly it is
the better) to an improper subject and perverted the wrong way viz. to the
fastening of the name Heretics and Schismatics, for nonconformity to the
Clergy, upon those true Churches of Christ, for nonconformity to whom in
opinion and practice (if miscariage about baptism may properly be so styled)
the Clergy are in very deed the truest Heretics and Schismatics in the world.

I shall therefore in a serious survey and examine of what* Heresy and Schism
is, discover plainly,

First that the people whom you call Anabaptists, upon account of mere dissent
and separation from you in the point of baptism, are no Heretics nor
Schismatics; but the truest visible Church that Christ has upon the earth.

Secondly, that you the P P Priesthood of the Nations, who dissent from them in
that point, are, as to that point at least, the veriest Heretics and
Schismatics your selves.

Thirdly, after some pathetical expostulation with your selves, address my
self, by way of Peraphrase upon your own pathetical and paraenetical passages,
pathetically to exhort the true Pastors, and paraenetically to persuade all
people (as you do yours to beware of us) to beware of you, the spirituallity,
by whom the way of truth is dispited, who though you disguise your selves under
the name of Gods Clergy or Heritage for a while, yet will appear to be but
cruel crushers of his true Clergy in the end.

First, then let us see what Heresy and Schism is, and then who is a
Schism^tical Heretic in the doctrine of baptism, Heresy as to the Gospel is
held (and that truly by all manner of men I think) the holding or maintaining
any erroneous opinion in the faith and doctrine of the Gospel, contrary to that
doctrine delivered by Christ and his Apostles in the primitive times,
obstinately and pertinacously against all means that can be used toward
conviction of the truth, Schism is division, or making of a rent fraction or
faction in, or separation from the true Church, and from walking with them in
the truth, by the holders or maintainers of such false doctrine or opinion; and
consequently Schismatical Heretics, who ere they be, are such as are bewitched
from the simplicity of the truth as it is in Jesus, and from the doctrine that
was once received by the Church from him and his immediate Apostles, so as both
to believe and practice contrarily thereunto, against all manifestations of the
truth, whereby to reduce and reclaim them, and do also rend from and make a
head against the true Church, and true head thereof Christ Jesus, separating
themselves so as to have no fellowship or communion i. e. nor union of action,
nor unity of affection with them that walk in truth. See how Mr. Baxter defines
him out of Bullinger p. 259. Hereticum cum dico intelligosectarum Authorem qui
ecclesiam scindis etc. when I talk of an Heretic, I mean an Author of Sects,
who rendeth the Church, who pertinaciously proceeds by false and erroneous
doctrine to infrings and trouble the unity of the Church, and out of Viguerius,
Hereticus est qui relicta side et ec clesiae doctrina alicujus temporalis
commodi gratia, et maxim gloriae falsas et novas opiniones gigni^ vel
sequitur, ut vel (...) maneat ab ecclesia divisus.


Now whether it be you O PPPriests, who rantize infants or we, who baptize
believers, that are thus gone off and divided from the primitive faith and
practice, from the true head of that Church, from the true foundation i. e. the
doctrine of the Apostles Ephesians. 2. 20. Heb. 6. 1. 2. and from fellowship with,
and conformity to the true Church in baptism and otherwise, is evident to him
that is not blind or blear-eyed; for verily the water baptism which we dispense
is abundantly showed above to be that one baptism Ephesians. 4. which was used in the
primitive times, then which there is no other water baptism, enjoined or
exemplified in the word as Christ's ordinance to his disciples viz. the burying
of new born babes i. e believers in water, and bringing them up again in token
of Christ's death, burial and resurrection, and of their dying to sin, and
rising to newness of life, this I say is that one only baptism the Churches
then practiced, and thus, and no otherwise do we at this day, for which the
word is our warrant; yea it is that faith which was once delivered unto the
Saints, that we now contend for, and the words which were spoken before by the
Apostles of the Lord, as we are specially injoined to do in these latter days
by both Peter and Jude, who foretold how they would be slighted, as we see
they now are, by the two Spiritualties viz. the Rantizer and the Ranter, the
one Hereticizing in the excess by adding a new thing, the other in the defect
by owning nothing, both Schismatizing accordingly from the way of truth; and
howbeit after that way which you call Heresy, Schism, separation from the
Church, and such like, so worship we God yet, as sure as the coats upon your
back, you shall first or last, to your weal^er woe, find that, as to the point
of baptism, Churchfellowship and the supper also, it is no other then the way
of truth we walk in: yea so far are we from erring, and Schismatizing from the
Church, that we of all men do stand for a full reformation in faith, practice,
doctrine, discipline, worship, manners, government and baptism according to the
word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches i. e. those
mentioned in the word according to which we are all sworn to endeavor to
reform, as we will not be justly charged with Perjury, Perfidiousnesse, and
Preva^cation, the guilt of all which how little the Orthodox* protesting,
covenanting Clergy are clear of in the sight of God and man, is good for them
to consider: yea conformity in all things to the primitive practice is that we
plead for, press after, and pursue, and howbeit (to the shame of his ignorance
be it spoken) Orthodox Mr. Baxter is pleased, among other sectaries, to charge
the Anabaptists (so he calls us that baptize aright) as the Authors, and
approvers of the horrible wickedness of these times, and speaks of us as
dispappointing, and destroying their hopes in point of reformation, to the
grief of his heart, yet with grief of heart that the way of truth should be
evil spoken of by him, by reason of such as do wickedly indeed, yet those
lascivious ways, he lays to our score, are less approvvd on in our Churches,
then in the purest Parish Church in all Christ'ndom, Kederminster not excepted;
yea I tell him (and God I hope will one day seal it home upon his heart to the
grief of it another way) that the power and purity of Christ's ordinances are a
1000 fold more strictly stickled for, according to the Covenant, by us, then by
all those Orthodox ones he talks of, who (the more shame for them) do so
zealously, and constantly oppose us: we therefore cannot rationally be
denominated Heretics and Sciasmaticks in separating from, and practicing
contrary to you in the point of baptism, so long as we keep close to the
primitive truth, gladly both preaching and receiving the word as it is preached by
Peter Act. 2. ^aying repent and be baptized suc^ words as none of you ^ish
PPPriest^ in CCChrist'ndome do, can or ever did preach in, for if your people
Ask the Priest what they must do, you say repent, but be not baptized, yea take
heed every one of you that at any hand you be not baptized.
every one of you, repenting, and being baptized accordingly, and after that
continuing in the rest of the Apostles doctrine and fellowship in breaking of
bread and prayers: and though we draw never so many disciples from you after
us, yet the man is out of his Christian wits, that deputes and declares this to
be Heresy and Schism, since so far are we herein from rending from, and
refusing to be reduced to the Church, that we indeed earnestly endeavor to
reduce them to the true Church, to the true head Christ, the true constitution,
the true Baptism and Gospel order, from which they are rent, and run astray,
wondering after a false Church, a false head viz. a Lording Priesthood, and
Parochial posture, both which derive all their being from D^ephes, i. e. his
prating Pre-eminence the Pope: But now as for your selves, the PPPriesthood of
the Nations, who mostly deny not, but that the primitive baptism was of
believers, and dispenst in Rivers, or places of much water, which was needless
if sprinkling was then the way, you have a thing among you indeed, which you
call Baptism, but it is not that one Baptism, that old Baptism then urged and
used, but another, a new Baptism, and yet to say the truth, neither another nor
A new Baptism, but A-no-Baptism, Rantism, Babism, a toy of your own taking up
by tradition from your forefathers, but not the first fathers that were the
founders of the Christian Church, for you find it not there, but fetch it
further from thence, by such consequence as, besides the remotnesse of it, is
too weak and rotten to carry it downwards to these times; you are they that
dissent, and rend from the truth in this point of baptism, and draw all the
world to Sectarize, and err after you by a law, by your subpaena directories;
yea you pretendedly reforming Presbyters, who peculiarize the term of Orthodox
to your selves, even you, as to the right administration of the outward right
of baptism, are not a whit less Erratical, Heretical, Schismatical and
Heterodox then the Pope, for as he has another baptism then that, which was in
the primitive times viz. infant rantism, which, by the mouth of his cardinal
Bellarmine, he confesses to be but a tradition of the Church, so you have no
other then the same, yea you own that for good baptism, which is done at Rome,
or else how to prove the Popish Bishops to be baptized themselves, that
baptized, and ordained you Presbyters, you plainly know not; yet you falsely
father it upon Christ, and fain it to be an ordinance of his, then which
nothing is more clear then that it is not.

And as in point of baptism you all err, not knowing, or at least not doing
according to the Scriptures, all means used to reduce you thereunto
notwithstanding, so in the supper, and many more matters pertaining to that
visible Church order that was in those times, as namely impropriating to your
selves sole power of speaking in your Churches, i. e. steeple houses, so that
your members may well say men mutire nefas? it is not for them to open their
mouths there, unless to answer when you catechize them; whereas then all the
Church were to covet to prophecy i. e. to speak mutually to the exhortation,
edification, and comfort each of other, and being gifted, might all (women
only excepted) prophecy one by one, and every one minister as of the ability
God gave them, great or small, that God in all things might be glorified, and
all judge of the doctrine delivered; but with you what doctrine ere ye deliver,
men may try it if they will, but must take it whether they will or no, the
mouths of all must be muzzled up, save such as (in your sense) are ministers i.
e. have some Parchment Preachment orders to show from such, as can show their
orders from his Highness the head of the Church, not Christ but his Holiness
the Pope, who had his from the beast Rev. 17. who had his from the devil Rev.
13. yea verily, as to the external face, and fashion of the first Churches, you
have altogether altered it, from what it was, and brought in a business of
your own heads, being all gone aside, and altogether become vain in your ways,
as to your administrations of Gospel ordinances, so that there is none of you
that are in the right way of the primitive Churches, no not one: yea ye are
separated from and make a head against the true head of the Church Christ
Jesus, and take upon you to head the Church your selves, for this is not the
fault of P the Pope only; but of PP i. e. you Prelates and Presbyters too, who
howbeit you seem to throw off that supremacy, or headship which the Pope had
once, and lays claim to still in the protestant part of Christ'ndom, yet in
your several Christ'ndoms you have been (not nominally but) really as supreme
in Church work as he, and that not over the people only, but civil powers
also, to whom in all cases Ecclesiastical and civil, though you say you grant
the headship or Supreme Government under Christ, yet how does that appear,
since they only Corrective, but you Directive, till of late, have done all? for
the Bishops, and Sinods, and General Convocations of the Clergy, and assemblies
of the Kirk, seeundum te; must determine what is to be done by Magistrates in
Church affairs, and they do it accordingly; The Priests must give out the word
and sentence what is the worship, the way, the faith, the truth, what Heresy,
and Schism, who are Heretics and Schismatics, and then the Princes in all
their Dominions establish the one, and root out the other, as Rogues, at their
appointment, in which cases, saving the bare name of supremacy over the
Churches, which has been allowed, it is difficult to me to discern, whether
Christian Kings have not been, as of old under the Popedom, so more lately
under the very Protestant Clergy, as the Bosholder under the Constable, at his
discretion and direction to whip the beggars: and though you may say, and so
says the Pope too, that you claim to head and order the Church directive no
otherwise then under Christ, yet in very deed as he, for all his saying, so you
have presumed to set your selves above Christ, the only head, Counselor, Lord
and Lawgiver to his Church, for as the Pope has done no more then broken his
laws, changed his ordinances, trampled his truth, made void his commandments,
and subpaena damni Temporalis, et eternae damnationis, imposed men's Traditions
arrogantly in their stead, so you in your several lines have done no less;
yea you also make people to err with all your might, and whatever tender
consciences find Christ piping to the contrary in his word, yet if they dance
not after you pipe, when it sounds to the tune of Tithes, and put not into your
months, you cry peace, but bite with your teeth, and prepare war against them:
Mich. 3. 5. possessing the world with prejudice against them as a sort of
seditious Sectaries, damnnble Heretics, and Schismatics; yea (exceptis
excipiendis) saving some few scatterings here and there of more sober and
moderate minded Ministers, like so many grains of salt to keep the rest from
stinking too much in these states, where you have, or would have reigned, who
have not been so hot spur as their fellows, by the good will of P. the
Presbiter, as well as of P. the Prelate and P the Pope, many an honest man's
native country, for nonconformity to his Gangraenaticall domination, should
ere this, have been made too hot to hold him: so far therefore as separa* from
the true church and her orders may denominate a people Heretical Schismatics,
and Divines themselves place the Nature of Heresy much in separation and
Schism, the Denomination seems to be your due, O P P Priests, who are departed
from the primitive church, and not ours, for departing from you, ye are are
those Schismatical Teachers, that are rent all from the primitive plainness of
the Gospel, and present pompousnesse of each others way, and have seduced the
whole world into spiritual thraldom, idolatry, and superstition, and enticed
them into a carnal liberty of calling all things according as your carnal ends,
and interests impose the names of Heresy or truth upon them: you are S S She
that having got the good liking of the Kings and Kingdoms of the earth to
confide in you, do close the eyes of their judgments, as Dr. Featley faines we
do, with your birdlime of Schism from the true church, and head thereof Christ
Jesus, and bewitched them into an implicic submission to Papism, Arch-bishopism,
Occumaenical Synodism, Provincial Classism, and so lead them as you list into
Anti-gospelism, Antiscripturism etc. making a prey of them, and though Featly
had the faculty of faining the Baptists ^o be such, yet you are indeed devisers
of new religions, and Spiritual Impostors, falsely pretending to Christ as the
Patron, and Authorizer of your new doctrines, of which Paedo-baptism is one,
which because there is not the least dram of evidence for it in the word of
Christ, therefore when people begin to question it, you amuse the vulgar with
the names of some divine Authors or other, not Peter, nor Paul etc. but St
Austin, S^ Gregory, S Chrysostom etc. at Rome his Holiness the Pope, the holy
Mother, the Catholic Church, Ghostly Fathers etc. and in places where those
subterfuges are not regarded, Reverend Sinods of grave Orthodox Divines,
Ministers of Christ, Suffrages of all the learned Divines in the Reformed
Churches, Dr. Featley p. 161.
etc. and this you do to secure your Tenets from the hazards of disputes, and
exempt your persons, and actions from the test of examination, as if there were
such infallibility herein, that it is no less then blaspemy to doubt, or call
in question the Dictates or Directories etc. of such and such: thus bearing
your selves up with bombasting terms of Fathers, Spiritual, Ius divinum etc.
you gain to the captivating of the reason of men so far, that they resign up
themselves, ^urare in v v vostram sententiam, and will be as their Priests are,
and never believe but that they believe the truth, when all this while there is
nothing but humane authority (and humanum est errare) for most things you do.
yea you are indeed the greatest Schismatics, or Rentmakers For Tent makers
such as Paul was to make the Gos pel chargeless, you are most ly too proud to
be.
in the seamlesse coat of Christ, that the Earth bears; you are they that have
caused divisions, and offenses contrary to that doctrine, which was at first
received at Rome and in all Churches, and by good words and fair speeches, viz.
decency, order etc. have deceived the hearts of the simple, so as to make more
conscience of serving those belly gods the Priests, then the Lord Jesus
according to his own will, therefore when you talk so much to us of the Church,
and your Church, crying out (as the Pope does against the Bishops for theirs,
and the Bishops against you Presbyters, for your departure from them)
Heretics, Heretics, that disturb the peace of the Church, forsake the Church,
infringe the unity of the Church, yet I say what Church, so long as there is no
other Church constitution among you to this day then that of parishes, into
which the Pope put all Christ'ndome? what Church, so long as Sine qua
Christianismus non constat, says Calvin.
the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, on which every true Church is built
Calvin inst. lib 4. c 2. s. 1. verbi et sacramentorum Mi nisterium nobis
perpetua ^ssera dignoscende ecclesiae.
is cut off, disclaimed, and exploded, and neither the word purely preached,
nor the Sacraments duly administered, which by Calvin and Featley themselves are
both made such true notes of the true visible Church, that wherever they are
there is the true Church, and where not there is no true Church, what ever there
may be in pretense: yea verily so far are you from due administration of the
sacraments (giving the Supper to such as were never at all, much less truly,
baptized, and many of you Presbyterians not administering it at all to your
flocks, whom you contend were truly initiated into your Church by baptism)
that indeed as you have substituted infant rantism instead of it, so you preach
down that due administration of baptism and the Supper, which according to the
primitive pattern Acts 2. is at this day to be found amongst us, withal the
vehemence you can, proclaiming us Schismatical heretics for declining your
disorderly administrations, and, according to our covenant, pressing on to that
purity of administration of Gospel ordinances, which lies now in such plain
English before men's eyes, that all your glosses will beguile them but little
longer: there is no danger therefore of being rent from the Church of Christ,
in departing from participation with you in your oppositions of the truth,
therefore never glory so much in these vain lying words, the Church of God, the
Church of God, which is indeed the Common tone of all you Romanists each to
other, in your rendings each from other, for there is none of you all three
have a true visible Church of Christ among you, nor yet right any
administration of the things you call Sacraments, whether we speak of either
baptism or the Supper.

My answer then to the whole PPPriesthood of Christ'ndom, even ye Protestant
Clergy also, from all whom, as well as from the Pope, we who are fictitiously
styled Anabaptists, and charged as Schismatical Heretics for so doing, and
troublers of the unity of the Church, are departed, shall be the very same,
that you Protestant Clergy do make in your own defense, when you are charged by
your old father Caiphas, and his Catholics, as Heretics and Schismatics in
your rending from them, and as infringers of the unity of their Church, yea in
the very words of Calvin, to whom you my Ashford opponents are pleased to send
us, who says thus of them (as I do with him of you all) Inst. l. 4. c. 2. S. 2
Magnifice quidem etc.

They do indeed gloriously set out their Church unto us, that there should seem
to be no other Church in the world, and afterward, as though the victory were
gotten, they decree that all be Schismatics that dare withdraw themselves from
the obedience of that Church that they paint out, and that all be Heretics
that da^e once mutter against the doctrine thereof. But by what proofs do they
confirm they have the true Church?

S. 1. If the true Church be the pillar and stay of the truth, it is certain,
that there is no Church, where lying and falsehood have usurped the dominion.

S. 3. There is therefore no cause, why they should any longer go forward to
deceive by pretending a false color under the name of the Church, which we do
reverently esteem, as becomes us; but when they come to the definition of it,
not only water (as the common saying is) cleaves unto them, but they stick
fast in their own mire, because they put a stinking harlot in place of the holy
spouse of Christ: that this putting in of a changling should not deceive us, be
side other admonitions, let us remember this also of Augustine, for, speaking
of the Church, he says: it is it that is sometime darkened and covered with
multitude of offenses, as with a cloud: sometime in calmnesse of time appears
quiet and free: sometime is hidden and troubled with waves of tribulations and
temptations. He brings forth examples, that oftentimes the strongest pillars
either valiantly suffered banishment for the faith, or were hidden in the whole
world.

S. 4. In like manner the Romanists do vex us, and make afraid the ignorant
with the name of the Church, whereas they be the deadly enemies of Christ.
Therefore although they pretend the Temple, the Priesthood, and other such
outward shows, this vain glistering, wherewith the eyes of the simple be dazzled
ought nothing to move us to grant that there is a Church, where the Word of God
does not appear; for this is the perpetual mark wherewith God has marked them
to he his. He that is of the truth (says he) hears my voice. Again, I am the
good shepherd, and I know my sheep, and am known of them, my sheep hear my
voice, and I know them, and they follow me, And a little before he had said,
that the sheep follow their shepherd, because they know his voice: but they
follow not a stranger, but run away from him because they know not the voice of
strangers. Why are we therefore wilfully mad in judging the Church, whereas
Christ has marked it with an undoubtful sign, which wheresoever it is seen
cannot deceive, but that it certainly shows the Church to be there, but where
it is not, there remains nothing that can give a true signifition of the
Church, for Paul rehearses that the Church was builded, not upon the
judgments of men, nor upon Priesthoods, but upon the doctrine of the Apostles
and Prophets, but rather Jerusalem is to be severally known from Babylon, and
the Church of Christ from the conspiracy of Satan, by that difference wherewith
Christ has made them different one from another. He that is of God (says he)
hears the words of God, ye therefore hear not, because ye are not of God. In
sum, forasmuch as the Church is the kingdom of Christ, and he reigns not
but by his word, can it be now doubtful to any man, but that those be the words
of lying, by which Christ's kingdom is feigned to be without his scepter, that
is to say without his holy word?

5 But now whereas they accuse us of Schism and Heresy, because we both teach
a contrary doctrine to them, and obey not their laws, and have our assemblies
to prayers, to baptism, to the ministration of the supper, and other holy
doings, severally from them: it is indeed a very sore accusation, but such as
needs not a long or labor some defense: they are called Heretics and
Schismatics, which making a division, do break in sunder the communion of the
Church. And this communion is holden together with true bounds, that is to say,
the agreement of true doctrine, and brotherly charity, whereupon Augustine
puts this difference betwixt Heretics and Schismatics, that Heretics
indeed do with false doctrine corrupt the pureness of faith, but the
Schismatics sometime even where there is like faith, do break the bond of
fellowship. But this is also to be noted, that this conjoining of charity so
hangs upon the unity of Faith, that faith ought to be the beginning thereof,
the end, and finally the only rule. Let us therefore remember that so often as
the unity of the Church is commended unto us, this is required, that while our
minds agree in Christ; our wills also may be joined together with mutual well
willing in Christ, Therefore Paul when he exhorts us to that well willing,
takes for his foundation that there is one God, one Faith and one Baptism. Yea
wheresoever he teaches us to be of one mind, and of one will, he by and by
adds in Christ, or according to Christ, meaning, that it is a factions
company of the wicked, and not agreement of the faithful which is without the
word of the Lord.

S. 6. Cyprian also following Paul deriveth the whole fountain of the agreement
of the Church, from the only Bishopric of Christ, he afterward adds the
Church is but one, which spreads abroad more largely into a multitude with
increase of fruitfulness, like as there be many sun beams, ^ut one light; and
many branches of a tree, but one body grounded upon a fast root, and when many
streams do flow from one fountain, although the number see^ to be scattered
abroad by largeensse of overflowing plenty, yet the unity abides in the
original, take away a beam of the sun from the body, the unity suffers no
division, break a branch from the tree, the broken branch cannot spring, cut
off the stream from the spring head, being cut off it dries up, so also the
Church being overspread with the light of the Lord, is extended over the whole
world: yet there is but one light that is spread every where. Nothing could be
said more fitly to express that undividual knitting together, which all the
members of Christ have one with another; we see how he continually calls us
back to the very head. Whereupon he pronounces that Heresies and Schisms do
arise hereof, that men do not return to the original of truth, nor do seek that
head, nor keep the doctrine of the heavenly master, Now let them go and cry
that we be Heretics that have departed from their Church: since there has been
no cause of our estranging from them but this one, that they can in no wise
abide the pure professing of the truth: but I tell not how they have driven us
out with cursings and cruel execrations, Which very self-doing does abundantly
enough acquit us, unless they will also condemn the Apostles for Schismatics,
with whom we have all one cause. Christ I say did foresay to his Apostles, that
the time should come when they should be cast out of the synagogues for his
name sake. And those Synagogues of which he speaks, were then accounted
lawful Churches. Since therefore it is evident that we be cast out, and we be
ready to show that the same is done for the names sake of Christ; truly the
cause ought first to be inquired of, before that any thing be determined upon
us, either one way or other. Howbeit, if they will I am content to discharge
them of this point. For it is enough for me, that it behoved that we should
depart from them that we might come to Christ.

S. 10. But we see h^w each where they cry out, that their assemblies are
unholy, to which it is no more lawful to consent then it is to deny God.

Therefore it is needful to depart from the consent, of those assemblies, which
were nothing else but a wicked conspiracy against God. In like manner if any
man acknowledge the assemblies at these days being defiled with idolatry,
superstition and wicked doctrine, to be such in whose full communion a
Christian man ought to continue even to the consent of doctrine, he shall
greatly err.

S. 12. Whereas therefore we will not simply grant to the Papists the title of
the Church, we do not therefore deny that there be Churches among them: but
only we contend for the true and lawful ordering of the Church: which is
required in the communion both of the Sacraments, which are the signs of
profession, and also specially of doctrine.

Hereby therefore appears, that we do not deny but that even under his
tyranny remain Churches, but such as he has profaned with ungodliness full of
sacrilege, such as he has afflicted with outrageous dominations, such as he
has corrupted and in a manner killed with evil and damnable doctrines, as with
poisoned drinks: such wherein Christ lies half buried, the Gospel overwhelmed,
godliness banished, the worshipping of God in a manner abolished: such finally
wherein all things are so troubled, that therein rather appears the face of
Babylon then of the holy City of God. Therefore because these marks are blotted
out, which in this discourse we ought principally to have respect unto, I say,
that every one of their assemblies, and the whole body wants the lawful form
of a Church.

These very words of Calvin, which are your defense, and mine too against the
Pope (O ye Protestant Priesthood) are mine also against you, when you clamor
against us as Schismatics, for separating from your National Churches, and
calling as many out with us as we can, viz. because you two P P as well as the
Popish Priesthood, are not Syon, as you suppose, but two of those three parts
of that great City, Mystery Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlotry and
Heresy, that has reigned over Kings and Kingdoms of the Earth: You hold not
unity with the head, you return not to the fountain of the truth, reform not by
the Primitive standard, but start aside like a broken bow; you hear not the
voice of our Prophet in all things he says, but make void his laws; you walk
not in those scorned, mean, base ways, which he has chosen, but are they
rather that count them base, and so we can no more ioin with you then deny
Christ: and so far are we from being Heretics and Schismatics thereupon, that
we rather truly declare you such as stand divided from the Root, the Sun, the
Fountain, as well as all three one from another; yea what need we any further
witness that you three Hierarchies are all Heretics, and Schismatics, since
the whole World hears it aloud out of your own mouths? the Bishop says the
Presbyter, as to his Government, is a Schismatic Heretic, the Presbyter
says the Bishop is so, the Pope says they are both so, and they both say he
is so, and therefore I say they are all three so, if we may credit what they
say among themselves: you stand all divided from Christ, and the Apostles, and
now God has justly divided you into three parts, and divided you three
miserably each against other among your selves, yea and sub-divided you; i. e.
divided his people, and well nigh all other people from you, so that though you
labor in the fire of wrath and rage, to bring them back to unity with you, and
their old blind conformity to your ways; yet you weary your selves for very
vanity, for the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the Sea: even so O Lord divide their ^or gues more and more, and
let great BBBabel come down daily by the division of Languages, that the whole
Earth, which was once of one Language, and one speech, even that of Babylon,
may at l^st after all, and by all this div^sity, learn all that one pure
Language of the Land of Canaan: yea come (my beloved) hast'n this blessed work,
and be like a swift Roe, or young Heart upon these Mountains of Bether divsion,
.

So having discovered what Heresy, and Schism, and who the Heretics and
Schisma^cks are, I come now to discourse over again, in a little plainer way,
your ow discourse concerning them, and the means of opposing them; which (as I
said above) is a parcel of pretty right matter, if spoken of the Pop^, and his
P P Priesthood, to whom of right and most properly it appertains; yea quid
rides O S S Sacerdos? mutato nomine de ^e fabula narra^r Thy own tale is a
fi^rod for thy own tail, thou have sharpened thine Arrows, and bert thy Bow,
to shoot at a Pigeon, and killed a Crow: for verily thou art the man to whom all
those properties of the Heretic, and Schismatic propounded by thy self, do
much more aptly and exactly agree then to him thou talkest of; a little
translating, a little trimming, a little turning of it toward the true
subject, will make every tittle of that tattle of thine to be the truth, which
is but a piece of fained falsehood as thou tellest it of the Baptists: what thou
have reported lacks but to be retorted (O Priesthood) with a little
amplification, and a right application of it to thy self, and then omne tulit
punctum, it hi^s the nail on the head, and tells (...) but the truth indeed.

Thus then distinguishing your Patheticall piece (O ye Ashford Opponents) which
I mean shall be my Text, all along by a different carracter from my own
peraphrasticall amplification, and genuine application thereof, so that both
you and the World may read (as it were in text letters) your own abst^act from
that of mine, when you please; and signing the Titles of the CCClergy. whether
true or surreptitious, with three letters in the front, as C. C. C. P P P etc.
most commonly, when I speak of them in the lump, to denote the three P P Parts
into which that great City B B Babylon, which they make, stands divided, I
proceed as follows.

That Herestes must be the Apostle has said, yet it makes no more for a
tolleration of them (in the true Church I mean, though others mean in the civil
state) than that of our Savior of offenses, saying (foreseeing no question how
by means of the Clergies crying out Heresy, Heresy, Schism against the way of
truth, being once turned aside to Heresy themselves, the world would be
offended at his little ones for walking in it) They must come, but woe to the
man by whom they come: the Apostle reckons Herestes among the works of the
flesh, Idolatry, Witchcraft etc. Gal. 5. 20. which alone to argument sufficient
against the Patronag^, and Invitation of them, unless withal license in the
true Church should be given to all other carnal sins, why should the Church of
God upon Earth make much of those against whom the Kingdom of Heaven shall be
^ut? her pale is not so strong to keep them out from breaking in upon her, like
wild bores, and wolves to spoil, and wast her, but her good will should not be
so great to them, as to welcome them in to her fellowship, till they repent
from their dead works of superstition, bloody tenet of persecution for cause of
conscience, worshipping God after men's traditions, blaspheming the name of God,
and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven, trampling the holy City,
Heresy, Schism from the primitive truth etc Nevertheless, how beit to
tolerate and harbor Heretics in communion with them whilst they oppose the
true way of Christ, would be an error, and an evil too intolerable in a true
Church of Christ, yet I hold that opinion of the C C Clergy not only
intollerably Heretical in it self, but intollerably hurtful also to themselves
that Heretics may not be tolerated in a civil state, for if Fines, Prisons,
Banishments, Racks, W^ips, Tortures, headings, hangings, burning^, and such
like punishments with the civil sword were the due of every Heretic, and
Schismatic in the faith, as the C C Clergy have for ages and Generations born
the world in hand that they are, to the causing of all these their national
Church censures to be inflicted on the Saints, when they have once blindly
sentenct them to be Schismatics to the civil power, if this I say were the due
of every Heretic or Schismatic, and every true Heretic and Schismatic had
his due too, good Lord how have the C C Clergy condemned themselves out of
their own mouths to devastation, when the civil powers shall find them to be
the Arch-Hereticks in the world, if taking them at their word, they shall do
with them, as they say they ought to do in this case concerning others? but God
forbid that with what judgment they judge, they should be judged, and with
what measure they meet, it should be measured to them again at our suggestion,
if their own Cheek-by-jole carriage to the Stern-men of the State do not pull
it unavoidably upon themselves; yea verily though as far as those that oppose
themselves against the truth of Christ, they may well challenge the name of
Schismatic Heretics, and though Amen might justly be said by the Magistrate
in this point to the opinion of Gangraena, and his Gang, and might Amen be said
to his wise wishes as concerning us, who teach and practice baptism in its
primitive fashion, we could expect to be suffered in the Commonwealth no more
then Highway Murderers, yet dare we not desire their extirpation out of any of
their native rights, in the several states, wherein they are, nor such uncivil
suppression of them, merely for their erroneous Tenets, as they have solicited
the higher powers to concerning us; we have not so learned Christ, nor would
they if they had heard him, and had been taught by him as the truth is in
Jesus: for howere it comes to pass that the C C Clergy (whose own the worst
would he, if that were true, and execution done accordingly) are so besotted as
to believe that Heretics and Schismatics from the faith, men of false ways,
worships, religions, though elsewise never so peaceable and innocent must not
only be dischurched, but discommunicated also from the patronage of the civil
power, and cut off from the privileges of other Subjects, yet neither Christ
nor any of his Apostles, as from him, gave any order for such rigid rejection,
indeed the Apostle Paul wills in his Epistle to Titus cap. 3. who was a Church
officer, that a Heretic after a second and third admonition be rejected, i. e.
from the Church, and Gal. 5. 12. wishes that they were cut off from the Church,
that did trouble the Church, and Rev. 2. 20. 21. the Church of Thyatira was
reproved for suffering that woman Iezebel, which calls her self a prophetess
which whether in the Antitype it be not that woman the CCClergy, by whom the
Kings of the earth have bin (as Ahab by the other) stirred up to a^l mischief
against the the truth, may be seen mo^e clearly Rev. 17.
, to teach and seduce his servants to fornication, i. e. false worships, etc.
but it will no^ follow therefore that such may not have license to live civilly
in civil states; for the weapons of the Churches warfare, wherewith she is to
fight against Heresies, and which she is ever to have in readiness to revenge
all disobedience to Christ by, are no^ carnal 2 Cer. 10. 4, 5, 6. not such as
are used by the officers of States, but only spiritual, as admonition
reproof, and in case of obstinacy, putting out from among them, delivering up
to Satan, and not delivering up to the secular power, as the Popish Priesthood
used to do witness the case of John Sawtrey, the first English Martyr, of whom
we read thus, viz. that Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury 1399 first denouncing
him an Heretic, 2 in the name of all his fellow brethren the Bishops, and of
the whole Clergy condemning and digrading him from his priestly orders, from
all his priestly honors, and in token thereof taking from him, as he was a
Priest, the patent, and chalice, the authority of saying Mass, the casul and
vestment, as a Deacon, the book of the New Testament; as a Subdeacon, the Albe,
and Maniple; as an Acolite, the Candlestick and taper; as an Exorcist the book
of Conjuration; as a Reader the book of the Church Legend [of lies] as Sexton
the keys of Church door, and surplice; and then rasing his crown, and putting
the cap of a lay prrson on his head, delivers him up to the secular power,
saying pray be favorable to him, who after burns him (being called on by the
Bishops) in the City of London.
, when any of their creatures, specially of their Clericocreatures turned
Heretics, i. e. departed from their Heresies to the truth, saying pray take
him into your power, and be merciful to him, meaning hang or burn him for a
Heretic. The Church I say is neither to use the carnal weapons of the State,
nor yet to stir up the State so to use them on (...) and truths behalf, as to
imprison, sine, hang, burn or banish false worshippers, unbelievers,
misbelievers, or Heretics, further then they are withal (as by mere unbelief
they are not) offenders against the civil State; I find the Lord Christ
foretelling by himself, and his Apostles, that for the most part (the more is
the pity) the Rulers, Kings, Governors, and Princes of the world would be
such enemies against his Gospel, that his Disciples should be hald before them
as evil doors for his names sake Matthew. 10 18. that not many mighty, and noble
men would own his truth 1 Cor. 1. 26. that rich men would oppress the Church,
and draw them before their Judgment seats, and blaspheme that worthy name,
whereby the poor in this world, which commonly are the richest in faith, are
called Ia. 2. 6. that the Kings of the very Christian Nations would throw down
their crowns, and give up their power, and strength unto the beast, and commit
fornication wi^h the W W Whore, and at her instigation make war with the Lamb,
and at last be overcome by him, Rev. 17. 14. 17. and be put down together with
all their rule, authority, and power, as very enemies, though once his
ordinance, under his feet, 1 Cor. 15. ^4 25 I find also Ephe. 4. that he has
sit in his Church Apostles, Pastors etc. for the work of the Ministry, and
affairs of it but I no where find in his will and Testament, that Christ
intended the Magistracy, as his Ordinance (though undoubtedly in other cases
the supreme ordinance of God to men, whether in the Church or out of it, for
civil good) to officiate so immediately in matters of Religion, says church
order, etc. as to execute Church Discipline, Church censure, for ^er Church
disorders, Church Divisions, Church offenses, or so as to make all men within
their jurisdiction (and yet, though their Churches be no true Churches neither,
so the CCClergy would have it) to believe as the Church believes, worship as
the Church worships, and be members of the Church, whether they will or no; if
not to pray with them, yet at least to pay to them, or else to be
excommunicated out of all they have, and, under the name of Heretics,
dischurcht out of the world: for so verily they do (doctrinally at least) who
teach such false doctrine, that men of false relegions, whether heathens,
Jews, Turks, or Pagans, or men erring most grossly about the true, as Papists,
or whatever else, though never so submissive in all civil things to the civil
Powers, yet may not lawfully be licensed to live in civil States, or in any
Commonwealth under the Sun: for by the same reason that Jews, Turks, Heathens,
Heretics may not without sin, be tolerated in one Nation, but must (ex
officio) be rooted out of it, upon that mere account of denying and defying
Christ, which is as high as ever any Heretic went, they may not without sin be
permitted to be in another, and so either some nations must sin in allowing
these to live in them, or else, though de facto they cannot by reason of their
number, yet de jure they ought, as far as they well can, by Kings and Princes,
among whom few or none are so well acquainted, as they should, with what is
Heresy, and what truth, to be driven quite out of the world; and so the poor
Jews whose conversion the Priests pray for with much zeal and compassion, must
in quiet live no where at all, that they may be converted, but must belike be
turned altogether into the sea.

Besides the notion of their being Christians adds nothing to men's power as
Magistrates, so but that if such magistrates as are Christians, are Church
officers, as Magistrates, then other Magistrates, as heathen Magistrates, must
be Church officers as well as they, and then how well that Christian Church is
likely to be served and governed, whose head Church Officers are Heathens, a
fool may see.

Yet whether the Magistracy be Heathens, or Christians it matters not to the
Church, so long as they are the ministers of God and Christ to them, and others
too for civil good, to punish evil doers, that are injurious against the
common, or any man's proper weal, Churchmember or other, in body, goods, or
name, by stealing, lying, murder, defiling, defaming, defrauding etc. whereby
any are prejudiced in point of their outward well being: mean while whether he
be the minister of God only or Christ also, and that not only as God, but God
man also it matters not, so long as he is an ordinance to us for civil good:
Whether the magistrate be the minister of Christ, as God onley, or as Mediator
also, I mean God man? is a question, about which I find some fill the world
with a world of confusion; viz. Mr. Gelaspie and Mr. Rutherford, who are
together by the ears about it; and Mr. Baxter also, who makes much more ado
then needs p. 228. etc. to prove that Christ exercises some of his Government,
as Mediator, by Ministers, and some by Magistrates, by which if he mean that
Magistrates are officers in Christ's Church, of Christ's appointment, I pity his
blindness, when I read Ephesians. 4. where its showed what officers Christ sets in
his Church, for the edifying and establishing thereof: if he mean that the
Magistrate is Christ's officer, and ordinance to the worldward, for the
Government of it under him, and of the Church too (as it is a part of the world,
so far as he does yet administer in the world, and judge it) I will not greatly
deny that, howbeit that he (as man) yet judges the world, and (as Mediator)
governs it, as once he is to do, by appointment from the father, Acts 17. 31,
at his appearing and his kingdom 2 Timothy 4. 1. when he shall put that power in
full execution, for which he has now but the commission, when he shall return
personally to set up, and rule in that Kingdom, which he is now gone to heaven
to receive, Luke 19. 11. 12. 15. etc. when the Prince of this world, (for so
Christ himself, who is Prince of the world to come, is pleased to call the
devil now John 14. 30. who is dominus fac totum here by permission, and rules
over Kings, Princes and People by the Beast, and whore that rides it, Rev. 17.
to whom he has given his seat, power, and great Authority Rev. 13. 2.) shall
once be judged, and bound up in the bottomless pit from domineering over, and
deceiving the Nations any more, that Christ I say yet judges the world as once
he is to do, when the Kingdom appointed by the Father to him in reward of his
for them, and by him to his disciples in reward of their sufferings for him
Luke 22. 28. is come, this I utterly deny; nay rather he is yet in his Saints
an underling to the civil powers; the miserable ignorance of which time wherein
Christ shall take unto himself his great power and reign, and be de facto, as
he was de jure before, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, makes the Divines so
dote as to Interpret that place Isa. 49. 23. of Kings being nursing fathers,
and Queens nursing mothers, and bowing down, and licking the dust of the
Chuches feet, and a hundred more as fulfilled now, in this his day of small
things, in this his personal absence, which, when the devil is blind at least,
and bolted up in the bottomless pit Rev. 20. theyl surely see are not in esse
actuali till then; and to suppose Magistrates to be now Christ's chief Church
officers Supremely under him to rule in it; when as, were they not already
blind themselves, they could not but see it to be contrary unto truth, for
women may be Magistrates, but not Church Ministers, and may be Supreme in
authority in a State, as Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, but are bid to be
under obedience, and fordid in Church matters so much as to speak, much more to
usurp authority in the Church, 1 Timothy 2. 11. 12. 1 Cor. 14. 34. 35.
so that if any matter of Division of inheritances, or of wrong and wicked
lewdness be brought before the Magistrates, committed whether by a
churchmember or any other it is all one, reason wills that the Magistrate
should hear it, and (be they Heathens or be they Christians who stand before
him) determine and destribute ac cording to the equity of his civil Law, and as
much as Mr. Baxter looks askew at this assertion p. 120. as if he thought the
Magistrate were to do a Pagan no right against a Christian, without partiality,
not favoring a Christian in a civil cause against a Heathen, a Turk, an
Egyptian, a Pagan, so as to take the Christians part, further then the equity
of his cause in hand may justly call for it, more then the others, though the
Magistrate himself also be a christian, and a brother to the christian, whose
cause depends before him, or a member of the self same congregation with him,
not balking to do civil justice against Church Members, they deserving
punishment, as if the church were exempted from his viz. in refusing to be
judge, in matters of faith and religion.
jurisdiction in civil things, because he is no christian, but a heathen, nor
yet denying to do right to church members, if they be injured by others, for if
he do any of this, I am sure he does no justice in his place, whereupon Gallio,
the Depuputy Governor of Achaia, who was not a little to be commended in one
thing? was no less to blame in another, Act. 18. 17. in that when the Greeks
in a rude and barbarous manner took Sostenes the chief Ruler of the Synagogue,
and beat him, for letting Paul preach in it, before his face, and before the
very judgment Seat too, yet he cared for none of those things, for those were
the things that fell duly and directly under his cognizance, as he was a
magistrate, and so the minister of God to men for good, whether they be Christ's
disciples or no, for the redress of such civil abuses; neither is Christ yet
in his own person, Luke 12. 13. 14. nay nor yet by any Church Officers of his
(qua sic) unless they be civil Magistrates also, and then as in that capacity
they must do that right that concerns them as such, as mere church officers to
be judge in those outward cases, and as therein the outward man only is
concerned, for then Paul, one of the chief Apostles, and officers of the
Church, being then present, might have taken upon him in the behalf of
Sostenes, and himself, as the Pope and the PPPriesthood do for the most part in
their religions, to have determined for themselves in that civil dissension,
but Christ as man, and his church, as his Church, are yet no judgers, nor
dividers over men, but the Magistrate by Gods, and if I say by Christ's
appointment it hurts us not, is made as only in such, so the only judge and
divider in such civil matters; but if it be a question, and a brabble about
Heathenism, Turcism, Judaism, Christianism, and about Religion, worship, and
faith and Jesus, and words, and names as Antinomists Arminians, Anabaptists,
Pelagians, Socinians, Anti-christians, Pedobap tists, Sectaries, etc. and about
his law, and about Heresy, and spiritual Truth, and Schism in the Church, and
Ministry, and such like, about which the ears of the civil powers have been
d^d by the usual addresses of the PPPriesthood unto them for help against
Heretics and Schismatics, and by their hideous outcries viz. of the Prelates
against the Presbyters, saying, help O King, and the Presbyters against the
Sectaries, help O Parliament, all will be overspread with a Gangrene of
Heresy, Murder, Murder, etc. O ye Magistrates restrain dipping in cold water,
as you will save the lives of your subjects, and such stuff, and folly as is
powered out to the Magistrate by the Minister against men more true to Christ,
and Magistracy then himself; I humbly conceive the Magistrate may lawfully, and
more acceptably to God then otherwise, save himself so much labor, as to let
these matters alone: yea he may do well to see, that whatever Religion men be
of, that are under his civil power in each state, whether Jewish, Turkish,
Heathenish, Popish, Prelatical, Presbyterian, or Independent, may not be
injurious each to other, without satisfaction, in civil matters, and to see
that none commit any uncivil actions, that are contrary to that common honesly
and righteousness among men, which men as magistrates, are set to vindicate
For Custo^s et vindex ut ciusque tabulae under the Gospel, because it was
sounder, that typical standing of the Law, is but a tale, and a trick of our
Priests whereby to curry favor with their princes: the truth is that whole
Jewish State (which was also a Church as no one whole nation under heaven now
is) was a type and both the Kingly, Priestly and Prophe tical office that then
headed that Church, were typical of that tripple true head of the Gospel
Israel, Christ Jesus, and are no more to be drawn in as an example so as to
argue more warrantably from the Kings then to the civil Rulers now then from
the High-Priest-Hood to the Popedom.
, to see that none live (be they of this or that Religion) dishonestly without
correction, to see that none usurp Dominion over each others faith, so as to
make all men believe as some do, whether they see ground to believe so yea or
no, by the civil sword, to see that, in order to their own eternal good, they
find out, and walk in the way of truth themselves as it is in Jesus, and when
they are once assured that they are in the truth themselves, to let that truth
be verbally declared per se, or per alios, as much as they please, but not
forced upon others, as their faith, further then the light of preachings and
discourses may prevail to fasten it on others consciences; and to see that even
enemies to the Gospel, and true Church may have no more then the weapons of the
Churches warfare, which are not carnal, used toward them to make them friends,
and as to those, who walk in truth, whoever they are, or shall but be supposed
by the successive representatives, Princes or Powers, to walk in the way of
truth, to see that they be countenanc't, but not too much maintenanc't, because
Christ's disciples, nor cockt up to all the honor, and preferment, and places
of trust, and advantage, above their fellow subjects, to the ingendring of
jealousies, and emulations in others, that may be happily, though not so near
the truth of Christ, yet as trusty to the State as themselves; for that too
often choaks the Church my Petition to the power^ on behalf of the Church is
that it may have as much peace, and as little preferment as they please, for
ever Cum Ecclesia peperit divitias, silia devoravit matrem.
but only that with an indifferent, impartial hand, as men, whether in Church
or out, being otherwise honest, and able, and of public spirits, not selfish,
nor covetous, nor cruel etc. may seem fit to be entrusted with such, and such
places, so they may be chosen, and disposed of thereunto; in a word to see that
such as make prayers, and supplications, and intercessions, and giving of
thanks for all men, for Kings, and such as are in authority (living in all
godliness and honesty) may as well as others, and others also as well as they
(living soberly and honestly, though not Godly in Christ Jesus, nor worshipping
in way of truth, but falsely) may live a quiet, and peaceable life without
persecution as to confiscation, bonds, or death, for doing and denying
according to the dictates of their own, though yet blinded, conscience, and
that men of all Religions, may live without molestation one from another, any
more then by mere manifestations of their light one to another at seasonable
times, in ways of query, disputation, and preaching, and then to leave all men
to worship God according to their several ways, even misbelievers, Heretics
and Jews themselves, and others that yet believe not in Christ, but deny him,
till the Lord lend them light by the word of truth, and to stand or fall to
their own master Christ Jesus, to whom every conscience shall give account of
it self at last, who, if any man hear his words, and believe not, nor receives,
but rejects them, judges him not here, either by himself, or the civil
magistrate, or by his Church, any further then to non-communion with them, yet
by the word that he has spoken unto him will judge every man at the last day

Thus it is most evident the magistrate whether Christian or Heathen is to do,
and not otherwise viz. to give protection to men, as men, (living honestly, so
berly and justly) without respect to their Religions, whether true or false:
And as to Religions, to allow Tolleration to all men to practice according to
their principles, the practice of whose principles is not directly destructive
to the true Religion, common honesty, civillity, morallity, righteousness, and
the peace and safety of the Commonwealth, as some men's principles are, if put
in practice, yet verily I know none, among Christians at least, save those of
the two Spiritualties vix. the Rantizing PPPriest that in his precincts (which
is the whole world, could he catch it) would have no tolleration for any way of
worship but his own, and the Ranting Prophet, who would have toleration of all
and more too, not only all Religions, but all, as well unciuill, unnatural,
lewd, abominable, as irreligious actions, which nature it self cries shame on
among beasts, and magistracy finds it self an ordinance of God to give
correction to, among heathens; for those men are now acting upon the stage, of
whom Jude speaks when he says Jude 10. what they know naturally as bruit
beasts in those things they corrupt themselves: the principles of that old
PPPriest and this new Prophet, Twospritualties, whereof (as bad as the first
is) the latter will be more sensual then the former, having not the Spirit
Jude 17. though pretending to it more supremely then the other, under which
last the devil now acts, as under a new vizard, to the deceiving of people from
the way of truth, perceiving his old vizard worn so thin, that all men begin
now to see through it.
if practiced in the hight of them, are utterly inconsistent with the standing
of truth in the world untrampled (viz. that of the Priest) and also with the
standing of very manhood among men, of civility in civil states, of the
common-health of the Commonwealth it self (viz. that of the Prophet) the one
is so far from owning any power to be a terror to evil works and encouragement
to good, that despising all Government and speaking evil of dignities he holds
that there is at all neither good nor evil, nor better nor worse amongst works,
but all alike, and then good Lord how fast must iniquity, dishonesty,
unrighteousness, and incontinency thrive and abound upon earth to the ripening
of i^ for the sickle when it shall be acted with allowance from such a
principle as this viz. that there is now no iniquity at all? this man would
have the civil power allow all Religions, and good Manners too, but allows of
none, at least thinks he needs use none himself, and is for a Toleration of all
truth in the world, thoughall truth is the intollerablest thing in the world to
him, and though it has leave from him to grow besides him, and will too among
some, yet he hopes to loosen it by lending it so much scope, that it may come
up the more easily by the roots, and seeks what he can to kill it by his
kindness.

The other viz. thou (P P Priest) though, that thou may seem to be totally
for the truth, and all others to be enemies to it but thy self and thine, thou
cravest (I might say command, and challengest) such a large toleration for
what thou call truth, that nothing else must be tolerated besides it, yet
the truth is, the truth as it is in Jesus, which is Heresy with thee, is less
beholding to thee then to the other, for i^ has not so much as leave from thee
to live, if it can, nay it can take no root at all, at least not thrive above
ground if it do, where thou live at the length of thy Lordlines; for like
Nimrod the mighty hanter before the Lord, thou have built to thy self great B B
Babel, a Triple Tower, a threefold Fort, or form of Tyrannical Churchlines,
wherein thou seatest, and securest thy self, and whence (being jealous least
all that comes near thee under the name of truth, should undermine thee) thou
fightest it afar off.

Thou art (as it were) a wild man like Ismael, having thy hand against every
man, and every man's hand against thee, dwelling alone, as much as thou can,
in the midst of thy brethren, by thy sword, and thy bow, by cutting and
fleshing, and shooting out thy sharp arrows, even bitter words, viz.
Heretics, Heretics, against all that heed not what thou say, before thou
hear them: these are the rough hands of Esau, wherewith thou handlest thy
brother Jacob, that will obtain the blessing before thee; TTThou art the 3
heads of that Eagle, spoken of 2 Esdras cap. 11. cap. 12. and wheresoever thou
look and spreadest thy black wings, thou look that all other birds should
tremble under thee, and be subject to thee, so that none of old, durst so much
as chirp against thee, no not one creature upon earth, but so soon as any began
to appear any where within thy range, that was not Pullus Aquilae a chicken of
thy own brood, thou have rapaciously torn it with thy Talents, and made it a
prey to thy youngones, and whersoever thy wonted principle of persecution for
conscience has taken place, and thy gaudy, greedy, griping Government stood up
in full force, the truth has lien groaning, and grovling under thee upon the
ground.

Thus verily has it been not only for ages and generations within the
dominions of the old Brutish, but also more lately under the domination of our
BBrittish Priesthood. Yea thou O P P Priest have been such a thicket of thorns
to the Lilly that she could never flourish upwards without a thousand scratches
from thee; such a tall crop of tares, as has overtopt, starved, and strangled
the wheat.

TTThou know not what spirit TTThou art of, thou would fain command fire
to come down from heaven Luke 9. 53. 54 55.
and consume them (as if it were Christ's mind) that receive not Christ Jesus in
the ways of thy own invention: thou judge them that are without, that are
none of thy C C Church (whom, were thy Church the true Church, thou should
leave to God to judge 1 Cor. 5. 13) if they be but in the same Nations wherein
thy Church is, and that shrewdly too sometimes, when thou can get the
strength and power of states to stand to thee, and execute such censure as thou
say is due to Heretics and Schismatics in the Church, yet I cannot much
blame thee, whilst thou clap'st whole commonwealths at once under thee as thy
Church, which ought as much to be corrected into an observance of the
directories and decrees of Synodical power in matters spiritual, as of the
Senatical in matters civil: thy chief way to cure Heretics (when they are in
health) is to kill them: this Pa^pharmacon is letting blood, thy present remedy
against the remediless disease of Truth-telling Truth-spreading is Truth
treading, and present smoothering it from the vulgar, by stopping the passage
of the press, and opening the Pipes in the Pulpit, and present tampering with
the Truth-teller, who, if he unsee not what he sees, is ^nse recid^ndus, to be
dispatched out of the way, ne pars sincera trahatur, lest sincere ones, that
seek after truth should find it when it flies abroad, and be in-per-fected by
it as well as he: thou massaciest men to the Mass, slayest men into thy
service books, s^st up thy religion by treason, Witness the Jesuits, that
(...) kill Kings if Heretics, and the Northen presbitery, that may lawfully
sight England, if it (...) (...) (...) (...) ^ctory: and the Episcopal war
against the State:
when it can stand no more by reason, fightest with fire and sword when thou
can do little by the spirit and word, So Julius the second, who seeing
himself vanquished, threw away Saint Peter's keys, into the River Tyber,
protesting he would thence forth help himself with S Paul's sword:
make thy pen knife keen enough to cut, when thy pen is not quick enough to
countetfeit, thou stopst Stevens mouth with stones, and bear him down with
brick-bats that he blasphemes, when thou can not resist the Wisdom and the
Spirit by which he speaks, like the wolf in the fable, thou accu^ the poor
innocent lamb of troubling the waters, for nothing but drinking at the pure
fountain, and when the lamb replies, my cause is better then thin^, On but
quoth the wolf, my teeth are better then thine, I must devour (...).

Now therefore as to the civil Magistracy, throwout all Nations, Tongues, k^ds
and people where thou (O proud P P Priesthood) ridest them, I humbly beg of
them in the name of Christ, and on behalf of his truth and people, which thou
ha^ suppressed, that they would no longer set TTThee up as Lady of Kingdoms as
(...) over Gods heritage, as Supreme dictators to the whole nations where they
live so in all Matters of Religion, faith, and Gospel, as that all people must
fall down to thee, and worship God only according to thy more dim and divided,
then divine directions; but that people may go forth from under thy Egyptian
prohibition, to serve the Lord according to his own will and word, which thou
have hid from the vulgar by unknown tongues, and forcing thy own constructions
on men in nations wherein its mostly truly translated, and believe no more at a
venture as the P P Priests believe by any law, as from the Magistrate, whose
duty it is not to force men to unity of faith and uniformity in Religion,
further then they find freedom to fall into such unity among themselves; but
to force men to live at unity and peace, in honesty and innocence, in all
justice and civility one toward another, under what diversity of religion
soever may be among them: and whilst any Religion puts its people in mind to
be subject to principalities and powers, to obey Magistrates, in civil things
for conscience sake, and not to resist them in rebellious ways in such cases,
under pain of resisting the ordinance of God, and receiving to themselves
damnation according to Romans 13. 1 2. Titus 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. 15. to see
that it have as mutual protection from them, as it yields subjection to them:
for this is the good will of God concerning them, as such, and whether they be
Heathens or Christians, they are Gods Ministers to attend continually upon this
very thing, viz. to render unto all men their dues, as men viz. a room in quiet
in the world of what ways of religion soever, yea though Indians, and redress
of any civil wrongs, as they expect to have all men, of what religions soever
within their power, to render to them their dues of tribute, honor, custom,
fear, for for this cause pay they their tribute also, because Magistrates are
Gods Ministers to the world ward, and to the Church as part of the world, and
in no other sense then as to the rest of the world, to attend continually on
this very thing: to dispense praise or punishments for civil good and evil
among men, not spiritual, for then they may punish evil thoughts, proud looks,
ignorance, non-profiting by the word, not Gods Church-ministers, to dispense
good or evil, for good or evil done in the Church, but as the same actions may
have reference to the state also, as theft, or the like civil abuse, which
comes one way under the Churches censure, and another way under the
Commonwealths: they are not I say Church Ministers, nor Ministers to the
Church qua Church, as the Priests principle seems to make them, for then they
may claim not only Tribute, but Tith also as well as the Priest, but that he
will be loath to part with, though in truth it belongs to him for his Church
wasting work full as little as to the other.

I humbly beg therefore (I say) of the Powers, that truth which has been trod
under foot may be tolerated among them in their several civil States,
Commonwealths and Kingdoms, and to the end it may undoubtedly be so, let all
that which the Powers in the several Nations do judge in their own consciences
to be truth in point of Religion, have toleration and protection and no more
countenance by them, as Magistrates, but bare protection from injury, as other
ways also may have, and not such extraordinary supports from a power
Heterogeneal to that of the Church, nor such extraordinary gratulations,
gratuities, revenews, incomes, preferments, and portions out of the common
State-stock (let their own private purses be as open to them, and such as
profess it pay to its Ministry as much as they will) for besides the
partiality of this thing of making other Religions, and ways that judge
themselves to be the truth as well as that, pay and be tributaries to the true
one, and the grumbles it will engender in men's minds, this proves the greatest
mischief under heaven to the truth, when the Ministers, who should expect
nothing but shame, and suffering with their Master, who was Beelzebub, are
slusht with the outward pomps and vanities of this world till they forget
themselves so, as scarce to know what ground they stand on; and howbeit
Mag^trates may mean honestly in their high honourings of them (as that good man
Constantine the great did) yet as his high embraces, and graces done to Christi
in Bishops proved (besides his intent) the stirrup, whereby those Lord beggars
got up on horse back, and rode to the devil (for so has that Romish whore rid
both her self, and the beast under her which is Christ'ndome) so though I hope
it never will, yet it may possibly be so again, if care be not taken against
it, witness the two other more seemingly modest and maidenly Minions,
Episcopacy and Presbitery, which (qua Ministry) came out of her loins, w^ have
not brought the world so far out of that old Babylon toward Sion as they
pretended to do by reformation, as else they might have done, being slugged,
and luld asleep by benefits, and benefices in the way; for posit a eadem causa
ponitur idem eff^ctus sublat a tollitur, golden cups ever yet made wooden
Priests, and ever will do; let truth have liberty, and peace, it will desire no
more of the State if it be truth indeed And Secondly, let all other ways and
religions besides that which the Magistrate judges to be truth, that judge
themselves to be in the truth (save that of those whose very way (as abovesaid)
is no way but dishonesty, and whose way isto root out all ways but their own
by civil power) be also tolerated, practiced and protected from outward
violence, and oppression as well as that, for this besides the knitting of the
hearts of men of all ways under one civil power, in entire love and strong
affection to that Power that domineers not ore their conscience The contrary
towhich where ere it is well may men submit out of fear till they can help
themselves, but never out of love while the world stands, for consci ence is a
tender thing, and though but a wo^m, yet if trod upon will turn again,
, besides that I say this tolerating all practices in point of religion, save
that practice of non toleration of any but it self in civil states, must needs
tolerate the truth among the rest, whether it ly in this way or that, and so
the Power shall be out of all danger and hazard of coming under the guilt of
truth treading, which the P P Priesthood has engaged the civil power in for
1260 years together, as else it cannot, for if toleration be of no way but one,
then if that chance to be the wrong, (and themagistrates are no more sure then
other men, that they are in the right, Howbeit they shall never want flatterers
to persuade them that they are.
yea 100 to 1 they are not if they use civil violence to others, First, because
the false ways are many, and bread, and easy, and fine, and the true way but
one, and that so streit and narrow, mean and base, that not many noble, and
mighty, and men of power ever find it 1 Cor. 1. 26. Secondly, because (as King
James said) persecution is a certain note of a false Church) then truth is
unavoidably smothered by them, and will first or last pull vengeance upon that
power, Rev. 6. 11. 12. though it be under the name of Heresy only that he
suppresses it, and plucks it up under the name and notion of weeds and ta^es
that would else choke the wheat: besides therefore a most strict charge that
Christ gives Mat. 13. that in the world i. e. the civil States and
Commonwealths of it the Tares should stand together among the wheat until the
harvest, which alone is an Argument putting all out of doubt in this
controversy, he gives this good reason viz. least in plucking up the Tares,
the wheat also chance to be rooted up with them, it is for the wheats good
therefore for the Tares to stand, and for the wheats sake that Christ wills
they should, though not in the Church yet in the world to the very end thereof.

And because the Divine cannot yet divine that to be Christ's meaning in that
scripture, that false worshippers heretics etc. may lawfully (if not civil
offenders) be licenced to live in civil States, let us consider how sinister
his own conjectures are upon it, I have met with some and some of chiefest note
in this County of Ke^, who have shifted it of thus, saying that by the Field is
meant the Church, not the World as we say, and Christ himself interprets it in
that place. Secondly, that the servants, who ask whether they should pluck up
the Tarts yea or no, and are bid to let them grow together with the Wheat, are
not the Civil Magistrates, but Christ's Disciples, who had nothing to do to
pluck them up, and ^o the civil Magistrate may do it no withstanding: to this
purpose I have been answered when I have asked in way of querie the sense of
that place. To which I say,

First, that by the Field is most necessarily meant the World, and not the
Church. First Christ so expounds it himself, the field (says he) is the World:
but, say they, the World is often used to express the Church, and so may here. I
reply, first, I deny that the word world in any one place of Scripture
signifies the Church only; it signifies sometimes the fabric of the Universe.
Secondly, it signifies all man kind good and bad collectively. Thirdly,
sometimes the wicked only that lie in wickedness, 1 John 1. 13. John 17.
abstract and in contradistinction to the godly, and the Church, but never at
all the Church, the godly, the Elect alone abstract, and as in
contradistinction to the wicked: and though I know how far forth to maintain
their absurd doctrines in other cases some Divines divine such a matter, yet
till they show more for it then they have ever showed to me, or I am sure can
show out of the word (not denying but that there is a number electorum (i. e.)
all that believe and obey Christ, exmundo electus) their Mundus electorum is
haud mundus dialectus.

Secondly, here it cannot be the Church however, because it is vox secundae
intentionis, a speech that is expounded by Christ to be the sense of the other
speech of fie^d he used before, for if the word world were ever used for the
Church, it must be by a figure synechdoche, whereby a small snip of it is
signified by the whole, and then Christ speaks figuratively again in his
Exposition of the other figurative word field, which were incertum per
incertum, to open one paraboricall ex pression by another as paraboricall as
that, which who can think Christ did to his Disciples, to whom his intent was
to speak more plain, that they might understand him, but understand him they
could not well, if while he spoke figuratively at first, he did not speak
properly at last however; for whereas he had told them the field was the World,
they had as much need to have asked again what the world was, if they could not
think he meant plainly as he said.

Thirdly, the Church is expressed usually by the name of Christ's Garden,
Vineyard etc. which are places more peculiar, and sequestered as Cant. 4. 12.
16. Isaiah 5. 6. Ez. 15. and the world or part without, the Church, by the name
of Field, Forest etc. wherein Tares, wild bores, briars, thorns, as well as
wheat, and Saints may live.

Fourthly, if by Field and World here is meant the Church, then twill follow,
that since the Tares, i. e. false Worshippers, Heretics, Antichristians are bid
to be let alone until the harvest, that such as these may be tolerated, not in
the world or civil state only with the Church, but also in the very Church it
self, which toleration cannot be, for God chides that Church that suffers
Iezebel to teach fornication in her; and if the P P Priesthood plead for such a
Toleration as this (as he had need considering how his Church is filled with
tares more then he is either able, or willing to root out) then he is for a
tolleration far more intolerable then that we plead for; for we would have
Heretics and Schismatics, and Erroneous false worshippers, and nominall
Christians, Antichristians no nearer the Church then in the world with them, i.
e. the same States, Towns, houses, but not in one and the same
Church Fellowship, or Congregation, but they would have them stand in the
Church, for which sure Christ gives no permission, much less a strick
Commission, as here is, that they should.

But say you Christ does not here mean that they shall stand, as if none had to
Abj.
do pluck them up, but only forbids these servants, who were his disciples,
from meddling with them, to ev^ry of whom he gives not Authority to pass
c^nsures, and punish, but some may have Authority for it for all that.

Some who are those I trow? it must be then either the Ministry, or the Ans.
Magistracy: not the Ministry, for it is far more clear, that by the servants
here, that took notice of the tares to the householder, is meant the servants of
Christ in the office of Ministers, that would fain have been meddling (as the
false Ministry ever does) to root (...) all both out of Church, and world too,
that is not of institution by Christ in their opinion, and such a spirit may
too much show it self in the true too, see the like Spirit in his own disciples
the first Ministers Luke 9. 54. 55. Mat. 15. 12. 13 14. for which Christ gives
them a check, and tells them they knew no^ what spirit they were of, and bids
them let the false plants alone to the heavenly Father to pluck up in his time,
saying let them alone they be blind leaders of the blind, and will both in due
time fall into the ditch: it is far more clear I say that it is his Ministry he
here forbids, then common disciples, for why should not their Ministry complain
of them as well as they? yet he bids these let them alone, which shows too
that it is the World, and not the Church they are to stand in, for it belongs
properly enough, and primarily to the Ministers, with consent of the Church,
executively to pass the censure of putting them out of the Church.

Secondly not the Magistracy, for if it were the Church as they say it is, how
miserably do they mope (and yet so the Priest does) that make him the highest
officer in the Church to cast persons out of the Church, who is (though the
highest officer over the Church, and World too, yet in truth) no Church
officer, or Minister in the Chuch (qua Church) at all.

Besides lastly, which puts all out of doubt, the prohibition is to all men as
well as some, and sounds forth the mind of Christ to be, that the tares shall
stand in the Field till the harvest, and not be plucked up by any at all, but
stand till the harvest they cannot according to his will, if according to his
will either Magistrate, or Minister might pluck them up, out of the field, what
field ere it is that is here spoken of: his will is not only that such shall not
pluck them up, but that they shall not be plucked up until the harvest, i. e.
the end of the world, till he sends his Angels to gather the tares, all things
that offend, every plant, that the heavenly father has not planted, out of his
Kingdom, which taken at large is the whole world, and to bundle them for the
fire. To all these many more reasons may be added why the Magistrate may not
force men at all in matters of faith, repentance, Religion, worship, see
Barbers answer to the Essex watchmens watchword, p. 7 etc. the Magistrate
receives no charge from God about Religion, neither is cura animarum, but cura
corporum only committed to him. Luther himself was of this mind, that the
Laws of the Magistrate extended no further then to the bodies and goods, that
which is external, and that God would have none to rule in the soul, but
himself, therefore where the Magistrate goes about to govern in the conscience,
he usurps that jurisdiction, which God reserves to himself, certainly this is
that great arrogany in the Whore or Woman of sin, which God will severely
punish, in that SSShee gives laws to the conscience, and sits in the Temple
and Church of God as a God.

King James in Parliament 1609 said, That it is a sure rule in Divinity, that
God never loves to plant his Church with violence and blood, and again in his
Ap^logy for the oath of Allegiance p 4 speaking of the Papists that took the
said oath, That he gave a good proof of it that he never intended persecution
for conscience, but only desired to be secured of them for civil abuses, that
it was usually the condition of Christians to be persecuted, but not to
persecute.

Again, Faith and repentance to acknowledgement of the truth is Gods gift (and
if we will believe our Clergy) no way in every man's power, no not by gift from
God to perform, and so the Magistrate must punish m^n belike, because God, who
gives where he lists, does not give them to believe etc.

Again Blasphemers, Persecutors, as Paul, Idolators, as the Corinthians, yea
Jews, Turks and Pagans may be converted in time by the word, therefore are not
to be plucked up out of the Earth, for then they can never possibly repent.

Again persecution was never taught by Christ nor practiced by his Apostles,
but arose among Heathens, and was continued by (the Roman) Antichrist, and his
Ministers. Vid.^ Tho. Beacons Reliqu^s of Rome, s^t forth cum privilegio 1563.
Pope Servitius ordained that Heretics should be banis^t An. 588. fol. 214.
Pope Pelagius the first, that all Heretics and Schismatics should be put to
death by the secular power, provided that the Bishops in their spiritual courts
do first prosecute, convict and condemn them for Heretics, and then commit
them to the temporal Magistrate to dispa^ch them out of the way by fire, sword
or halter, for they say as the chief priests to Pilate, it is not l^wful for us
to put any to death. In the council of Lateran by Innocent the third, 2
Patria^s 70 Aroh-bishops, 400 Bishops, twelve Abbots, 800 Priests, the Legates
of the Greek and Roman Empire, the Ambassadors of Spain, Jerusalem, France,
England, Cyprus, it was decreed that all Heretics and so many as should in any
point resist the Catholic faith should be condemned, that the secular power
of what degree soever should be compelled openly to swear for the defense of
the Catholic faith, and to the utmost of their power to root out and destroy
in their kingdoms, all such persons as the Catholic Church should condemn
for Heretics, and if any King should be a Heretic, or defender of them, and
not reform within a year, then his subjects should be absolved by the Pope from
yielding any further subjection or obedience to him, or keeping any fidelity
with him, and so it was in the case of John here in England, who resigned to the
Popes Legate his Crown, kissing his knee as he came into England (which John
was after poisoned by a Monk, who having his pardon from the Pope, poisoned
himself first, to poison the King) and also that the Pope may give that land to
Catholics to possess peaceably and without contradiction, all Heretics
being rooted out of it.


Yet there is one way more, whereby they evade all this, and that is by denying
that by the Tares here are meant Heretics, False Worshippers, and
Antichristians, and asserting them to be Hypocrites in the Church; and this is
the way of Mr. Cotton (whereby you may see again how Divines are divided among
themselves in all things almost, as well as some) which Mr. Cotton, in a book,
which the Bloody Tenet relates to gives ou^ (as I remember) that by tares is
meant hypocrites in the Church, who are so like the wheat, that they cannot
well be discovered, nor discetned from it, and so must be let alone in the
Church, by the Ministers of the Church, least they mistake and pluck up wheat
instead of tares, and cast out men for hypocrites, who its possible may be
sincere for ought we know.

In answer to which I must confess men that cast out persons for Hypocrites,
had need be pretty wary, and not overhasty, yea better an inconvenience than a
mischief; better err in letting some Hypocrites stand in the Church, then for
have cast out one that seems to be so to us, and yet is not.

But this is not the sense of our Savior in this place, for as it cannot be
the Church that the Tares are here bid to be let alone in (as I have showed
above) so much less by the tares can be meant hypocrites, so near the wheat,
i. e. true Saints in show, and likeness, and pretense, as to be hardly
disc^rned from them. For

First, Though Hypocrites are like Saints, and appear so to be often, it may be
always, to the deceiving of us, yet the Tares are not at all like the wheat,
nor at all to any, but such as are stark blind, appearing to be wheat.

Secondly, an Hypocrite in the Church (who is one that app^ars to be what he is
not) must be supposed while he is in the Church, to be discovered, or not
discovered so to be, when not discovered, he is no hypocrite to us, to whom
things are, as they appear (what ere he may be to God) but as true a Saint as
the rest; and when discovered (till when to us he is a Saint, and must stand
under the notion of a Saint) then he must not stand in the Church, which is not
to harbor any that are palpably wicked, and who is so palpable as he, whose
simulata sanctit as is dulplex iniquitas.

But now First, the tares he^e spoken of are plainly said, and seen to be
tares, and appear to be tares, and a distinct stuff from the Wheat; and yet
for all that they are bid to be let alone in the Field, as Hypocrites must not
be in the Church, when they appear to be such.

But in the field, i. e: the world it is true enough that hypocrites may stand,
even after they are cast out of the Church, unless they act any thing that
civil justice will reach them for, and so also may Antichristians, and all
false Worshippers.

It Is evident then that in this place, as well as Matthew. 15. 13. 14. that in the
time of the Gospel Church, Tares that much hinder the wheat, that are mingled
in the same Field, world, Civil States, Countries, Commonwealths, of Satan's
sowing among the Wheat, Weeds, Nettles, Briars, Thorns, Plants that are not of
the heavenly Fathers planting, Fa^se worshippers, Heretics, men and their
Ministryes of false Religions, doctrines, faiths, ways of serving God, may and
ought by permission, and commission from Christ be let alone, and allowed to
stand, by no means in the same Church, by all means in the same world, or part
of the world locally considered, for the Church is not locally considered as a
place measured by, and consistent of such or such a compass of ground, as the
Popes parish Churches did, whereupon they went on procession once a year, lest
they should forget the bounds of their Church, but mystically, of such or such
a company of men, however scattered locally here or there, yet in one
fellowship, I say in the same part of the world, nation, City, Country, civil
corporation, with the wheat, Saints, true Church, under the protective power of
civil Magistracy free from molestation, merely for their religion, so be they
live justly, soberly and peacably with all men, any thing said to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding by the Priest, who of all men has least reason to
be against toleration of tares in the world, and of plants which the heavenly
father never planted; if he consider what he is himself, and unless he desire
to be rooted out in have by the civil power, before his time.

See the parable, and read it, with the exposition of it Mat. 13. 37. etc. He
that sowed good seed in the field is the son of man, i. e. Christ, the field is
the world, therefore not the Church, the good seed or wheat are the children of
the Kingdom, i. e. the Saints the true Church, and worshippers, the tares,
which while men slept, and did not mind it, the enemy came and sowed among the
wheat, i. e. in the same parts and places of the world, Towns, Countries, etc.
locally considered, the children of the wicked one, (...), the same as (...), 2
These. 2. that wicked, false worshippers of God after their own inventions, men's
precepts, not his will, people and priests grown up into a Church, worship,
ministry, religion insensibly by little and little, from false principles, and
foundations, custom, forefathers, prudential additions of orthodox men etc.
not the pure naked word it self: a people born to their religion, yea their
christian religion in the way of flesh, and blood, and the will of man, of the
Pope and counsels constituting, and civil powers from them commanding; not of
God by the word of truth.

The Enemy that sowed them is the devil, for he indeed filled the whole world
even the whole Christian world, with false worshippers, false principled Clergy
men, and when he could not kill the wheat, the Christians in the ten
persecutions in his open war against them by the mouth of the beast, or empire
heathen, wherein he prosecuted them under their own names, because Constantine
a Christian was come now to the crown, then he turned, Christian himself, and
would have Christianity embraced by all means, by a law, and sowed the seed of
false principles, of stablishing Christian religion, as the only religion,
before which all other shall now down, promoting Christianity in the shell,
that he might kill it in the substance, causing great honors, revenues, Peter's
patrimonies to be given in favor of Christianity, from which principles,
selfish, ambitious, lazy, luxurious Ministers, as the Pope, formal mere
nominal Christians g^w up, and overtopt the truth and true Saints, that kept
close to the truth, in the midst of all this mock show, wherein the devil has
kept an apish imitaon of Christ's church all along, and ministry, ordinances,
baptism, supper, church censure, but all corrupt, and trod the holy city to the
ground Rev. 11. the same subtle one, now he sees his trade of forcing men from
the truth by the p^inciple of conformity to the false Christianity, and the old
Spiritualty fail, is now shifting himself undoubtedly in to another
Spiritualty, that will as much corrupt, and delude the world by the principle
of liberty of conscience abused, and turned by the Ranter into license, though
we who plead for liberty of truth say in maxima liberate est minima licentia,
in the greatest liberty of conscience to serve God, there is the least license to
serve the devil by our lusts, and corrupt our selves in what we know naturally
as bruit beasts; nor is that conscience that makes conscience of nothing.

The harvest is the end of the world, the reapers the Angels, by whom at that
time Christ will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into his barn
and burn up all chaff, Tares, husks, weeds, briars, thorns, idolators,
hypocrites, subtle seducers, and sinful subverters of the truth, whoever shall
appear to have been such, and all other trash, with unquenchable fire Matthew. 3.
12.

Mean while I say still Tares may stand among wheat locally in one Country, yet
not lawfully in one church society.

Weeds and flowers, Roses and nettles, Lillies and thorns, Vines and brambles,
Idolatours and true worshippers, Believers and infidells, the children of the
Kingdom and of the wicked one, the Temple of God and idols, Christ's church and
the Devils chapel, discovered hypocrites and sincere Saints, Christians of all
sorts, save such whose very principle prohibits toleration, and they make the
case incapable to be, which will win or loose all, stand alone or not at all as
whether the P P Priesthoods do not, or at least did not, let all men judge
Jews, Turks and Pagans may be lawfully allowed their religions, living in
subjection under one civil power, if the whole world were but one Monarchy, in
one World, in one Field, or Commonwealth, though not in one Garden, not in one
Vineyard or Church; and may not be made to be of the true religion whether they
will or no: yea I appeal to the conscience of any sober minded man, whether if
Pontius P^ue, whom the Scripture styles the Governor of Iudaea (and a lawful
Governor over the church, a very heathen may be, but no heathen lawfully, a
member, much less an officer or a Governor in the Church (whether I say if
Pilate should have been converted by Christ at the bar, while he sat on the
bench, and truly believed in him: it would have pleased Christ: that he should
have improved his civil power to have established Christianity in Iudaea: and
forced all men under penalty to believe in christ, and renounce all mere Jewish
worships; or whether it had been as lawful a decree in Augustus ^aesar to have
forced all men to be Christians under a penalty, as it was in him, to issue out a
decree, that all the world should be taxed? I suppose not, but that he must
have left all to their ways, and have practiced it himself, and protected it
from injury, and propounded it to all in way of preaching, but not prosecuting
any by his civil power, if they would yet remain Jews or heathens; and Christ
might as easily have made Emperors his Disciples had he meant that the Gospel
should be established by civil power.

And this is for the further safeguard, and advantage to the wheat (as I said
before) for Christ gives this reas^n why he would have the tares to be le^
alone, least by rooting out the ta^es, the wheat be ro^ed out also: for if all
religions may stand, then the true one may stand in quiet, without disturbance,
if all people may walk every one in the name of his God, Mich. 4. 5. then we
may walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever, but if all be
beaten down in a state, and but one stand, ten thousand to nothing it is not
the truth that is there established: for truth may be trodden down, but treads
not down others in a violent way of persecution.

Besides if true Religion establish it self alone in some States, by forcing
men to subject to it, its gives a bad example to false religions in other
states, that think themselves in the right, to do the like, and force men that
love the truth there, to submit to them, and ^o there is qui^ for quo, and no end
of disturbances, they saying that we are Tares, we that they are, and so there
is nothing but pulling up by the roots, if toleration be not tolerated, as the
most peacemaking principle, and so in these bussles if the wheat grow alone
some where, it must fall elsewhere, even every where, where the tares are
resolved to stand alone, and so Homo Homini Lupus, Christianus Chri^i no
Diabolus, men must be wolves and devils each to other throughout the world.

Besides, if the power in any place be ignorant, and under an erring conscience
that conscientia errans, will oblige him, seemingly to himself at least, to
tread down truth, and set up false hood, and all this by a law, yea if the
Magistrate take the part of any religion against all other, so as to establish
it alone, and root out them, whether it be the true one or a false one that he
sets up, not tolerating all others, but forcing them to submit to it, the
mischief is in a manner intolerable, on either hand; for if false, have not we
all felt the smart of being forc'^ to false ways, Smectimnus as well as
others? if he has not forgotten the groans, that for liberty of conscience
came once out of his own mouth, while he was crushed under him, that was crushed
under the Popedom, but in the Marian days above: but if true the forcing men
to own it before they see ground freely to receive it, makes a world of
formalists, of nominal Christians, who had as good be nothing at all, as no
better then they are, and of hypocrites, which are worse then naught, the worst
sinners in the world: for is it not better for me to remain a Jew under a blind
conscience, till I see the truth, then to turn Christian against my (though
blinded conscience) for fear of men, before convinc'^, or before I yet see it
to be the truth? a forced feigned profession for ^ear of men, if it happen to
be of the truth it self, is at best but splendidum peccatum a gilded sin.
Besides us to weave the spiders web as Isa. 59. to make laws and penalties to
bind conscience, which brawny conscienc'^ men can creep ore, let them be what
they will, as we see in Nebuchadnezzars days, and in the Popes time, and ever
since, all people for fear fall down and worship the golden image the King and
Clergy sets up, save such as fear God indeed.

And if it be thought that if the civil power take not the part of truth Obj.
(as I wonder where and when ever it did, at least since Constantines times,
till of late) it will be lost more in the crowd of errors and Heresies, that
will ens^e a general toleration, then any other way it can:

I say, let truth alone, and turn it loose to plead fully for it self, and it
will work out its way and live, and thrive, maugre all the entanglements it can
have Ans.
from tares: plain truth may be trusted to treat with the subtlest and proudest
opposers it has in the world, that (caeteris paribus) do make head against it:
but if it be set against by the foreign power of a civil sword, premi (yet then
too haud supprimi) potest: do but defend it only from injury equally with
others by the civil, and^then it will defend it self by the spiritual sword
against them all.

Wherefore I again humbly represent that grave Council of Gamaliel, whose
reason is good, to all the civil Magistrates throughout the earth. by whose
subjects it is sh^rpely controverted, and zealously quaeried what is truth, viz.
that they refrain from meddling more with men, though they seem mad men to the
world, and besides themselves for the sake of truth in pretense, left happily
they be found fighters against God, for if any way be not of God, twill in Gods
time come to naught of it self, and ye cannot establish it, if of God you
cannot withstand it, but twill come on, in this juncture specially, wherein it
dawns toward the great day, and God is about to pluck up every plant he has
not planted; And if men be in your apprehension blind leaders of the blind in
things of God, yet let them alone, if they will not go to the right way when
called to it, they will see, when they both fall into the ditch. And likewise I
humbly beg that what is further and more clearly held forth concerning this
subject of liberty of conscience by Mr. Blackwood, in the first part of his
storming of Antichrist, may be well weighed by our Magistrates, together with
the thirty quaeries presented to them lately by Mr. John Goodwin, and his
vindication of them against the Apologist, neither of which ever will be
answered solidly by their parish Ministers.

And as for the PPPriesthood it self (though I hope the night is too far
spent for any (save such as will be ignorant, and if any man will be ignorant,
let him be ignorant says Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 28. and so say I) to doubt but that
the day is dark over them and theirs) they are blind leaders of the blind in
many things, which many others see, of whom yet they are ashamed to learn, and
which is worse, such as stand not a little in their own light, by snuffing at
it that the Russet Rabbis, and Clergy of La^cks should presume to instruct
them more perfectly in the way of God, which God in these days (wherein the
last must be first, and the first last) will subject the proudest spirited
Priests in Christ'ndom to take from some illiterate, and perhaps, non-sensical,
yet honest hearted Saints stammerers in speech, babes (with them bablers) as of
old eloquent Apollos from Aquila and Priscilla, or else it may be hid from
their eyes.

And though what they would not that others do to them, when they were
underlings each to other, they have done unto all other professions, that were
underlings to them in the day of their reign, hasting what they could to the
hunting of the Sectaries out of their synagogues (or their native rights and
enjoyments therein) which they have subjugated to be their Synagogues, counting
the compass of whole Common-weals, and Kingdoms little enough for them to
Lord it over, and set their several names of Papal, Prelatical, or Presbyterian
there, confounding, and Babilonishly blending Church and State Power together,
so that it was hard for any to ken clearly which was which, or to know where to
set the sole of his foot almost upon European ground in any Nation, bu^ he and
all (his conscience and all) must come under the command, and fall within the
verge of some or other of their merciless Church Monarchies, yet nevertheless
my humble desire to the powers on their behalf is that they may be tolerated
and protected in the practice of what profession, Religion, way of worship,
doctrine, discipline, or Churchgovernment soever they see occasion among
themselves, and such as shall see occasion to cleave to them, or any of them,
to set up, so far as they shall desire to build their several BBBabels without
that blood of souls and bodies of men, in which they have imbrued both their
own, and the Princes hands of the Christian Nations in former days: I heartily
plead for a toleration for them, if ever the power shall (as not a few people
already do) discern them to be as Heretical, and Schismatical from the truth,
as they have judged all others to be, such toleration I mean, as may not be
inconsistent with the toleration of all other people, and professions of
Religion in the several nations in peace together with them, and in security
from such searches as have been made by their Surregates Paritors and Proctours
etc. after men as unsufferable Schismatics that side not with them: but a
toleration of them in that wonted Tyranny of treading all under their feet, and
plucking up all plants by the roots that live beside them by the civil power,
when they once have censured them for such seditious ones as are not fit to be
suffered in a state because they submit not to their stateliness, and
complained of them to Kings as H^man to Ahasuerus of the Jews, the true
Churches type, saying Esth. 3. 8. there is a certain people scattered abroad,
and dispersed among the people in all the Provinces of thy Kindom, and their
laws are diverse from all people, neither keep they the Kings laws, therefore it
is not for the Kings, (alias not the CCClergies) profit to suffer them, and
made their modest request that if it pleas^ the King it may be written that
they may be destroyed, which conscience of correcting Heretics, that conformed
not to the CCClergies Christianity, carried Christian Kings to condescend to in
old time, this toleration is too intolerable in all conscience.

I wish well to the persons of the men called CCClergy (God is my witness) but
I wish not so well to their way as to wish it up in the way wherein they would
have had it: and yet I here wish they may have their way too, abating us no
more of it then their unreasonable wonted wishes, that the state would allow no
ways but their own, let them pare off that knotty piec^ from off their
principle, wherein they pray the Powers to beat all men into the belief of all
they say by the sword, the belief of which they can never beat into them by the
word, then let them and their party practice what they please: let their way be
no way of civil violence to all other ways and then in civil peace let them
walk in it till they are weary: and let it stand till by the word it fall
before the true one, if it be such a noun Adjective that it cannot stand by it
self in Scripture, sense and Reason, without such a Substantive as the civil
sword to support it, it is a sign that there is far more show, then Substance in
it: for verily that Gospel that will not stand not only without, but against
the edge of Caesar's sword encountering with it, is Antichrists, but none of
Christ's Gospel to me: yet such it seems is the CCClergies Gospel, which freedom
to set it up by other ways leaves still as helpless, as hopeless, of ever
standing, unless it may be stablisht against all other ways, on the necks of
all people by the carnal weapons of Caesar's civil State; its very doubtful of
entering the field with no other strength then its own Canons, unless the state
lend it her ordinances to back them but if Baal be a God, me thinks he might
speak for himself against them that throw down his Altars, without imploring
all the Gods of the earth to speak for him; if the Multitude of his Priests
cannot set up his worship, without the Magnitude of earthly Princes to relieve
them, let it go, and a good riddance of it too, if Dagon 1 Samuel 5. 24
cannot stand on his own legs, but must fall before the Ark, unless the
benevolence of others lift him up, his PPPriests may set him up as much as they
will for themselves, but they shall never set him up again for me.
Nevertheless I am as freely willing, since it is the will of Christ, and his
Testament, that even Baalitish, Romish worshippers should have a Room, and
being in the world by the civil Magistrates permission, they yielding civil
subjection which he has more says then I that believes they ever will for
surely the CCClergies Win all or lose all will pull them down at last.
even to the end thereof, as I am willing there should be a Room and being in
it for the truth, for though the Prophets of Baal were put to death in
reforming Elijahs time, in the old Church of Israel, which was the type, yet
that pointed out no more then that spiritual execution, which is to be done on
Iezebel, and her false worships in the true Church in these reforming times of
the Gospel, not one of which may abide any more in the Gospel Israel; yea I
here seriously supplicate the civil Powers for them, that their consciences no
more then ours may be forced by any forinsecal power to act in Church worships
contrary to their conviction, but if naught will content the PPPriesthood at
all (as of old it would not) but that all Heretics, as they call them, that
hearken not to their Traditions, must be clublawd into conformity to their
parochial precepts, so far at least as to obey the Hue and Cry of their purses,
without free leave from their own consciences so to do, then (protesting
against the iniquity of their desires after the persecution of those, who
desire the protection of them from persecution by the civil Power) my most
humble suit to the supreme Powers is, that they will be pleased, as to let the
PPPriesthood preach as much as they please (a little of which work serves the
turns of some of them) and to let such as are satisfied in their Souls and
spirits, that they ought to do both, to own and pay them, so* to let such as
seem to themselves on sufficient grounds to have clear cause to decline them,
have the freedom of their consciences to be none of their flocks, and being
none of their flocks, a freedom from being forcibly fleeced by them any more;
and if the CCClergy shall he Angry at this without a cause, to let them be
pleased without amends, since it is most evident, that as men ought not to be
constrained against their wills, to be of Christ's, much less of the CCClergies
flock, so he that feeds a flock may freely, and not by force, live of the
milk of that flock he feeds, and may not of them that are forrainers to his
flock, further then they are free to supply him: they went forth freely to
preach the Gospel for his names sake, taking nothing, much less by force, of
the Gentiles, that were Ministers to the Church of old, John Ep. 3. v. 7. and
many heathenish Parishes here have the Gospel preached freely to them when they
accept on it by the messengers, that go forth of the true churches at this day,
but many Parish Ministers will make all that live, or have to do within their
line, buy their Sermons of them, and that at their own price too, whether they
like them or no, and, which is worse, though they have sold them once, it may
be often, ore already (and a dear penniworth too) yet as often as they remove to
other livings, they carry them away along with them in their papers from the
people, that have already bought and paid for them, preach them ore again, and
so sell them for as much more in other places: but I hope the civil power
throughout Europe, as well as they do in the tenth part of it already, will
take cognizance ere long, that it can be no great ease to truly tender
consciences, who with the CCClergy are ever styled Sectaries and Schismatics,
to lie under the lash of these Lords over Gods heritage, and in tender
consideration thereof, and compassion to those righteous souls, who are vexed
with their vanities, proclaim such a Iubilee that the true spouse of Christ,
whom they made a keeper of their vineyard, shall have leave to keep her own
vine yard, and go forth from her Apprenticeship to these spiritual
Taskmasters, that their consciences shall be no more yoaked, nor captivated to
their crude and carnal conceptions, and the wings of the CCClergy so clipped,
that they shall not soar so high, as they have done, over the faith of all
people; yea in the name of the blessed, and only Potentate King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, Christ Jesus, I warn all the civil Powers, Princes and
Potentates of the world, that have been bewitched by the sorceries of that
WWWhore, who corrupts the earth with her fornications, that they give up their
power and strength no more to be improved to the forcing of the inhabiters of
the earth, to drink of the golden cup, and wine of her fornications, but that
they improve it rather henceforth to the freeing all men from from her
conscience crushing principle of per secution by the civil sword, that submit
not to her Sinodical constitutions, and if they refuse to obey the will of the
Lord in this thing, and permit not all people to live peaceably in their
several forms of worship, they behaving themselves civilly, and in all
subjection to them in civil matters in their several States, I testify unto
them that then the hand of the Lord will be so heavy upon them, and their
PPPriests and people, that he will plague them as c^rtainly as he did Egypt,
Pharaoh and his Magicians till they let his Israel go forth, and serve him as
he required.

Yea (O ye Powers) if ye shall yet persevere to Tyranize over truth, and
trample upon tender consciences, and force all men to that one faith which the
men, or rather the woman Rev. 17. the CC^lergy in their counsels make the
standard through you several States, the Lord Christ will tread you and your
people in his wrath, and trample you in his fury, and stain all his raiment
with your blood, and strengthen your own Subjects against you and your
PPPriesthood, IIIezebel, that stirs you up, who^e lovers you are, with
invincible courage, and irresistible wrath against you, to supp^esse your
miserable misgovernment, and cast her into a bed, and you that commit adultery
with her, into great tribulation except you repent of your deeds, yea he will
endlessly imbrole you in wars one against another, about your false faiths, and
Antichristian Christianities, and bring plagues upon you, the sword, famine,
death, and destruction, that he may repay unto you the things that have been
done unto his chosen, and will hold his tongue no longer as touching the
wickedness of that kind, which has been profanely committed, but as innocent
and righteous blood cries unto him, and the souls of the just complain
continually; so the Lord will surely avenge them, and receive unto him all the
righteous blood from among them (...) Es. 15. 5. to the 12. 49. to 57. Rev. 11.
(...). 6. 19. 2.
behold his people has been led as a flock to the slaughter, but he will not
suffer them now to dwell any longer in the land of Egypt, i. e. under the
Lordly tyranny of the PPPriesthood, who is that threefold great City BBBabilon,
which is also spiritually called Sodom, for her Spiritual whoredoms, and Egypt
Rev. 11. 8. the land of Isreal's captivity, in the streets, within the
territories of which the carcases of Christ's witnesses ly dead, where also our
Lord was crucified. for howbeit it was the Roman civil power in Potius Pilate
passing sentence, yet it was the Priestly malice that caused him to be
crucified, or else Pilate had re leased him: and so its Princely power, but
PPPriestly malice crying out crucify him, crucify him, that has caused
himunder the Gospel be crucified in his truth, and Saints, or else many of the
civil Powers would release him.


But he will bring them out with a mighty hand, and a streched out arm, and
will smite EEEgypt with plagues as before, and will destroy all the land
thereof; EEEgypt shall mourn, and the foundation of it be smitten with the
plague, and punishment that God shall bring upon it: like as they do yet this
day unto his chosen, so will he also do, and recompense unto their bosom, and
he will make the Princes of the earth to know, that it is Christ's right alone to
rule over the consciences of the children of men, and that no mere man may sit
as a judge there: and thou (O PPPriest) shall know that Christ alone is King in
his Church, and in the conscience, and the true Ministers, but mere Ministers,
or servants unto both, and not Masters over either, and that the civil state
is the element, and the Orb, which the Magistrate only is to move in under
him, and that only merely in matters civil, and that thy self, who art a
creature not of Gods, but of thy own creating, and have usurped a supreme
jurisdiction, at least a jurisdiction over all these, have nothing (but naught)
to do in any of them at all, and as thou art no plant of the heavenly fathers
planting, so shall assuredly be plucked up by the very roots, from all thy
pretenses, privileges, provinces, parishes, and other profits and places, in
which thy earthly father the Pope has planted thee: yea thou shall be weakened
as a poor woman with stripes, and as one chastised with wounds, so that the
mighty and lovers shall not be able to receive thee: would I with jealousy
have so preceeded against thee says the Lord, if thou had not always slain my
chosen, exalting the stroke of thine hands, and saying over their dead, when
thou wast drunken, set forth the beauty of thy countenance? the reward of thy
whordome shall be in thy bosom, therefore shall thou receive recompense, like
as thou have done unto my chosen (says the Lord) spoiling and destroying them
that fear the Lord, wasting and taking away their goods (tearing them with thy
teeth for Tith) and casting them out of their houses, even so shall God do unto
thee, and shall deliver thee unto mischief, thou shall be cast down by them as
stubble, and they shall be to thee a fire: look what thou have they shall spoil
it, and mar the beauty of thy face: and the glory of both thou O poor
Princely PPPriesthood, and of all those PPPriestly Princes that adhere to thee,
shall be dried up, as a flower, when the heat shall arise that is sent over
thee.

Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye that are judges of the
earth, see that you serve the Lord with fear in your own persons, according to
his own will and way revealed in his word, and know, that howbeit you are the
Gods of the earth, to judge all men that are under you, whether in the Church,
or of the world, in earthly cases, and matters of mere secular concernment,
that you are not the Gods of heaven, that is the Church, so far as to meddle at
all (as earthly judges) to correct in those mere heavenly cases: and though the
PPPriests persuade you it is a piece of acceptable service to God, to let your
whole Nations be by law from you compelled to be their Churches, that, as you
[civilly] so they [uncivilly] may go hand in hand [Moses and Aron like] and
share with you in subjecting violently all souls and your selves too to their
SSSacer dot all suggestion in soul cases, and that you may lawfully punish
Heretics into the hearing of them, and banish them into a blind obedience to
their directions, yet I am bold in the Lord to assure you, that as you should
have little thank from him, should you force men to such a worship as (for the
matter of it) is according to Christ's will, against their own, so will he once
check you in wrath (if you repent not in time) for forcing all men to worship
after the CCClergies will against Christ's; for as the first is at best but a
piece of honest ignorance, so this last is at least no less then a piece of
divellish darknese Rev. 13. 7. 8.

Hearken no more therefore (O ye the Magistrates) as you respect the true good
of your Republiques, to the clamors of your CCClergy, when they cry out to you
to hunt out Heretics, i. e. such as after the way they call heresy so worship
God, where by they run you unavoidably, if you run after them, upon certain
ruin, and on the hazard of fighting against God, and then woe be you, and of
rooting the wheat, his Saints, out of the Field, the world in which it ought to
stand, and the tares too even till the harvest, and of infinite cumbrances,
inconveniences, and brangles about Church matters, wherein, as Magistrates, you
are not so immediately conc^rned as they dictate to you, who are such a
contentious sect of men, both with all others, and each with other about one
Church business or other continually, that it is impossible (now specially since
truth is returning home, which they have so long driven from her own border)
but that the nations will be imbrued in their own, and one another blood, in
defense of their fopperies, if you engage as often as they would egg you to it
on their behalfs: What animosities have ever been between the Temporalty, and
these Lords Spiritual? What quarrels and jarres between the Friars of several
orders? what whole Country clashes, and consumptions have been made in Germany
between the Calvinists and Lutherans? what inveteracy between the CCClergy of
the several FFFormes of Government? which though they can agree all against
the true Clergy or heritage of God, yet hate each other unto the death, yea oh
the infinite wrang^gs and little less then divellish dissentions, wherewith as
with a sire they have wasted all corners of their CC^Christendomes, that they
have been more like the places of burying dead bodies, then like the houses of
Christ's flock, yea they have consumed themselves in their miserable burning,
whilst in their holy wars they have called (...) ^everally the civil sword to
the ultimate determining of their spiritual controversi^s, and made carnal
weapons the instruments of their churches warfare, as if the best way to
co^vert the nations to Christ, were to convert them to dust and ashes: how have
they s^amed upon occasion of different opinions, so as to tear and rend people
to pieces, and engage them, and their princes at swords point for their lusts
and wills sake? how have they cast the people from one element to another, one
falie way unto another, till they have made whole Countries, Cities, and their
own Academies A^aes, field, of blood, and like foaming and ^aging waves of the
Sea, sh^ving together for the dictates of that kind of Clergy still that they
are the S^ries of; insomuch that some observant spirits have wished to die, and
depart this life among other ends for this, that they might be delivered from
the sight of the implacable hatred of Divines: all which things also do take
off the Magistracy from a tendance to their main business of relieving the
oppressed, judging the fatherl^sse, pleading for the wid^w, and the works of
justice, and mercy among their people, which God will have, and no^ sacrifice,
and take be^ter from them, then the improvement of themselves to set up either
the P^pe, the Prelate, or the Pr^yier, or establish any form of Religion
whatsoever by a law.

On the e^re that the Powers would consider it (though I fear me m^st nations
in Ch^e will not till they pay dear for their learning) and leave their people
free to cl^use what God they will serve, and which way they will serve the true
God, by suffering all ways to stand before them in the world, and be objected
fairly to their trial, then shall truth be sure to be told them as well as
error, and leave them without excuse that shall reject^: Mean while as to the
civil interest ^om 13 (...). (...) P^. 2. 13. Magist^es are called (...)
^dinance o^ God^ the m^ t^it o^ ^he thing we (...) go^ern n^ is o^ him, the
ordin^ce of (...) to ^he (...) form of governm^ viz. wh^her it shall be by
Kings, Parli^. etc. and also the paticular persons that shall execu^e that form
is al^ogether in choice of the people.
of the wh^e, and each p^re of heir Commonwea^s, to see strictly to it that
they at^end conti^lly on (...) very thing, for which they are (when once the
ord^nence of men by their election) the ordinance and ministers of God; and to
be ^red to as both the ordinance of God and man, and that for both conscience
s^ke and the Lords, Act. 18 12 13. 14
that they attend upon the protection of all people from being inj^d one by ^er
in any cases pertaining to externalls, and the maintaining ^f outwa^ peace,
civil^ty, and good m^ners in all men to the whole, and to each other by
punish^g ^vil d^s of such a nature, and rewarding of such as do well without
par^ality, or respect to any persons or parties, in which cases Regu^ est part
sub^is, ^t de^llare superbo^: thus doing they must necessarily maintain true
Relig^n too (so far as they are called (as Magistrates) to maintain it) whilst
when all states ^ave trod it down under pretense of maintaining it, that
suppressed all as Schism that suited not with the Monarchiall minds of the men
called CCClergy, this state sets it up as far as men may, or can set it up,
that suffers it to live, and thrive among the false:

If there be any matter of wrong or wicked lewdness done by any, as well
members of the true Church, as any other, reason wills, and therefore no
Christians, but CCClergy man and their creatures, whose way is against reason,
^e supra p. 279.
will be against it, that such should suffer according to the law in that
behalf, whether unto bonds, or unto banishment, or unto confiscation, or unto
death without benefit of the Clergy, who have benedicted all benefits to
themselves, and not be favored because members, or because Ministers of such
Churches; neither is it fit at any that any persons should be spared, or but so
much as favored in any measure in such a case for their religions sake, though
it be the the one, and they of never so high account, and eminent standing in
it.

For howbeit, the men who are commonly, but not properly called Clergy For that
name [Clergy] however by themselves improperly impropriated to themselves, as
if they only were the [heritage] of God, for that's the plain English of that
Anglico-greek word [Clergy] yet in plain truth pertains properly to all Christ's
people, and that in contradistinction too from the Ministry, for the spirit
speaking of the Elders and Pastors of the Church, charges them not to Lord it
over the heritage, i. e. in other locution not to do^ineer ov^r the Clergy 1
Pet. 5. 3. (...) etc. we see therefore God calls the flock, and not the
Sheepheards (muchless^ the Sheeps^ers) by the name of Clergy; but the Pope (as
if he had projected purposely to betheeve Gods people out of all their
privileges, and rights, leaves them not so much as their own proper name to be
known by, but bestows the name of [Clergy] upon the Creatures of his own
creating, and leaves them the name of Laics in its stead, t^lling them, when
they begin ^o charge his CC Clergy with impropriation of preaching, and pay to
themselves, that they are but a Clergy of Laics, see Featleys Epistle, but to
say the truth excepting some few of his sons of the Episcopal and Presbyterian
CClergy (that are come from him two ways, viz. by dissent, and descent) who
may be honester, and wiser then the rest (and yet are not so wi^ as to know
their own father) the rest are mostly A CCClergy of Lazicks, or lazy locust^:
In like manner has he^ingrost other titles to himself, and his CCClergy, all
which the Scripture gives to all Christ's people, as namely that of Spiritual
men, as if all the world were but Natural, at least but Temporal men besides
themselves, thus the Bishops were called Lords Spiritu^l, and other Lord,
Lords Temporal: so the of Priests, see the book of Common Prayer, and of
ordination of Priests and Deacons, whereas these are titles afforded by the
spirit to all the S^ints of God as well as some. 1 Cor. 2. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
Rev. 1. 6. 5. 10, ye^ I call them by t^se ^mes, because these are now the most
common names, whereby they are known, or ^lso properly I cannot call them by
these, nor by any other names, whereby they commonly call themselves: I cannot
call them the Spiritualty, for not one of many of them has any Spiritualnesse
in him: I cannot call them Devines, for they are rather Humanes, if they have
their due, whilst they te^ch Gods fear after men's precepts, and for doctrines
the Traditions of men: I cannot call them the Tribe of Levi, for Levi though he
took Tith according to the Law, whereof he was the Priest, in the loins of
Abraham paid Tithes to the person of that high Pri^st that we are under, viz.
Melchizedeck, or the King of Righteousness Christ Jesus, but these are so f^r
from paying Tithes to Christ, that they most grievously gripe his people, if
they p^y it not to them: I cannot call them Ministers, i. e. servants of
Christ, and of the Church, for they are rather Lords and Masters over his
heritage, unless Servus Servorum, and Dominus Dominorum may stand together: I
cannot call them Pastors, or Shepherds, till I can own their Parishes for
Christ's Sheep, for if we denominate them by the General temper of their people,
they profess to stand Pastors too, they seem to be Swinheards rather by their
peoples wallowing in the mire: I cannot call them Presbyters, or Elders though
some of them be Seniores annis, unless they were Saniores Animis then they
are, for they are not yet sound, nor Orthodox in either their judgments,
doctrine or practice, so long as they are against the truest baptism, and abide
unbaptized: I cannot call them Preachers of the Gospel, for they preach down
that Gospel, which was at first preached, concerning Christ's dying for the sins
of the whole world* I cannot call them Bishops or Overseers of Christ's flock in
the spirits sense i. e. in respect of their care to take heed to, or feed it,
but Overseers in another sense rather I may properly style them, for verily
Christ's flock is so little and low, poor and plain, mean and base, hated and
despised, and themselves so lofty and high minded, that as not many noble, and
mighty, so few or none of these wise men after the flesh can stoop or look so
low as it is, and so (for the most part) they oversee it: and lastly if those
be the true Clergy and Priests of God, that are obedient to his word, (as the
Scripture says they are) the CCClergy need not find fault (as they do) with
the Mar-priests of these times, for in very deed the CCClergy, PPPriests, and
Presbiters have been the truest Priest-biters, Claw-clergies, and Mar-Priests
themselves.
, but specially the Clergy immediately under the Popes supremacy, were
privileged so far, as to stand exempted from the reach of the civil law, and
to save themselves the trouble of being hanged, when they had deserved it as
much as other men, by a business called the benefit of the Clergy, i. e. the
immunity of the Clergy from the civil law, Rem enim ndig nam esse putent etc.
says Calvin Inst. li. 4. c. 11. 5. 15. they deem it a disparagement that they
should be made to answer in their own personal causes before any civil
Magistrate, and suppose both the liberty and dignity of the Church i. e. the
Clergy, to ly in an exemption from the common seats of judicature, and their
laws: but the Bishops of old, who were otherwise strict enough in pleading the
privileges of the Church, did judge it no disgrace either to themselves or
their function to subject themselves to civil powers.
some relikes of which benefit the Clergy once had, and still has in some
places, seem to me to remain in our civil Courts, wherein we see in some
capital crimes, the malefactor, si legate ut Clericus, if he can, but read like
a Clerk or Clergy man whose work (...) mostly in reading service in old time,
till the Gospel came again to be preached in these latter days.
, he escapes execution, when else he should have died without remedy, which
favor is also called the benefit of the Clergy, yet we desire that no manner
of men may have exemption from the course of civil Justice, yea if we whom they
call Anabaptists do any thing at any time wordly of death by the civil law
rightly regulated we refuse not to die: but as we desire that others should, so
are we willing our selves in civil matters to stand at Caesar's i. e. the civil
Magistrates judgment seat where we ought to be judged in such cases: and thus
did Paul, when accused by the Priests as a Pestilent fellow, and a mover of
sedition merely for preaching the Gospel: To the Jews, says he, have I done no
wrong, nor yet against Caesar have I offended etc. therefore no man may deliver
me to them, I appeal unto Caesar Act. 24. 5. 12. 13 14. 20. 25 8. 11. where we
see that in case of civil injury charged upon him as committed by him he
appeals to C^sar to judge, though Caesar was a heathen, and he a Christian, and
not of Cesars Religion, which he had been a mad man in doing, had the question
been simply about the right Religion, yea when any question a aro^e in the
Church about Religion, as in the point of circumcision Act. 15. the Apostles,
Elders and brethren considered of it among themselves, consulting the mind of
the spirit in the word, and had they not agreed it, they would not have
referred it, nor, had any not conformed to their determination in that point,
would they have complained of them to C^sar: and as Paul would not stand at
Cesars judgment seat in Religious, as he desired to do in civil, so Cesars
Deputies would not meddle at all, as Magistrates, in Religious cases: for when
the Jews set Paul before the judgment seat of Gallio deputy of A^haia, and
complained saying, This fellow persuades men to worship God contrary to the
law, Gallio said, if it were a matter of wrong, or wicked lowdnesse; O ye Jews,
reason would that I should bear with you, but if it be a question of words, and
names, and of your law, look ye to it, for I will be a jud^e of no such
matters, and he drove them from the judgment seat, as who should say, we are
set to keep civil peace and right among you, but not at all to determine you in
your worships: Oh therefore that the Magistracy would consider it that they are
set not to force men to submit all to one worship, nor yet sorcibly to
suppress either Heresy or truth, but to prevent tumultuoulness about either.

If Demetrius, and the craftsmen of like occupation who make shrines for Diana
have a matter of wrong against any, let the civil law be open, and let them
plead each other there; but if the enquiry be concerning other matters (as
namely setting at naught their craft, profaning the Temples of their Goddess
and destroying their false worships by plain preaching of truth, what is Heredox,
what Orthodox in worship, etc.) (...) let that be determined in a lawful
Assembly, i. e. as the word is in the Greek insome lawful * Act. 19. 24. to 39.
Church, congregation, or select meeting for that purpose.

Last of all though the Lord prohibit the standing of Idolators etc. in the
Church 2 Cor. 6. Rev. 2. yet he himself, who could presently root them out, if
twere his mind, permits not only true, but also falseworshippers, Heretics
etc. to have a being in the world, and therefore me thinks Gods Vicegerent
should not be against it: It is according to the will of God himself
permitting, not approving them, that heresies do arise, but its according to
his good will approving, and in his word appointing that they shall stand in
the world, when risen, further then they can be annihilated by the word.

And as the Scripture shows how far he himself tolerates them, so the Divines
themselves (as shy as they are of having them tolerated) do Give these good
Reasons of Gods suffering of Heretics. 1 For the discovering of the sound,
that Gold and Silver may be known from hay and stubvle, that by the Devils
sitting of us the good corn may be discerned from cha^: it is the Apostles
Reason 1 Cor. 11. 19. that they which are approved may be known, for who they
are that, with the weapons of the Churches warfare, are valiant for the truth,
indurers of hardship as good Soldiers of Christ etc. would not appear, if
there were no Heretics, False worshippers, Antichristians, Truth treaders etc.
to try them; true love to Christ's truth can never be seen, if never tried, nor
tried if truth never opposed, hated, hunted, and that to death too sometimes,
by the fierce wrath, and cruel malice of its enemies.

2. That truth may be discussed and fetched out as fire from the concussions of
flint and steel. Truth had not been fetched half so far out of the dark, nor
from under that Popish Smoother of traditions at this time, as it is, had not
the C C Clergy so hotly hunted it, and so fiercely clasht against all that came
out to clear it. If there had not been an Heretical C C Clergy crying out
Heresy against all truth, the world had never heard so much of it in these
latter days as now it has; and I verily persuade my self, that as the day
breaks and the shadows fly away, the way of truth in the hearts of the Just,
and in the eyes of the of the world (by how much the CCClergy calls Heresy
upon it) shall shine more, and more still to the perfect day, who saw some
truth in their days, wherein it was twilight, but not all that is nowtobe seen,
for though I reverence the men (as I do every man, that sees truth as far as i^
shines clearly in his time) yet Luther left much truth unseen to himself, be
hind him, and some of Calvin's Institutions too are none of Christ's.
if Luther and Calvin had not been, and that so fiercely, slung at by Popish
Priests because they preached against indulgencies, and selling pardons for
money, and against the Lordlines of the Popish Hirrachy, they had not heard so
much against them, but that they might have sold more pardons, then they have
done since: and the 2 latter litters of Spiritual lords (that qua CCClergy)
came out of the Popes ^oins, the two P Priesthoods of the Protestant party
might have lorded it longer like their father (who will never be dead as long
as they are alive) had they not been as iron and steel against truth, and true
worshippers whom God makes as hard as slint against their faces, that by their
concussions against it, he may the more fully fetch it forth, the oppositions,
and imprisonments, which Paul met with from the adverse party, whereby they
intended to smoother it in his days fell out rather to the furtherance of the
Gospel; for it came to be the more manifest in all places by means of errors so
earnest appearance against it 1 Phil. 12. to 19.

Thus truth has gained ground not a little in these latter days by the
ominous onsets wherewith falsehood fights it, and would fain fright and force
it to hide its head: and wisdom works out it self not a little to light, by
follies flying so furiously at the face of it.

3. That the truth might be better loved, and more price set upon it, we prize
light the more by our knowledge of darkness, health by our sense of sickness,
error is a foil to a Diamond, truth looks more lovely being compared with it.
The lilly looks most lovely and beautiful, when it stands among black thorns
2 Cant. 2. the stars, though ever obvious to us would never shine if there were
no night, contraria juxta se posita maxim elu^scant, contraries set together
discover each other more lively in their several loathsome or lovely forms:
the light of the Sun shows brightest, seems sweetest when it breaks from
under a dark cloud, so does the Sun of righteousness now arising appear the
more lovely, by how much it has been hid from the earth now of long time by
that dismal darkness, and smoke of Heresies, erroneous false worships, and
foolish figments with which the CCClergy has filled all parishes throughout
CCChristendome.

4, For the punishment of hypocrites, nominall Christians, curious Minds, such
as have itching ears, and heap unto themselves teachers, straggling sheep fall
into the wolves clutches, such as will not keep the steps of the flock, but go
after the flocks of the Companions ever fall into most dangers of seducement,
all which is most plain by too woeful experience in all Nations of
CCChristendome, for while Christianity, and the Gospel was professed sincerely,
as it was (saving some remote beginnings of men's traditions to take place
against the commands of Christ) in the first three hundred years, wherein it was
evidenced by the ten bloody persecutions that Christians served Christ for love
then, and not for loaves nor for lives sake neither, for they loved not their
lives unto the death, there were not half so many Heretics, or Heresies as
have been since: but when once after Constantine, Christianity coming into
credit, and being not only owned by the Emperors themselves, but established
by their edicts in all things according to the pattern showed them in the word,
not of Christ, but of the Catholic Clergy convened in Councels, as the
Religion sub paena to be submitted to, men turned Christians upon such slight
grounds, and were born to that Name of Christianity without the Nature, no
otherwise then of the will of man, and were no more then nomine tenus
professors of it, the Lord in his just and (...) judgment to these nominal
Christians, permitted those Spiritual plagues, that we ^e Rev. 8. Rev. 9.
seconded the sounding of the trumpets, to fall thick and three fold upon the
world: suffered the Clergy to fall to contentions, jars and janglings about
their ambitious interests, viz. primacy and universallity etc and to Apostatize
more and more from the plain primitive truth, and to degenerate be degrees into
darkness till they came at last to be totally blinded in things of God, and
blind leaders of the blind Princes and people, that implicitly g^ve up
themselves to be guided by them, that both might drop together into the ditch:
yea he suffered that great star the Bishop of Rome, that sometime shone very
bright, to fall as wormwood upon the third part of the waters, the pure
doctrine of the Gospel, i. e. to foist in his heresies to the poisoning and
imbittering of the doctrine, so that many died, even all that drank thereof,
because it was bitter and unwholesome: and he suffered the third part of the Sun
and Moon and Stars, all the means and ways of Christ's own institution and
appointment to give light unto men by, to be smitten, and darkened corrupted,
covered with false glosses, depraved with heaps of heresies, and traditions
etc. crept in and authorized by the Pope and his Ecclesiastical D^ctors, so
that what with the damnable and horribly devilish heresies by means of Mahomet
and his Alcoran infecting the Oriental Christians through all Asia, and these
Papisticall errors of those Arch-Hereticks, the Pope and CCClergy, and For
verily these Stars for their light of learning (as Dr. Featley confesses p.
165. 166.) have been the Authors, devisers and broachers of Heresies; yea
peruse (says he) if thou please all the ancient Heresies listed by Epiphanius,
Austin, Philastrius, Alphonsus a castro, Ambrosius de Rusconibus, and others,
and therein thou shall find the Ring-seaders great Clerks, and accute
Sophisters, whence is that true observation of Tertullian, Philosophi
Hereticorum Patriarchae, Philosophers have been the great Grandfathers of
Heretics.
Scholastic Rabbis, who with vain deceit seduced the Occidental part of the
world, from the simplicity that is in Christ, the day shone not for a third
part of it, and the might likewise i. e. the third part of that pure and
precious truth of Christ which shined in the primitive Churches, was now
exclipsed, and extinguished, neither had men by the third part so much, of that
clear light of Christ's Gospel that they were wont to have in former days yea
further in way of plague and punishment to hypocrites and mere nominal
Christians, the Lord at last suffered that star, which fell before, or angel of
the Church of Rome, when he was fallen from all his heavenlinesse, and love of
truth, to earthlinesse and love of money, and honor from beneath, to open the
bottomless pit, i. e. the way to the very depth of hellish darkness, and to
raise up a smoke or thick fog of errors and heresies lies, and traditions,
which as the smoke of some great furnace darkened the sun and air, i. e.
totally put out the light of Scripture, and pure administrations, which were
but (...) part ecclipsed before, so that now nothing could be seen, (as it
were) but Popish legends, and such stuff, by the advantage of which smoother
the Locu^s came out i. e. the Clergy that swarmed all over the earth, in every
parish one at least stinging, hurting, wounding to eternal death by their
poisonous doctrines; propounded under pretense of the word of Christ, all
persons, save such as have the seal of God in their foreheads, even a few
witnesses to the truth, that withstood their doctrins, which locusts are said
to be scorpions i. e. carrying a fair face, but stings in their tails, and to
have crowns because of their great power, for under their great King Apollyon
they rule all, and reign ore the Kings of the earth: These are they * Nahum 3.
thy crowned are as the locusts O King of Assyria, Apollyon in the Antitype.
that outwardly wear the sheeps clothing, i. e. cloth themselves with the
denominations of Clergy, Gods heritage, Spiritual men, Priests, men of God,
which are the true titles of the sheep, but inwardly are ravening wolves, into
whose clutches the straggling sheep that would not keep the steps of the flock
of Christ, but turned aside after the flocks of the companions, going at a
venture which way the most went, for companies sake right or wrong, did fall,
and by whose Heretical principles men are in danger of perishing for ever.

Thus when the world would be nominally, yet not really Christians, obeying the
pure word of Christ, would not endure sound doctrine, but, having itching ears,
that loved to be tickled not grated upon, grew weary of the plains of the
Gospel, saying to the Seers see not, and to the Prophets prophecy not, prophecy
not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophecy deceits, get ye
out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the holy one of Israel to
cease from before (...), despising his word, and rufusing to hear the Law of
the Lord as they of old. Isa. 30. then the Lord gave them their own hearts
lusts, and sent leanes withal into their souls, granted them heaps upon heaps
of such Cater-pillars as should dwell at their own doors, and devoute their
souls, and delude them with Heresy and false divinations, and as their pay
for so doing should devour also the tenth of their labors, ^ay the sixth in
all parishes through the Nations; he removed the candlestick out of his place,
and because they walked not in the light thereof whilst they had it, let
darkness come upon them, he gave them Priests that should teach for hire, and
Prophets that should divine for money, and say is not the Lord among us? none
evil can come upon us, Mic. 2. 11. he gave them like people like Priest, a
people not willing to be taught, and a Priesthood not able to teach, he removed
their truthteachers into a corner, so that their eyes should see no more such
teachers, nor their ears hear any voice behind them, saying this is the way
walk in it, and so opened the flood gates for all manner of horrible Heresies
to flow in upon them, he powered upon them the spirit of deep sleep, and closed
their eyes, the Prophets, their Rulers, their Seers he covered, so that the
vision of all, became unto them as the words of a book sealed, which if
delivered to their learned men saying read this I pray, they cannot for it is
sealed, if to their ignorant people, saying read this, they cannot, for they
are not learned, it is for their Orthodox Divines, and not for them to read and
expound the Scripture, for as much as the people drew near to God with their
mouth, and with their lips did honor him, with Gloria Patries etc bu^ removed
their hearts far from him, and would have their fear toward him taught by the
precepts of men, therefore the Lord proceeded to do a mavelous work in all
Christ'ndome, yea a mavelous work, a wonder, for the wisdom of their wise
men perished, and the understanding of their prudent men was hid, and the Lord
left them to do their works in the dark, and to turn all things upside down,
and to put a bridle upon the jaws of the people, and ride them from Jerusalem
unto Babylon, even to all manner of Heresy, blindness, and confusion for ages
and generations together.

Lastly to provoke the Pastors to diligence, and watchfulness, to prove them
whether they be hirelings, or not, such as will fly when the wolf comes, or
lay down their lives for the sheep: therefore the Apostle Paul speaking
specially of that very time wherein the insolency, and obstinacy of Heretics,
and Schismatics should increase to such a height as not to endure sound
doctrine, but rather to turn from the truth, and turn to fables, and heap false
teachers to themselves to tickle them up in their lusts, preach down, and act
no patience, but rather persecution toward those that preach up the truth, in
consideration thereof, charges Timothy to whom he left the oversight of the
Church at Ephesus, in order to the making full proof of his ministry, to stand
to it then with so much the more diligence, to preach the word, and be instant
in season, and out of season, to reprove, rebuke and exhort with all long
suffering and doctrine, to watch in all things, endure the afflictions that
should befall him from the hands of wolv^sh spirited men: 2 Timothy 4, 1. ad 8.

And indeed this is that which should move the Pastors of the several
congregations of Christ, and such whom the holy spirit has made Overseers of
that little flock of his in these days, to take good heed both to themselves,
and all that flock; for throw the negligence of the Pastors turning Heretics,
yea wolves themselves in former days, the sheep have been most miserably
misled, and ruled over with force and cruelty; and this will be a proof of
their love to Christ above their lives, if they shall give all diligence to the
feeding of the sheep, and lambs of Christ, not flying for fear of men from that
worthy work, not forbearing, nor shunning to deliver unto them the whole
council of God at this day, though there be so many CCClergy men to croak
against them for it: And here let it be well noted, that whether here, or
wherever throughout this discourse, I dilate on the duty of the Pastors, and
put them on to performance of it, I mean the Pastors of the Churches, which are
commonly called Anabaptists, which are among the Nations as sheep among wolves,
as the lilly among thorns, rent and torn for their Testimony to the Truth, and
not YYYou the P P Priesthood, Y Y You the P P Pastoralty of the Parishes, for
verily he is blind that beholds you not to be no Pastors, but rather H^relings,
yea Wolves, Persecutors then Pastors of the sheep of Christ, yea even you
Presbyterian Pastoralty as well as others.

Indeed you have the boldness to style your selves the Ministers of Christ,
but you are wrapped up in a cloud of confusion and contradiction about the proof
of your Pedigree as from him; yea when its closely quaeried whence you came (I
mean as to your ministerial function, and capacity) seeing you cannot derive
your ordination by a lineal Of which chain of succession of Ministry, if but
one link fail, or chance to be lost, so that it meets with interruption, you
confess, all your Ministry lies on the ground too, and cannot at any hand be
counted valid or raised again: and yet if there was not a breach of that line
in the link of Pope Joan (alias Gilberta an English woman born at Lin, who was
both literally and mystically the Whore of Rome, and therefore far (I wot) from
being a true Presbyter, or Minister of Christ's Church, in which women are
forbid to usurp authority) then my understanding fails me not a little.
succession from the Apostles otherwise, some of you (and I judge the most) do
not deny, but that remotely you receive your orders from the Pope, who (as you
say) not as Pope, but as Presbyier, ordained those Bishops which, not as
Bishops, but as Presbyters ordained you Presbyters (though twill prove but
Pri^sts when all is done, if the Ancients among you consult the common prayer
book, and form of your ordination) a pretty series for the Ministers of Christ
to descend in: why Sirs are you not ashamed of this to cry out against the Pope
as Antichrist, and Rome as an Apostate strump^t, and yet to hold all you have
as a Ministry from, and through these, and that too since they Apostatized from
the truth? shall we think that all Christ's ministers descend lineally from the
loins of Antichrist? ye are witnesses then against your selves that your
Grandfather is the Pope, and so that you descended one, and the same way with
those locusts, even popish Priests, Jesuits, Monks, and Friars and that you
are no better born, as to your being men in holy orders, then the veriest
Scoundrel among them, that depends together with you upon that Hierachy: Mr.
Rutherford says Diotrephes i. e. the Pope is the native Father of the Bishops,
and therefore he must be at least the Grandfather of you Presbyters.

Yet some of you are so ashamed to have it said that, as Ministers of Christ,
you receive your orders, and standing, as such, from Antichrist, that you
profess not to act in your ordinations to, and executions of the ministerial
function as from Gregory the Great, Who by Austin the Monk dispatched an
Ordination hither (with resolution about infants viz. that in case of necessity
they might be baptized) by which ordination men have ever since bin authorized
to ordain here and such as have been ordained to baptize.
but to renounce that, and to ordain now not as Presbyters that were in orders
from such as were in orders from the Pope, but rather as persons deputed so to
do by the ordinances of Parliament, extant to that purpose, and by the power,
and appointment of the Civil Magistrate, who (say you) is he that only has
power to raise all again since the treading down in matter of both Ministry and
Ordinances, and may as well do it with his own hands, if he please, as appoint
you to do it, making him the chief officer that Christ has set in his Church,
to redress all that's amiss in it: such a Mish-mash as this was once more
largely uttered by Mr. Glenden in a discourse at Swevenock in order to the
proving the Ministry of the Church of England to be a true Ministry: But if the
Magistrate were any Church officer (as at all he is not For the civil
Magistracy may reside in women (as is also showed above) who though by Pope
Ioanes example they may yet by Paul's rule they may not usurp authority in the
Church.
) so as that men, that have their orders from his ordinances (as it seems the
Junior Sophisters of this age have) are (as to the outward call or ordination)
true Ministers of Christ, yet that makes nothing to the proving of you to be
so, that stand Ministers of the old stamp, from the hands of the old Lord
Bishops: besides some, yea it may be the most of you that hold your present
authority to ordain from the Parliament, scarce held the Parliament while, it
stood, For now that's put down also, as to the present session, as every power
will be, and that suddenly and with shame, that puts down others for tyranny,
covetousness, unrighteousness, self settlement in greatness, and delay of
justice to poor people that cry for it in these latter days, and yet succeeds
them in the same sins, and in such security as to say, Populus me sibilet, at
mihi plaudo
Ipsa domi simulac nummos contempler in Arca.

of any authority at all since the last new modelling of it, so discontented
were you that your Northern model was in no more request: yea though you held
it such a lawful, and sufficient power, when they made an ordinance for Tith
and Trebble damages, that you held your selves bound in conscience to God, or
rather your own good, to obey it, and improved you selves to the utmost to see
it executed on conscientious delinquents against it, yet when ordinances for
double service came, as solemn fasts (witness that of Iun. 13. 1652.) so
strictly enjoined to be observed by the Ministers of every parish, how many of
you drew your necks out of the collar, as not owning the then Parliament to be
a power, that you might lawfully submit to: thus an ordinance that is charged
topful of benefice you durst venture to let off, but when one came that had
nothing but bare office in the mouth of it, then they, by whose orders you
pretended to stand in both benefice and office, might give order to discharge
it twice, before you would once discharge it.

And as your mere Mongrell Caesarean; Magistratical, Pope-episcopall kind of
Ordination, together with that unworthy un Pastorlike forcible Obtrusion of
your selves as Pastors on people without their free election; so your Popelike
practices and unministerly management of your selves in all other particulars,
does proclaim you plainly to be no true Ministers of Christ's Gospel, nor true
Pastors of the flock, but rather to be Wolves, Thieves, Robbers, Hirelings that
come not in by the door Jesus Christ, but climb into the folds some otherways,
to wit the recommendation of great men and sometimes buying the gift of the
spirit i. e. a spiritual living, yet modestly saying No thrice as the Bishops
when they had given a thousand pound for the place, and improvement of your
interest in your Patrons, and do come into spoil, steal, destroy and serve your
own selves of them as well as you can, while you are with them, and so away
again to make a prey of some other parishes, for verily if you can spy out any
flocks that have better fleeces then other (leaving those you lived with before
to shift for themselves) without their leave, and with the leave of such as
pretend to the power of presentment, you will be their Pastors whether they will or
no: but if any of you be chosen for their churchmen by a poor people that want
a great Benefice for their Cure, they must for you want the Benefit of a Curate.

Yea what maintenance is in this or that vacant parish, which you are harping
after, is one of the main Questions that's about it: yea Ye minister for
maintenance, ye teach for reward, ye preach for hire, ye divine for money, ye
turn the Gosspel into a mere trade, to the learning of which you put men out as
Apprentices about some seven years to the universities, and then allow them (as
free men thereof) to set up for themselves and get as good livings by it as they
can: where you may be sure of sufficient wages, you will tell men a little of
the truth, and truly it is not much of it that you know, but you care not how
little you preach of that little you have to preach, where you can hope to have
but little pay for your pains.

Woe to ye O ye National PPPriesthood, it is too too eviden that you are not the
Shepherds of the sheep, yea you are the idol-shepheards, that leave the flock
to provide for your selves, not regarding their welfare, when by slincking away
from them you can provide but a little better for your own: you are (except is
excipiendis) saving some few hundreds among many thousands, Hirelings' that
flee to prefer, better, secure, advance, or advantage your selves, because you
are Hirelings, and care not for the sheep: you are Pastore that are become
brutish, you have not sought the Lord, but your selves for the most part,
therefore shall ye not prosper, but your sheep shall be scattered away from you
Ier. 10. yea verily you drive them from you daily more and more, not only by
many pieces of your dry divinity but specially with your terrible doctrine of
trebble damages, in which you drive so furiouslly upon them, that you drive
them both out of your doors, and their own also: you have an evil eye of
covetuousnesse, and greediness upon the tenth of every man's substance, and
therefore you loose no time, while the law of man favors you in it, though not
the man Christ Jesus, and spare no pains, but take, scrape, strive, streign,
ride, run, rake, wrangle, weary out your selves and neighbors, and all Courts
and Committees, in City and Country to have something out of every thing, for
doing worse then nothing, till you not only trebbly endamage, but totally undo
many poor men's wives and childrens bodies, and your own souls too (except ye
repent, little considering that an inheritance gotten hastily in the beginning,
shall not be blessed in the end; you devour widows houses, and for a pretense
make long prayers, and therefore will receive greater damnation; you Tith I
mean take tith, for you pay none,
mint and rue, and all manner of herbs, corn of which you have the fifth not the
tenth, if the husbandmans charges be all considered.
, lamb, wool, milk, eggs, calves, pigs, apples, pears, plums, flax, hey,
hens, hops, hemp, wood, houses, cum mult is aliis, quae nunc praescribere
longum est, either in kind, or pecunialiter, but you pass over judgment,
mercy, faith, and the weighty matters of Christ's law* you eat the fat, and
cloth your selves with the wool, and kill them that are fed, but you feed not
the flock; you even flea the very flesh from men's bones, for your un-dues, and
that such men too sometimes, whom your selves are, so far from teaching, that
you have need to learn of them, which be the first principles of the oracles of
God: you feed your people with words, but not with the word: you strengthen not
the diseased, but strengthen them in their diseases; you strengthen the hands
of the wicked, that they do not return from their wickedness, and discourage
the hearts of the righteous: you run from place to place, parish to parish,
parsonage to parsonage, pretending you have Christ's call from this to that,
when the loadstone that leads you is the love of lucre: and when you are about
to leave one living for the love of another, you often dance a while between
both, serving them by turns, by the halves, till the half year be expired, that
you may have your half years hire from both places, and when you take your
leave of the flock, which you fleec't before, then what a deal of do there is
to part, and such scrape sometimes, as if it went to the hearts of you, that
you must forsake them; then there is farewell speeches, farewell Sermons,
farewell all at once, once for all, the Lord be with you, and such like; but
the devil may take them all, and be their minister if he will for you, if you
can but get Christ's call to a bigger living, or some more emolumentall
employment:

And howbeit, you parish PPPastors can give your selves a dispensation from
Christ to run away (for selfs sake) when you please from your flocks, yet if
any of your flocks run away from you (for Christ's sake) to other Pastors, many
of you take o^ heavily at this, saying it is a most miserable thing, that when
you have converted them, and been a means of opening their eyes If you were not
blind your selves, you would gather thus much from that, viz. that while men
are blind they sat under your ministry, but when once they begin clearly to
see, they can see no ground to sit under you any longer.
, they should presently run away from your ministry: you may separate your
selves it seems without sin from them, for more Tith, but if they separate
themselves from you for more Truth, this is such a high piece of Schism, and
iniquity in the Church, as deserves to be sharply censured by the State, at
least if they abide not in all conformity to the cry of your wide mouthd
coffers? which if they do there is so much the more content: yea let them run to
what Pastors they will, so they still stand Paymasters to you, for what said
one even what many more of you proclaim is in your minds, by your mindlesseness
of ministering to men in spiritual things, any farther then they minister to you
in carnal viz let them run to the devil if they will quoth he) (for so you
judge they do when they run from you to God) so they will but pay us our
tithes. How justly may even England say as Isaiah said of Israel of old Isa.
56. 10. 11. 12. his watchmen are all blind, they are dumb dogs that cannot
bark, (but bite they can bitterly if men put no into their mouths) sleeping,
lying down, loving to slumber, greedy dogs that never have enough, all looking
to their own way; every one to his gain from his quarter:

And as you can shift and flee from flock to flock, and stand in several
livings one after another, and some of you in two or three togetherin the same
creeds, catechisms, forms of worship, Government etc. for your own earthly
ends, and emoluments, so can you stand under several postures, practices,
creeds, catechisms, forms of worship, government in the same livings rather
then lose them, when time and tide turns so strongly upon you, as to turn you
out of your places, if you turn not with it.

Yea verily you are the most subtle, shifting, sinful, shameful, shuffling,
self Saviors (some few still excepted, for those that know their innocence in
this, I speak not of them, but if any men's consciences tell them, I speak of
them, I speak of them indeed) from suffering joyfully the spoiling of your
goods, turning out of your houses, in the troublous turns of times, for your
professed conscience scruples, that are to be found throughout the earth: hence
it is that you are generally quiet under the absence of that which you strictly
pleaded for as truth, while it stood, and under the establishment of that which
you styled, and stickled against as error, till it was set up, when the remove
was made by the hand of that authority, that was like to remove you out of your
places if you sided not with it: you suspend the removal of known corruptions,
and practice of known truths many times, unless the whole state will move all
in a body with you, and unless all men may be made to march your way by
Canons, Ordinaces and Acts, yea one order for this or that from the Rulers has
often given you a more clear sight of some things you seemd not to see before
in an hour, then bare reason would have done in a year: from your Masters to
you, as well as to your servants from you stat pro ratione voluntas.

Hence it is that the same persons could ever serve the nations in the office
of Priesthood under powers never so different, never so contradictory one to
other in principles, postures, practices, government, discipline, liturgies,
forms, Creeds, Catechisms, when there was no other remedy, though till the
sword decided it there was nothing, but deadly implacability,
irreconcileablenesse to each others ways, maugre all that the word could do
among you: witness the case of Common prayer, which many of you saw to be a
corruption, yet kept to it while it was dangerous to decline it, and till
Authority took it away; what Authority had to do to take it away by force from
them, whose conscience, being blinded, persuaded them they ought to use it, I
leave to authority to examine, yet sure I am that Authority has no Authority
from God, if it be a corruption, to excuse, empower or authorize any one to
practice it without sin, for so much as but an hour; and many of you, that
could not see it to be any corruption at all, but rather such a thing as would
pluck up all Religion by the roots, till such time as Authority did remove i^
under that name, on pain of five and ten pounds forfeiture to them that used
it, did then see it a corruption, and embraced the Directory in its stead, and
did not sleep, as before, but were changed in a moment; yea we cannot be
ignorant (for who so blind as they that cannot see what they cannot but see) of
the Protaean practices of you Priesthood, who since the new moulding of things
here in E^gland from the depth of Popish darkness, have been the most self
preserving sect as is to be seen this day in the world, keeping together
Catervatim in covents, Counsels, Classes, and as trooping, so trumpeting
together for the most part in one tone according to the tempers of the Princes
in whose times you happened to be trained up, or have a being in, against all
that as Heresy which you saw the Higher Powers, or general Assemblies of the
Kirk directing, and State correcting, would have so, and (saving some few still
among as well the Popish, as Prelatick, and Presbyterian Priests (for its a
hard case, if there be never a conscientious Priest at Rome) that would say
otherwise then you all said) saying and unsaying, seeing and unseeing, turning
and returning changing and unchanging. singing a new song, and unsinging it
again, agreeing to speak with one mouth like the Prophets that Prophesied
before Ahab 1 Kin. 22. 13. who all, save one Micaiah, said but one thing, and
nothing still but good, good to please the King: so that whereas of old it was
throughout all Christendom like Priest, like Prince, like People (the heart of
all Kingly power being hammered to the will of the Whore, with whom it was
enamoured, Ahab being not a little overwiv'd by Iezebell that stole the
breeches from him while he lay in bed with her, and ran a whoring after her
from the Lord) so now since the civil Powers in these parts are resolved to be
suprem, and to be no more such underlings, as to crouch any further then
Consultative about religion to any of the three parts of the Tripple Crown, you
the Priesthood seeing all your Pomp depend upon your obedience to the Sic volo,
Sic jubeo of King Henry and his Successors, it has been here like Prince, like
Priest, like People; me thinks I here you say, O ye time-serving, Prince
Pleasing Priesthood, Tempora mutantur and nos mutamur in illis; let us have our
fees, the fleece, and let the flock feed how they will. Kings, Popes, or
People, which ere Supreme do sit,
May let Religion be as you think fit:


We cannot but be aware, unless we will wink, how the body of you the
Priesthood have, for livings sake, like reeds in the tide leaned this way and
that way, even which way soever the waters have turned, and stood under K.
Henry Papists, under K. Edward Protestants, under Q. Mary Papists, under Q.
Elizabeth, and K. James Protestants, and though you were ever eager for that
form of Government and Worship still that was in present being, pleading the
truth of it, as if you would have lost your lives rather then left it, crying
out that Religion it self was taken away if that were not continued, as of old
for Mass, and Popes supremacy, and more lately for Common prayer and
Episcopacy, and more lately yet for a Synodian Supremacy, and Scottish
Directory, yet like children crying for the loss of some Gaudy Hornbook, or
Gilded Primmer, a new Book, a new Psalter and Festraw, a New Testament or Will
of the State straight stops your mouths, so that any form else, if it be an
indifferent Independency may serve the turn, specially when you judge it may
cost you a whipping, if you grumble and conform not.

Thus whilst truly tender spirits like a few harmless flies are caught in the
Cobwebs of men's laws about Religion, the Spider creeps clear over all, and
lives it out under Papacy, Prelacy, Piesbytery, under commands of King,
Parliament, and Army, under the impositions of Mass, Liturgy, Directory, and
should a law be made (as I desire of the powers there never may) for conformity
to the true form indeed, may as well (for ought I know) begin again with the
Baptists in the principles or A B C of Christ's doctrine Heb. 6. 1, 2. and
primitive practice.

You profess (you Protestant Priests) to be Reformers in these times, and
places, and bringers back of Gods people from Babylon to Sion, but verily you
hold them back from Returning so fast, and so far homeward to the truth, as
some do, and more would do, were it not for you, who rather rap them in, then
help them on that run faster, then your coveteotis turns can afford them to do
in this work of reforming bythe word, yea you are the greatest hinderers and
retarders that are, of that perfect reformation of all things according to the
plain pattern of the word, which yet upon several occasions since Protestanism
came up you have protested for your selves, and also pressed, not to say (what
in you lies) forced, all people to protest for with you.

How is it else that men, when they pass but a little from you Watchmen, find
him who their souls love, and being first a shamed of your, and their
abominations, while by implicit faith they dwelt under the shadow of your
Ministry, see the form, and fashion, the commings in and goings out, and even
all the ordinances and the laws of Christ's house, and keep and do them in some
measure, and not tarrying for man, Mic. 5. 7. nor waiting for the Sons of men,
are, if not fully reformed, yet daily reforming according to their covenant,
viz. the word of God and example of the best reformed Churches, viz. Iudaea,
Rome in her first and true glory, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Plilippi, Colosse,
Thessalonica etc.

Yet you, even you Watchmen are blind, and found beating; and abusing the
spouse, for her inquiries, and sit like a company of Black Ravens or Rooks in a
mist, gaping after what way the whole body will take their flight, before any
Individual, though never so clear in discovery of the right, dare once move
from his standing before his fellows: you wait one upon another Sperantes
omnes in singulis, singuli in omnibus for light but behold obsurity, for
brightness but you walk in darkness.

You groap for the way like the blind, like them that have no eyes, calling out
help King, help Houses, help Counsels, help Neighbor Nations, help Brethren
of Scotland, from all which because they are men, and not God, flesh, and not
spirit, there comes no help at all, save help to Gods people against you, and
such help too, that he that helps you shall fall, and you that are helped
shall fall down, and you shall all fall together and none deliver. You are
sworn as well as we in the sight of both God and men to reform according to the
word, and that word is nigh enough, even in your mother tongue, bibles, hearts
and mouths, viz. the word of faith which we preach:

Neither is it far off you unless your shutting your eyes against it, and
putting it away from you, has engaged the Lord to shut up your eyes, and put
it f^rther, so that because seeing you would not see, thereupon seeing you
shall not: You have also promise enough from Christ to know his will in his
word if you look to him only and to it:

Yet you say, who shall go up to heaven to bring Christ down to us again? who
shall descend into the deep tobringChrist to us from the dead? who shall go
beyond the Sea for us, viz. Holland, Germany, etc. and bring the word unto us,
that we may hear it and do it? who shall go into Scotland and brings us a
directory and platform of government from them? You swear to reform after the
example of the best reformed Churches, but you mean of Europe, not of Asia
sure, not the congregations you read of in the word, but the Nations you dote
on in the world viz. Scotland, Holland, Denmark, Swethland, Germany etc. which
all qua Nations (excepting such in them as truly fear God and worship him
answerably to his will) are together with this, till they be converted to the
faith by the spiritual and the civil sword, and then (not in nonage) baptized
(not sprinkled) in ^he name of Christ, with confession, and for remission of
sins, and then walk in free (not forced) fellowship in breaking bread and
prayers, are as far in sano sensu from the denomination of true Churches, and
have as much need of reforming, as our selves. Indeed you talk of Church, of
Orthodoxnes and reformation, as the thing much desired, making them the
Heretics and Schismatics that side not with you: see Baxt. p. 151. We prayed
for reformation, and the progressr of the Gospel, we fasted and mourned, and
cried to God, we waited and long^d for it more then for any worldly possession;
indeed we overvalued it, and had too sweet thoughts of it, as if it had been
our heaven, and rest, therefore it is just in God to suffer these men (meaning
the Anabaptists) to destroy our hopes, and if they root the Gospel quite out of
England its just in God, but yet we hope they shall be but our scourges, and
that God is but teaching us the evil of their Schisms etc.

But Sirs, what is that hoped for reformation of yours, the pure Gospel you
Presbyters so much talk of, which those that hinder and hold not with you in,
are all sentenced for Schismatics ipso facto: for my part I could never find
what reformation more in ordinances, discipline, doctrine and government, you
Presbyterian Priesthood aimd at, then establishment of the Scottish faith and
the removal of the Bishops, and their superstitious Clergy as they removed the
Popish before out of place, that themselves might reign as tyrannically in
their steads; the pulling down of red glass windows, and placing of white, the
knocking down of Fonts, and setting up Basins to Rantize in, the forcing the
fathers to say the same at the Font, that the Godfathers did in old time, the
observation of your own directory instead of the old liturgy, giving the supper
to none at all (for most riged Presbyters have denied that to their whole
parishes this seven year) instead of giving it promis^uously to all, levelling
the maintenance of the Nations ministry, so that every one may have a
competency of an 100d per annum; and not some all, some none as in old'n time,
and a few such trivial translations, in which the Gospel is no more promoted,
reformation according to the primitive faith and baptism far less furthered,
then it would be, if never a penny might more be paid to the Priests that
preach for hire while the world stands, such a reformation indeed you have
generally overvalued, therefore its justice in God to you, and mercy to the
whole land, to suffer his people to prosper in their preachings of the truth to
the utter destroying of your hopes, which if they were not more after worldly
possessions in many of you that settled your selves in 100ds per annum by the
shift, then after that which is truth indeed, twill be the better for you
another time, but I testify it to the faces of you that for all your prayings,
and fastings, and mournings, and cryings to God, and waitings, and longings for
Reformation, you are the fiercest opposers of the primitive practice under
heaven.

It Is true you CCClergy are some more reformed then some, you differ each from
other as Papal, Prelatick, Presbyterian, facing each other a squint as the
three corners in a Triangle falling out, and contending bitterly with one
another about your own false ways, yet camna utentes facundia, concurring to
ba^k altogether against the true: yea even you Protestant Priests, yea you
Presbyte^ that pretend more strictly and peculiarly to the title of Preachers,
and Presb^ of the truth, and more serious searchers after it in prayer and
supplication, are together with the flat Popish Priests gross hiders of the
truth as it is in Jesus, for the revealing of which to your selves, you seem
(and that sometimes with fasting) earnestly to pray to God, and for the
revealing of which to them in preaching you seem (and that sometimes Iure
divino) to take pay from men.

You cry mightily indeed after knowledge, and lift up your voices for
understand^ng, saying, Lord direct us more and more into the way of truth, for
we are blind and ignorant, and in the dark, neither know we what to do, but our
eyes are to thee, give us pure ordinances, show us the right way etc. but if in
any of your public places never so soon after your prayers the Lord stir up
the spirits of any of the m^ssengers of his Churches, that go forth in power,
and plainness of speech, to make offer of any question or further information,
you are so far from that candor, which the Rulers of the Jewish Synagogues used
in this case A^t. 13. and from saying men and brethren if you have any word of
exhortation to the people say on, that you rather rate them as dogs out of
doors, with what make you here to disturb us? we must have an order taken with
you to make you hold your peace, and such like rough repulses, as 100ds of
people know are used, by more then one of you Querists after truth, and yet you
tell us of running into corners, as refusing, and unwilling to be be openly
examined; and tell your people that veritas non quaerit A^gulos see Featley p.
167 and that we creep into houses, as if we were ashamed to come out into your
public assemblies, though we tell you ore and ore again, that as it is more for
want of your leave, then our love so to do, that we do not tell the truth there
before your faces, so our meetings, when in private houses, are more public
then yours, when in public places, by how much where ere we are, and what ere
we say, we submit not only to your access, but your exception also, as you,
though in public, do not to ours.

You profess your selves desirous to have all things come to light before all,
that all things may be proved by your people, and indeed, though he that does
evil hates the light, neither ^ometh to the light lest his deeds should be
reproved, John 3. 21. 22, yet he that does truth comes to the light that his
deeds might be made manifest, that they are wrought in God, yet the means and
courses by which truth should be tried, which are plain and not puzzling
discourses upon the Scripture, you smother by all the means and courses you can
conveniently devise, as for any entire discourses of such as are contrary
minded to you, though teachers of truth as it is in the word, these you cannot
away with at any hand, not permit to be used in public before the people,
while you have any powar to shut your pulpit doors upon them you bid your
people now or then prove all things, that they may find out which is good, and
shun the evil, but by your good-evil will they shall hear no more then what you
tell them, and choose whether they will take that for truth or nothing, you bid
them cut where they like, and yet you will be their carvers, and force them to
feed upon what you offer them or fast, and welcome, for no more messes must be
meddled with, though they have never such a mind to cut and try, then what is
of your dressing, and that often is no more then some sugar spot, sententious
Academical, bespangled, hide bound, glass measured, spirit stinting stuff,
which may challenge the name of duncery, baldness, babbling and prating, more
then that sincere milk of the word you commonly call so, which hour of divinity
when you have bookt down and cond with no little care, is many times but Sed,
and sometimes but Red ore when alls done neither: yet often times you crow
courageously upon your own dunghill, you pay it soundly in your own pulpits with
convincing, and opposing the approach of heresies, and argue so substantially
against them that you carry the cause, and win all, but it is because you play
there by your selves; for if any chance to hear you, that has never so much
wherewith to undeceive your deluded people, yet they may not receive his
interrupted reply to never so little: when you in the first place have pleaded
your cause, the next thing to be done is for all them, that hear and have ought
against you to hold their peace; they must not andere audire alteram partem
least they be infected, though wise men know there is no other way to be
perfected in the knowledge of the truth, and freed from that hobnob implicit
faith, which is wrongly acted, when rightly objected, then by hearing all that
is to be said against it as well as for it; yea the heathen herein may be thy
Tutor, O PPPriest, Qui statuit aliquid etc.

You cry out they are not Orthodox that oppose you, and so forbid all audience
of them to your people, whom you feed with a word and a blow, a bit and a
knock, lest if they be not as well corrected into a refusal of all direction
from others, as directed by your selves, they quickly discern difference
between you and them: yet you would fain be counted free and forward, that all
should have liberty according to their duty to try all but the niggard shall
never be called liberal, nor the churl said to be ^ountiful for me, for he
devises not the liberal things, whereby the liberal shall stand, yea the
instruments of the churl are evil, and he devises wicked devices, to destry
the poor with lying words, when the needy spoaketh right things: yea his heart
works iniquity, to practice hypocrisy, and to utter error before the Lord, to
make empty the soul of the hungry, and to cause the drink of the thirsty to
fail, Isa. 32. 5. 6. 7. 8.

As for pro and con discourse, or disputation, you smother that likewise with
all your might, for as you desire no more of it then needs must, so you decline
it what you can, and disclaim it too, as far as you dare for shame be seen in
such a service as disputing against disputing is declaiming against it as a
dismal thing of some dangerous consequence, poison, means of infection,
contentionem, scabiem and such like: being sensible of your sores you come not
to the stake to be questioned in your ways before your blind admirers, but
when you cannot with credit (considering your over shooting your selves
sometimes in hasty challenges) make a cleanly come off without it, though it be
to meet with those that are inferior to your selves, save that the Lord is
with them; for surely you see somewhat further then a mole into a millstone,
that things are no better with you then they should be, why else should there
be such loathnesse (like that of the Elephant, that's loath to drink in fair
waters for fear of seeing a foul face) to come to the light, as we find there
is in the most of you, as well as in Dr. Gouge, who would at no hand vouchsafe
any public discussion of insant-sprinkling, whether it were of God or man nec
per se, ne per synodum, in his parish with Dr. Chamberlain: yet sometimes
Euphoniae gratia for reports sake you make some pretty put offs in public, and
put on tooth and nail for disputation, but alas you curtail it into so narrow a
compass, as namely half a day, two hours, or some odd end of an afternoon,
when two days is too little, two weeks scarce enough, two years not too much
to discuss the truth in; witness not only Jude, who bids the Saints of the
last times (saving Tertullian, and Sir Henry Wottons dislike out) contend for
the faith once delivered to the Saints, and Paul, who for 2 years space
disputed daily in the School of one Tyrannus (not such a Tyrant to the truth as
you are, it seems, for if he had he would have admitted not a word out) you
confine it I say into such a corner of time, that as Pilate asked what is truth?
and, when he had so said, went his way without an answer, so you have to have
an end, not hearing half the half quarter that is to be said, in opposition to
your own opinions about that question: And during that little while the business
lasts, you carry all as much as you can above the reach, and beyond the
capacity of plain minded men and women that come together for resolution, in
Scholastic terms, and conclave it from their cognizance under the lock and key
of your Linsey wolsey Logic, which is neither fine enough for the University,
from which you have a while discontinued, nor homespun enough for the Country;
which muddy way of mood and figure, is neither suitable to the simplicity and
plainess of speech in which the Gospel ought to be declared, and discussed, nor
reasonable to reason in with Russet Rabbis, that are otherwise reasonable
enough to give you such reasons of their faith and practice, as you can never
rationally resist; nor is it much more profitable to our honest hearted people
then if you spoke wild Irish.

And when you have done then you smother and cloud over all, that was more
plainly and punctually answered, and uttered to you on truths behalf, in some
true counterfeit Account or other, in many, if not most of which ways this
Ashford D^spute, as I have already showed before, both was, and was designed to
be smothered.

Thus like the fish Caepia, when you are like to be caught with playing too
near the mouth of plain truth, you cast a flood of ink behind you, and darken
all that's done, and like the Lizard, making good prints with your feet, putting
on as fair pretenses as may be, of willingness to try, and have all things
seen as they are, upon the forepart of your work, and then dashing all out with
your tail, and blurring all ore again with with some after and hinder part
practices, whereby to hinder the truth still from taking place in the spirits
of the people.

As your Fathers have done before you for ages and generations together, so do
your selves in this point, and more too not a few, Their delight was to hide
their counsels, and to do their works in the dark, that they might say who
sees and who knows us?

Yea the whole Creation of you out of the Chaos of Romes Catholicon, have been
a very race of Smotherers, that have cried down truth as Heresy, Saints as
Schismatics, their tenderness as stubbornness, their serviceablenesse to
Christ as selfishnesse, separation from your superstitions, and corrupt
communions, as Sectarism, singularity; perseverance in Christ's way, without
turning back to the flesh pots of Egypt, as obstinacy and will fullness,
Church meetings as Conventicles, Church Messengers, who are Christ's true
Ministers to the world even to the end of it, approving themselves as so, (as
few of you do) in much patience, in tumults etc. reducing men to primitive
pureness of faith, fellowship, worship, baptism, Supper, life, as Fools,
Bedlams, Juglers, Seducers, Seditious, Tumultuous, deservedly round and rough
reprovings of you who, are more then any men hardened in your abominations, as
Elias, John, Christ and others did them that were like you, disgracing,
tailing, reviling, the one and only true baptism as Anabaptism, baseness,
Enthusiasm, Scripture searching by the Laity, the only way of Christ's own
appointment for all men to come to acquaintance with him by, as meddling more
then needs, Scripture opening by the illiterate Weaver, Tailor, Shoemaker,
Soldier, upon whom the spirit, that only makes a preacher, may as soon blow
as upon a Scholar, a means to multiply errors.

And thus what you Popish would smother in an unknown tongue, you English P
Priesthood, who deliver it from that, would more subtly smother in a known,
whilst how far soever men see into the word, yet they must see and say
nothing, or presume to see no farther, nor practice any faster than the Priest.

Yea to show how little you degenerate from him, you even fill up the measure
of your Father the Pope, that wrath may come upon you all to the utmost, whilst
in these last breakings forth of light from all that smother, wherewith
Synodicall constitution has overcast it, even since your own separation from
Rome, you damn it all by whole sale for darkness; ye are therefore of your
Father Abadd^n, and the works of that Father of yours ye do, he was a Smotherer
from his beginning, and neither could abide in, nor can yet abide the truth,
because there is no truth in him, he opened the bottomless pit, and raised up
such a smoke of traditions, Ceremonies, Canons, Calumnies, lies, nicknames,
misrepresentations of things to the world, as the smoke of a great furnace, to
the darkning of the sun and the air, when he speaks a ly, he speaks of his own,
for he is a liar, and next to the devil the Father of it, when he smothers
that which should come to light, he acts most like himself, for he is a
Smotherer also, and the father of that practice.

Wherefore also as beloved that curse, even darkness, dryness, and smother so
it is come unto him and his CCClergy, as he delighted not in the blessing of
light, so it is far from him, as he clothed himself, and his with smoke, and
smother like as with a garment so it is come into his very bowels, and like
oil into his bones, it must be to him as the garment that covers him, and
for a girdle wherewith he must be girded; this is the Reward of that Adversary
from the lord, and of all that speak evil with him against the truth.

Thus God has lose you in his just severity to wander in by ways, and to be
lost in the laborinth of your learned Legands, till you be all moped, and s^red
even in the works of your own hands, and smothered to blindness by your own
smoke, because when you should have Fathered and Mothered the Gospel, so as to
have brought it out in its primitive, native, beauty, and brightness, you
CCClergy men have been the generation in all ages of your reign, that have
murdered and smothered it in the world.

And instead of Patronizing the truth, and its professors and promoters you
have belyed, blasphemed both by the terms of Heresy, Heretics, and worse;
witness Featly specially, who from a few feats of some few mad men, or rather
Monsters of Manster, and other place, (hapily like to our English mad braind
Ranters, whose rudeness is in reason no reproach to us, since the way of
baptism, and Church Membership we walk in (which these either never owned or
abode not in) allows not, but is more at odds with open wickedness, then any
other ways whatever) who I say from some particular pranks of one John of
Leyden and his compeares, that is no more kin to us, then one Joan of Lin is to
the whole CCClergy, denominates all the Baptists, whom he yoaks together with
them under the nickname Anabaptists, an Impure and carnal sect, a cruel and
bloody sect, a profane and sacrilegious sect, a lying and blasphemous sect, an
illiterate and sottish sect, all how truly it agrees to those men of Munster
and their Chi^ftan John of Leyden, it matters not, but I am sure as much as you
wipe your mouths and shift it of from your selves to the people of God that
walk in the truth of the Gospel, yet there is no generation of men upon earth
whom it all lays more claim to then the PPPreisthood of the Nations.

Forfirst though you style your selves the Spirituality, and holy men of God,
you are a race of men (exceptis excipiendis, still setting a side those few,
even all such whose consciences do not check them of too little chastity) more
corporally carnal then every body knows on: yea saving the holiness that you
have in a black box, derived from his Holiness the Pope, whose holiness all
your holiness of that kind hangs on, and from the date of which the name of
Spiritualty also i spilt upon you throughout Christendom, from him who thinks
he has, by a promise to P^ter, the fatherhood of the Clergy, as much as
Abraham the fatherhood of the faithful, I believe it is not for nothing, nor
without special respect, as well to the corporal, as spiritual whoredoms and
filthynesse residing within your Skirts that the great CCCity BBBabylon that
reigns over the kings of the earth, or WWWoman sitting upon the Beast, or
many waters, i. e. tongues, nations, people of Christendom in three PPParts,
is styled the great WWWhore, and Mother of Harlots, and SSSodome, also as well
as AeAeAegypt: neither does she only seduce Christ's people to commit
fornication, and eat things sacrificed to id^ls, i. e. to run a whoring in
worship, and do things that way abominable unto God, but she is an adulteress,
in respect of her fleshly whoredoms also: as for the old Brothel or Italian
Joan, i. e. the Popes Cardinals, and the Catholic Clergy that still retain
their integrity to their Lord God the Pope, from whom you younger Brethren the
P Protestant Clergy are rent in Twain, retaining yet that Clergyship and
baptism, which you had from them, she is so base all over from top to toe,
having no found part, that you two that have no other spiritual being (as to
your holy orders) but what you have from her, do cry out of her your selves for
a whore in grain, as well you may, when, if we search the Series of the holy
Chairmen, Spec. Romans Pontisi. p. 91. to 111. Thirteen were adulterers, Three
common Brothellers, Four Incestuous Whoremongers, Eleven impoisond with vile
Sodomy, Seven erectors of Brothell houses, whereof every Iillia was to pay
weekly a Julian (or ^er a Iillian) penny to the Pope, which came often to four
thousand Ducats per annu^, One an arrant whore her self, viz. Pope Joan, alias
Gilberta an English woman born at Lyn, who being two years and a half Pope, at
last dyed in childbed openly in the high street of Rome, going on public
procession by the way to the Church of St. John de Lateran so discovering her
filthynesse; in memory whereof they go not in procession that way where this
most holy Father-Mother dyed, but round about another way.

Besides how chaste the other Priests are of this Italian Sea, their laws,
privily permitting them to have concubines, but not wives do declare Nicholas
the first was (I think) the first that prohibited the Clergy marriage saying
that it was more honest to have to do with many women privately then openly to
take one ^fe: Insomuch that a Priest of Placentia being accused to have a wife
and children, was deprived of his Benefice: but proving the said woman to be
the wife of another m^n, and his conebine only, he was again restored Helin p.
183.
, by the indulgence of which law very likely it was that one of the Popes
Legates here in England 1129, John Cremernsis by name, when he had disputed all
day at London for the Chastity of Priests ad ravim et sudorem, was found that
very night in bed with a whore: and how pure the Nuns and Friars kept
themselves from butchery and bawdery, the innumerable skuls of infants, that
have bin found in moted Abbeys since the demolishing of them here in England
sufficiently testify: so that u^lesse the Ranter Rant it higher when he comes
to the height of his spiritual sensuality, whose lascivious ways many will
follow and fall off to from the true Churches of the Baptists, maugre all means
to hold them in, yet the Churches themselves (to which therefore it is not to be
imputed) are modesty in the abstract to that public Pandor: as for you two
mystical Mistresses the PProtestant PPr^sts, who tumbled both together in the
belly of that old Bawd or Mystery Babil^n, and made one with her, till her time
came to break in PPPieces, and are yet scarce wholly weaned from her breasts;
it is true you are far more modest then she, for you neither permit stews, nor
prohibit marriage of one as they do, that they may be free to more, nor set
rates upon Venery as she does, neither are so bad by as many degrees, as you
are younger in years; yet are you so bad that way that neither all the white
surplices, nor black superfluityes you use to cover your nakedness with, will
either cleanse your consciences from the guilt, or your reputation from the
stain of carnal impurity, so that it may be said of you as of Isreal's
Priesthood of old, Zoph, 3. 4. her Prophets are light and treacherous persons:
Indeed you desire to walk in long Robes, and therefore made provision in one
Canon that every Priest must wear a long gown, or canonical coat, unless he
were one that was unable to go to the price out, and then your Wisdoms enacted
(but necessity needs no law) a law of liberty to wear a short one, well knowing
that, as short as the Curates coat was, it would be long enough ere his silken
non-resident Rabbi would allow him money to buy a longer, yea you make broad
shows in garments distinct from the vulgar, and all Laics, as if you were the
only men that did (...) or keep the law, yea you love the uppermost rooms at
feasts, and chiefest places in the synagogues, and to be called of men Rabbi,
and therefore got a certain impropriation of the Black Garb to your selves,
that you might be known from Russet Rabbis, and reverenced above them, as men
of God, spiritual men, holy fathers, when yet such has been the rioting and
drunkenness, chambring and wantonness, as well as strife and cavying of the
most part of you Painted sepulchers, that few of you have been either pure, or
holy, or sober, or spiritual, or godly minded men indeed, as does appear to
all, by the several centuries of censured Clergy men, since this Parliament,
put out at one place, and popt in at another, few of which could be much
capable of Divine Irradiations, having such impure minds, and unchaste bodies,
for the pure in heart only can see Gods face M^. 5. Heb. 12. and yet how bad
you are, if all were known, as much as some then was, neither do I know, ^or
yet they, who began to cleanse the* A^gaean stable here in England, but this I
may safely say, that ^fejection be the due of such, and if every Spiritual man
that is a carnal, luxurious wanton had his due too, 1000s of the present
Priesthood might go whistle for their T^the;, and their people go sing for so
fair a way, as would thereby be made, toward their having the truth taught
them, as it is in Jesus, for little, o^ nothing but acceptance from the
mess^ngers of the Churches.

Secondly, as for cruelty and blood, Dr. F^at. himself more calls, then clears
the Anabaptists to be guilty in that kind; for he brings nothing in proof out,
but a tale or two of a tub with the bottom out, viz. of 40000 of them in Suevia
and Franconia, that at their first risi^g killed all the Nobles and Gentry
there, that made head against them That there should be 40000 dipped disciples,
at the first beginning of them too, shall be no article of my faith, who find
an increase but to a few 1000s of such here in England, under no loss then
seven years talking of this truth, and find men more refusing to be baptized at
all in truth, then forward to be baptized ore again: yea in this English
Sectarian army of Anabaptists, as its termed by you Priests, who have a habit
of naming all men Anabaptists, whether baptized or no, that are up in lawful
arms for the civil rights and liberties of the people, against those Priests
and Princes that have destroyed them, it is to be feared there is not one of an 100
did ever own Christ so far yet, as to be baptized.
; also of one brother that killed another, and of one John Matthias that for an
abuse caused a man to be condemned to death, and then executed him, and of one
John a Leyden that accused a man of high treason, and cut off his head, and at
another time one of his wives heads, these are his most remarkable observations
of the bloodiness of the Anabaptists, for if he could have brought more, or
more clear you should undoubtedly have had them.

By these few instances (quoth he) as it were ^x simbria de textu by the list
and selvedg you may judge how deeply the cloth is died in blood: but alas what is
all this to a sight of the cloth it self? what a small show of blood is here to
that of the WWWoman, which John saw, and he is blind that sees not now sitting
upon a Scarlet colored beast, araid her self also in scarlet i. e. died red,
red to drunk^ness with the blood of the Saints, and the blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus, spiritually called BBBabilon and Egypt for cruelty to Gods Israel,
reigning in wrath and rigor in three PPParts or Tyrannical forms of governmet
ore Kings and people, deceiving all nations to drink so deep of the wine of the
wrath of the her fornications, as to be drunk with wrath against the Saints,
and in their drunkeness, at HHHer will to push and gore them with ten horns, to
execute cruelty on them for truths sake, and try them to the tyring of
themselves with cruel mockings, scourgings, bonds, imprisonments, stonings,
sawings, burnings, hangings, headings, and with such geer as Feat. himself (as
if by his own pen he would prove the PPPriesthood, and their people to be men
of blood) confesses that the Anti-baptists have inflicted upon the Anabaptists
p 68. 182, 183. and for which they had no warrant from Christ, viz. drowning,
racking, fleaing, stabbing, tearing with hot pincers, and (to use his own
phrase) the severest punishments they could devise?

And finally in which WWWoman is found the blood not only of persecution, of
Martyrs, and Prophets, but of war also, and of all them that are slain upon
earth; for all this verily will be seen at last to ly hid in her Scholastic
skirts, Rev. 18. 24.

As for the Pope and his Clergy (fas est vel ab host doceri) both by Featley,
and others it is asserted, and that truly, that the devil by him and his
adherents, has acted such bloody persecutions against the true servants of
God, and maintainers of the Orthodox faith, as together with such other
exploits of Satan, and his agents as he there names, has been the ruin of
Millions of men: all which is very true of them, yet not only the Italian
Seminaries, but our British Seminaries also have been such stirrers up of
strife between and within these nations about worships, Governments, Covenants
for the same form, and faith, to the shedding of the blood of thousands in war,
and such sowers, cum sanguine Martyrum, semine Ecclesiae, that though I know
the wrath of the CCClergy has wrought his praise and his peoples peace, so far
that be will restrain the remainder thereof, Yet I can more bewail then either
you avoid; or I avert, that blood which the Lord, that is righteous in judging
thus, will give you to drink, except you repent of your cruelty to consciences,
and to the carcasses of men for their conscience sakes, and your pitiless
inexorablenesse toward others in the self same cases, wherein you cried
quarter your selves: for you cried out for liberty still when you were under
the Tyrannical domination one over another faith; the Bishops when they
groaned under the Pope, and the Presbyters, when under the Prelates, but when
you crept out of the Captivating clutches, and got quit from the Clerical
cruelty of each other, you curbed the poor people still, and chaltered them up
sub paena to your own new found postures, and Impenitent pnrses, as mercilessly
almost as before, and have lent them but little better liberty then the horse
has, when his loadsome log is taken off his leg, that he may be rid to a Jade
another way: for what great difference between Rome and Canterbury, save that
of old our Pope lived further off us, and of late we were bejaded with one
nearer home? I^ludamus hunc in orb nostro tanquam alterius Orbis Papam says
Pope Urban the second of Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury 1099. when he set
him at his right foot in a general Council, i. e. we must count upon him in
our world, as it were some distinct Pope of another world, and so it fell out
to be too at last: a Pope is but a Pope at one place, and so he is as well at
another, and what amendment of the matter to have one man that Lorded it, and
Pater Nosterd over the faith, and conscience of Gods people removed, and
Classes or Assemblies of them stablished in his stead? yet thus, for ought I
see, it should have been, if the Trojane Horse of the Scotch Presbytery had
taken place here, which men were mad, being betwatled by subtle Sinons
Synodicall pretenses to hale in, till some more wise amd quick of hearing then
the rest, heard a noise of Arms more then Arguments clang in the belly of it,
and so not believing it to be such a Donum divinum, such a ^us divinum as was
pretended, but a thing that stood Iure Hominico, Daemonico rather then
Dominico, could never since be charmd by any Sinonical or Sinodical
solicitation whatsoever to admit it into English borders. Blessed be God that
cursed creatures begin now to have short horns; that the Trebble Terrible one,
the Trebble TTTribe is brought so low, that those that would have made a man an
offender for a word, yea for THE WORD spoken against their word, and laid a
snare for such as reproved them in the gate, and turned aside the just for a
thing of naught, and were barbarously, bitterly, bloodily beat against the poor
among men, that rejoice in the holy one of Israel, are disappointed, else we
should have seen (it seems by Featley and Gangraena) hat not only Pope
Boniface Qui intravit ut vulpes, reg navit ut Leo, mo^ieb atur ut Canis: came
in a like a Fox, reigned like a Lion, and dyed like a Dog.
and Bishop Bonner, but the bonny Bishops of the two latter broods P and P are
imbrued also not a little with the blood of Christ, whom they crucify throw the
sides of his Saints, for Sectarizing after him from themselves: witness their
bloody Tenet of persecution by prisons, fines, confiscations, banishments, etc.
for cause of conscience; witness their constant crying out to Pilate, i. e.
the Governors and Pilots of such States, where Christ would but live quietly
beside them in his poor disciples, away with him, away with him crucify him,
yea though the Governor strive with the chief Priests, as Pilate did, to
rescue him, as finding no fault in him; but though they wash themselves with
N^re, and take them much soap, yet this iniquity, into which Smectimnuus
degenerate^, si^ce groans for liberty of conscience came out of his own mouth,
is marked before me says the Lord: yea had you been sprinkled with holy water
it self, yet except you repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name
of the Lord Jesus for remission of sins through his blood, which so doing saves
even them that shed it, you are not only by eating and drinking unworthily, i.
e. disorderly at the Supper, which baptism must precede in Gospel reformation,
but also by your cruelty to his disciples, whom you would have crushed if you
could tell how, become guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, however
repent, or repent not, this I say unto you from the Lord, that your bloody
principle of persecution for conscience, and forced conformity to your foolish
forms, canons, creeds, chatechisms, dictates, directories, shall utterly perish
from off the ear^h.

I wish the Independents for their turn's next look to it in time, and take
heed of turning aside too much from that precious principle of depending upon
no King, but Christ, in conscience cases, neither state Counsels, nor Church
counsels, nor Classes, save only for conscience to Christ to be subject
freely in all mere civil cases, to the one, and for cognizance sake to consult
in mere church and conscience cases, with the other, and whom else they please,
keeping Church and State as distinct as it is possible, which the CCClergy have
confounded so together, that we have lost the true Peculiarities of either,
and, as not suffering such saucy doings, as to have most general Assemblies of
the Ki^k, qua Church Assemblies, to be tampering at all with state affairs, so
not troubling any officers of state, qua State officers, no not the highest,
nor Committees nor Sheriffs to weariness with representations of things
pertaing purely to churches, and church orderes, expecting no more then a
passive, permissive influence from them to the church-ward, i. e. to let all
Churches, and all religions, Jews themselves alone to their light, till they
see the true one, so be they live faithfully under them, and quietly,
peaceably, and civilly one by another: but me thinks I smell a mixed mongrel
Independency too much on foot and creeping on, an Indepency by the halves, a
Presbyterian Independency, Independency too dependant in church work, upon the
state for state pay, enquiring after parish maintenance, telling some truth,
and taking as much tith as they can lay their hands on, lending liberty to
themselves to have no supper in the parishes, when they please, yet resolving
to make the people pay for it so long as they preach, whether they eat a bit of
it at all yea or no: A thing I cannot well tell what to call it that has a
smack too much of Smectimnuus, and yet it is not so tyrannical neither, nor yet
so tender toward a toleration of all consciences and Religions, though of all
tender conscienced Christians, as that the poor Jew or natural Israelite can
have any room or creep hole by it into the Commonwealth; in order to his
conversion he must keep out, unless he be so converted before he come, as to
resolve heel own Christ, and not speak against him, as not the Christ, which
what power in any State under heaven can banish a Jew out of any nation for
doing, I plainly know not; an Independency that is willing to let Israel go,
but not to let another Israel come into the Land, so as to promulgate his
principle which I Am sure is contrary to the principles of Christian Religion;
o^ if the Jew may deny Christ, and yet live in the world in quiet, why not
another, unless the word can gain him to the belief of it, as well as he?

Independents a word or two with you by the way; no hurt I hope if you will
have but patience, I find proposals presented F^b. 11. 1651. that make me
amaz^d to think that they should come from Independents, for I took
Independents till of late to be genuine Independents indeed, but I see there is
nothing. but may have something like it, which is not the same, and such is
your Semi-demiindependency to me.

For supply of all parishes in England with Orthodox Ministers, its propounded
that the Sheriff of each County give account to the Committee what parish has
no Minister, that maintenance each such parish has, what Ministers that reside
in each County have no livings, and such of them as are Orthodox be placed
there, as the Committee shall think sit.

For settling right constituted Churches, that all Churches that are or shall
be gathered, signify to the Committee of the Universities or elsewhere, whom
they have or shall choose for their Pastors, and that such and such only shall
be declared right constituted Churches, whose Pastor shall be approved by the
Committee to be able, godly and orthodox.

Fie! Fie! Sirs that you will still have such a minglement of Sheriffs,
Committees, Ministers, Churches, in a kind of Omnigatherum about the Gospel,
and your Churchwork: and that you will trouble the Sheriffs to find what pay is
in parishes, what parishes want Ministers, and what Minist^rs lack means; if
your Ministers lack means cannot they look after it themselves, and bestow
them selves in some honest calling or other to get a living out on? or if they
cannot, cannot your Churches see to them a little what they lack? or do you
lack to have the tithes and parish pay turned ore to you now, as the Presbyters
gaped after augmentations from the Bishops, Deans, and chapters lands? if you
do, I hope the State will save your longing, as they did theirs, and take them
sheer away root, and branch, and let those Churches, that have Ministers,
maintain them if they need, and let the Gospel be preached freely by Messengers
from Churches to the Gentiles, to the world, without charging them with it till
converted to it, for such you suppose the nation to be now, as well as we, and
not a Church of Christ, why else do you gather Churches of Christ out of it?
will you gather Churches of Christ out of Churches of Christ what rule have you
for that? surely Churches must be gathered out of the world: and if so that the
nation be no true constituted Church of Christ, its no true Church of Christ
(for Christ has no falsely constituted true Churches that I know of) and so
her Ministers no true Ministers of Christ^ for Christ's Ministers are not
Ministers of no Church) but such as came remotely, as to their ordination and
parish posture, baptism and all, from the Pope, whom if you also look upon with
such favorable construction as to own him, and his ordinations, and his
baptism and administrations, and what the Prelate and Presbyter sucks in a way
of succession from thence as Apostolical, so as to stand Ministers and baptized
by it, I shall think the world goes round then indeed, and that whoever chances
to get on horseback, and sit in the Saddle here in England, whether Prelate,
Presbyter or Independent they cannot choose, for customs sake, but face about
still, and ride back at least a little way toward Rome: or do you hold (as some
Presbyters do) your ordination O Independents from the Magistrate? if so he was
ordained a minister of God in other cases, but neither per se nor per alios to
ordain and authorize Ministers for Christ Churches: yet me thinks I sent you
coming somewhat near that, when you propose only that such shall be decl^red
right constituted Churches, whose Pastor shall be approved by the committee to
be able, godly and Orthodox, which Independeht proposition I hardly know what
to make of it is so odd: what Sirs does the denomination of a right constituted
Church depend upon the Pastors being approved to be able, godly and Orthodox? a
right constituted Church is that which is built upon the foundation or
principles of the word of Christ, and the Apostles, Heb. 6. 1, 2. Ephesians. 2.
some of which you Independents yet want (but go on in your light for me, till
you see it darkness, I can speak but obiter to you here, yet know that if you
settle not upon all the foundation even your Church will be a come down castle
too ere long) a right constituted church is that which has right matter viz.
baptized professors, ^right ^cim, i. e. free fellowship of such toget^er in one
body in breaking of bread and prayers, whether they have yet a Pastor over them
yea or no, for the churches were rightly constituted first, and had elders
after ordained among them as they were found gifted: yet with you the church
that has no Pastor, and he not approved Orthodox, is yet not to be declared a
right constituted church: what if the Pastor prove Heterodox does the church
loo^e its true constitution? or I would I knew what you mean by constitution?
for perhaps I do no^: and why do you talk in singulari so much of the Pastor,
and Pastor of a Church, as if you were of the mi^d that a church might have no
more Pastors and Overseers over it but one, whereas t^s most evident that there
may be more Elders, Pastors, Overseers (these are all one, 1 Pet. 5. 1.) in one
Church, and that not without need neither when that one flock or congregation
grows numerous, for then they often grow out of the observation too much of one
eye: see Act. 20. Paul sent for the Elders of the Church of Ephesus: whether
any Church ever had but one Pastor or Overseer in it or no (if any at all) I
know not, but I am sure the use was to ordain more then o^e to one Church, Act.
14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. but one cannot Lord it so well, if others be ith traces with
him but however why must all this business of declaring which be right
constituted Churches, Orthodox Pastors, which not, hang upon the Committees
approving, or not approving of the Pastors? what if the Committee should chance
to be Heterodox it self? or the Major part of it? or the Major part sitting at
that time, when this Pastor comes for approbation, what shall a true
constituted Church lose or keep her name of a true constituted Church at a
venture upon the vote of a Committee? and what need at all that the Committees
be so cumbered with the care of such affairs? and what vanity to venture the
determination of which be true Churches of Christ, which the Scripture declares
plain enough, whether the Committee see it yea or no, upon the verdit of a
Committee, to whom other affairs are most properly committed? let all the
Churches come before the Committee, and all people declare their ways, and
their God, and he whom the Committee says is God, let him be God, and not the
rest; will you have it s^? if you will, I will not, take truth upon trust from
the vote of any Committee man under the Sun: and if you would not have it so,
you were better never trouble Committees with such matters at all, then not
commit them finally to them so as to agree to act at a venture as they
determine in matters merely of Religion, and that the true Churches of Christ,
who know no King but Jesus in church and conscience, will never do, but prove
themselves to be true constituted churches of Christ, and preach the Gospel
too as it is in Jesus, where ere they (...) people ignorant of it, whether they
will hear or forbear, though all the Com mittees, yea and all the Kings, and
Popes, and Priests, and People in the world should declar^ against them.

Beloved Friends me thinks you look too like a national Ministry to be of the
right stamp yet: I had hoped Independents would never have turned State
Ministers, and have looked so much after State honor, State help, State
approba^, State preferment, State Maintenance, for ministering to either their
Churches, or to the purblind nation, as I see they do: but Sirs if you be true
constituted Churches of Christ indeed (I do not say you are, nor is it my
busin^sse here to prove you are not, though you are not, till you own his
baptism) but if you be, as you imagine you are, know that Christ has set in
his Church A^stles, or Messengers to be sent forth not by the State, but by the
Church it (...) ^o preach his Gospel to the world, at the Churches, and not the
worlds charges, and (...) preach the Gospel to the Parishes, without pilling
the poor parish people and ^king way for the Gosp^l, and the truth by force and
law, whether they be free to have it, to buy and receive it on such terms as
you tender it on yea or no: therefore send forth and maintain your messengers
among your selves (you are rich enough) and let them preach the Gospel to them,
and gather Churches; but alas now I think out, how can they preach the Gospel
by the halves, and gather true constituted Churches, that yet own not (as ye O
Independents yet do not) all the principles of the oracles of God, nor all the
first doctrines of Christ as that of baptism^, and laying on of hands, upon
which together with the rest the true visible Church stands as on her
foundation: and are yet not only unbaptized, but unwilling to be baptized, or
to baptize with any other baptism then that Rantism that ran down hither
through Rome? You propound that when any of the Pastors of right constituted
Churches dye or leave them to take up some other employment, they choose and
present another Pastor within six months, and may have one settled among them
within 12 months, by approbation from the said Commit, or to dissolve or
disperse themselves into other Churches.

Good Sirs, what mean you by this? shall the Parliament and their Committees
never have their liberty to attend only, and perfectly the true liberties of
the subject? nor be at quiet from this wearisome work of approving, and settling
of ministers, that are men mostly so unsettled in their minds that they will never
(if they have such liberty to leave, as you here allow them) settle longer in
one place, then till they have more means, or be more to their minds in
another? had this piece been propounded by parish ministers and people it had
become them, as ^ounding somewhat suitable to their posture and principle, for
it is the usual tone they talk in, when one Pastor having left them, to take up
another call from Christ, or employment somewhere else to his advantage, they
address to the Committee for the approbation or settlement of such or such a
godly Orthodox Divine among them, as they have agreed with (if they can get the
Committees good will, for till then all parties are not agreed it seems among
either you or them) to be their minister: but to see them, whom I suppose to be
Independents (for I am sure they are Independent men that propose the next
parcel viz. Thomas Goodwin, Nigh, Simpson whose propositions these approve of)
to see I say Independents flocks depend, it may be half a year, on Committees
to have their Pastors approved on, and settled by the Committees among them me
thinks is something shameful: I reckoned that the Independent Churches had
reckoned themselves to have had the sole power not only of choosing, and
presenting, but of approving, settling and ordaining their own Pastors among
themselves (but I see I am deceived) and why may not the Church only without
the Committee approve of her own ministers, to be Orthodox, and be able to
minister in their assemblies and meetings, as well as to approve of such of her
members to be Orthodox, and allow them to speak as she shall judge fit to
speak, for in the next proposal but one or two, it appears you judge she
(without the Committee) may approve of such.

And what mean you by your Pastors leaving you to take up some other call or
employment? are your Pastors also such Idol shepherds, as it may be supposed
now and then will leave their flocks for any other employment? what employment
may they lawfully leave their flocks for, with whom they are in fellowship so
as to stand Pastors no more among them? is their any worldly employment to
which the Pastors office must give way so to as to cease for its sake, when it
comes in place? I know but one employment in honor, and excellency beyond that
good work of a Bishop, or overseer among his flock, as namely that of
Apostleship, or Messengership from the Church, to convert the world, if it be
that you mean, I Will have you excused, in choosing you other Pastors to oversee
you in the Lord, in your Messengers absence from you to preach to the world,
but other employment I know none more honorable then the Ministership, for
which its worthy to be left by them that have food and raiment in it: neither
count I it perferment, but degeneracy for a Minister to be removed from his
Ministership, and Servantship in feeding the sheep of Christ, over which the
holy spirit makes him overseer, though it be to a Lordship, a Mastership, a
Presidentship, a Deanship ore a college, whether that College be Christ's
Church also, yea or no; specially if that fl^ck he leaves be left so destitute
of another Pastor, that it must wait perhaps 12 months for another, and at
last, if at long running they cannot have one, must be fain to flee all to
pieces, and dissolve their Chruch and disperse themselves up and down to other
Churches.

Smite the Shepherd with some better employment, and then all his sheep that
were gathered may be scattered, and separate themselves together into several
places: I like this but a little, and am confident Christ Jesus likes it less:
if you can follow any manual employment for your livings, as Paul and others
did, and preach the Gospel too to make it as much as may be without charge, I
like it well but I am jealous you will make a trade too much of the Gospel too.

You propound that none presume under a penalty to speak in any Assemblies, or
meetings but ministers of the word, members of Churches approved, except
meetings purposely for disputing, and that where meetings be kept up likewise,
persons speak ^here that have Commission from some right constituted Church, or
certificate from two or more able, godly, Orthodox ministers, of their
sufficiency to speak, and soundness in the faith, except Masters to their
families, Schoolmasters to their Scholars, or others to such, as by their
callings fall under their government or charge.

Then at least civil Magistrates may speak any where within their verge,
without certificate of their sufficiency so to do, to the people, that by
reason of their call fall under their Government and charge, but others may
not, though the spirit moves them, unless they can obtain a certificate from
some Ministers.

Sirs, what mean you to muzzle men up in this manner under penalties, from
opening their mouths to speak, unless they bring testimonials, and
certificates from men? if any man speak from God, God will give testimony to
him by assisting him to speak honestly at least, though weakly and plainly; if
God do not testify to any man that speaks, so but that the hearers judge him
insufficient, or that he speaks weakly, and sillily, and see that God leaves
him to utter error, they may leave him too if they please, if it be free for
men (as it never was under the P^sthood) to refuse what they find not to be
truth; and as they like it not to le^ i^ alon^: them therefore that are weak in
the faith receive, and entertain, though they have no pastport or orders from
men to show, you may sometimes entertain angels unawares: and what if God stop
that man's mouth (as he may do when he pleases (the spirit blowing where it
lists) who has man's testimony of sufficiency, and from whom there is the greatest
expectation, and does sometimes when men dote on men, yea and opens the mouths
of them, that at other times, it may be sat as dumb, asses) to repr^ve the
madness of very prophets?

It Is propounded by Mr. Owen, Mr. Thomas Goodwin, Mr. Nigh Mr. Sympson, that such
as do not receive, but oppose those principles of Christian Religion, without
the acknowledgement whereof the Scriptures do clearly and plainly affirm that
Salvation is to be obtained, may not be suffered to preach or promulgate any
thing in opposition unto such principles:

But in this verily I am not satisfied at any hand, for not to acknowledge
Jesus Christ to be the Christ, but to deny him to be the Son of God, when he is
plainly preached is not to receive, but oppose those principles of Christian
Religion, the non-acknowledgement of which, where Christ at least is made
known, is utterly inconsistent with salvation; yet thus did the Jews when
Christ in person was among them, contradicting, blaspheming him, as also the
Samaritans did not receive him, yet the civil powers of the world had no power
from Christ to curb them, and not suffer them to say what they would against
Christ simply and solely I say because of that: neither find I (as before) any
warrant in the word for Caesar the civil powers of the world to prohibit, or
sub paen^ any false Religions, from standing, growing, preaching, promulgating,
practicing their own principles, be they Jews, or Heathen Romans, or Dia^tish
Ephesians, in their several dominions under the Gospel any more then to
prohibit the true Christian Religion it self: All Religions lived under Caesar
in Christ's and the Apostles days, and were not by him persecuted, nor
constrained, either to be of his Religion, nor to say nothing against it, nor
against any other: in after times indeed when the Emperors grew bloody against
the Christians, all Religions lived quietly under Caesar, but the Christian;
that was worse then naught, and I think it not a little too bad, and not doing
(as our duty is) to all men as we desire they should do to us, but the way back
to Priestly blindness, if we put Cae^r on now, because he is a Christian, to let
the Christian Religion live quietly under him, and none else: for my part I
dare not desire that the Jews may not, not only live, but till, they see
better, serve, God in their ways of worship in the State as well as othe^s,
for a being they must have somewhere, and may no where without sin, if not
here, for is it more sin for one Commonwealth to let false worshippers live in
it, till they see the truth, then for another? yea and let them and others too
preach and promulgate even all that ere they can for their way.

Ob. I know men fear false Religions will seduce men from the true to
themselves.

A^. Let them gain what they can, whom can they gain? not the elect, which in
your sense are a sort of individuals, without respect to any thing done in
time* personally, (...) positively, and not conditionally determined to faith
and final perseverance in it to the death, and if they seduce others to
damnation it self, they are no other then such with you as are as particularly,
peremptorily, and not conditionally onel^ of their loving darkness more then
light, before of old ordained to that condemnation, therefore me thinks you of
that principle of all others should ^ee no dan ger of doing more hu^t, then God
decreed to have done, by suffering sed^cers in the world before the foundation
of it, and as for us who hold no such, though as much election and reprobation
as your selves in that sense in which the Scripture speaks out, which bids us
know that God has chosen the godly man to himself, and ordained ungodly men to
condemnation, not determining the individuals to life or death before birth,
but upon account of belief or non-^ of the truth that's told them, for he has
chosen men to life no otherwise then through (...), and ordained men to be
holy, i. e. that they shall be^ve and l^ve holily tha^ mean to live for ever,
even we that know there is danger enough, and yet hope enough too of life for
men, that neglect not their own salvation, ^re venture truth among all false
ways whatsoever, which when and where ere it lives uncurbd as it never yet did
in England without molestation more or less, to these our days for a 1000
years and upwards, will shine through all the rest so clearly to m^s souls, as
either to save them, or else at least to convince them so as if they perish by
following any false ways, that grow up by it, to leave them without excuse,
because they either did, know, and did not what they knew, or might have known
more then they did but would not: besides if any religion be (as I am sure the
true one is not, though the R R Romish, Jewish, Turkish, and all others are)
such a dead Sea of Divinity, as has not life enough in it to live of it self,
if it may have bare leave unless all others that would live beside it be
sneapt by the civil sword, so that they must not show their heads by it for its
sake, let that Religion be the Jews, and the Turks, and the Popes, and the
Prelates, and the Presbyters, and the Independents too, if it will, for me, but
while I live to Christ, surely twill be none of mine.

So I have done with you my dear friends of the Independent way, and shall wait
and pray that you may first laying, as your foundation, and then leaving, the
principles of the doctrine of Christ, goo^ unto perfection.

It Is time to return to talk on with the Pope and P P Priesthood, to whom I have
almost forgo^ten what more I was about to say, being put by it by ones
presentment of these proposals to me inters^ribendum, which draw'd me on to
this long Pe^hesis, and off from my present purpose viz. the proving of the P P
Priesthood to be that themselves which they most falsely father upon them, whom
they as falsely call Anabaptists: I have showed how though they call us an
(...) and carnal sect, a cruel and bloody sect, yet themselves are both these
much more then we, yea and much more ^hats naught then either of these two also.

For next whereas you style us a profane and Sacriledgious sect, yet that you
are a more Profane and Sacril^gious generation then those, whom Dr. Featly
calls so, will appear very plainly if you consider either what Sacrilege, and
Profaneness are indeed, or what Dr Featley, if he may be your spoksman, to whom
you refer us, does falsey suppose it, and has defined it to be, for he states
profaneness or sacrilege (for these two with him are one) to be the extreme in
the defect to Religion, to which the extreme in the excess (says he) is
superstition, which is the offering to God, what he claims not for his own,
whilst the other i. e. profaneness, Sacrilegiously Robs God of that which is
his own in a particular manner; which if so, then you C C Clergy men are more
guilty in this behalf then any other under the Sun, for, besides that you err
from the true religion in the excess, by superstitious attribution of such
things to God, as his by institution, which are not his, but your own
inventions viz. payment of Tithes to you, infantsprinkling, and many other,
which you plead for, (as if the Lord had required them) Iure divino, or Iure
Apostolico, whereas it is no false Latin, because true English to say they
stand Iure humano, et Apostatico or rather Daemonico by the devil and the
whores appointment; you err from it also in the defect by Sacrilegious
ablation. and abolition of the true Baptism and Ordinances from the Church,
which Christ has appointed; this though it be wonderful strange, yet is
mavelous true, for though ordinary men miscarry from the mean, but by one
extreme ordinarily, e. g if men err from the virtue liberality by prodigality,
they are not covetous too, or if by covetousness they are not prodigal too, but
so extraordinarily out of holy order are you, O ye that are in holy orders,
that you content not your selves to go beyond the word, but you will be behind it
too, you will make God own that he never commanded, neither (to use the phrase
and figure in which he speaks of himself came it all into his mind, and disown
his own precepts, which you make void by your traditions: It Is bad to be in the
extreme on either hand from the truth, but to be in both the extremes at once
is to be extreme bad indeed, yet thus it is with you, O ye Priests, as whose
not only superstition, but sacrilege also, has exceeded, and by sundry
degrees surpassed all that ever was, whether among Anabaptists or others: yea,
if you look with a clear eye, all that of those whom your Doctor of Divinity
makes such remarkable observations of, as suffering the h^nd of God inflicting
curses on them for this sin of Sacrilege.

The first whereof is Xerxes, who attempted to pillage the Temple at Delphos. O
monstrous! is ^age come upon our Doctors now in the hight, that Apollo is the
true God with them, and his Oracles, which by Christians were ever counted the
Devils, Gods oracles, and the spoi^ing of his Temple the spoiling and rifling
Gods church, and the ruin which (Machinatione Daemonis say Historians
themselves that write it) fell on them that attempted it the curse of God for
this sin of Sacrilege and Robbing God of his due? so it should seem, for
defining Sacrilege to be a robbing of God, a rifling of his Churches,
stripping Religion of her neces^ary dress and decent rites and ceremonies, and
asserting that God will curse with strange curses those that are guilty of it,
his first instance is the revenging hand of God on Xerxes for meddling with the
Temple of Appollo. Surely these men who have so high an esteem of the God
Appollo, and his Temple, would have had the like of Appollo's Sister Diana the
great Goddess of the Ephesians, and her Temple, whom all Asia, and the world
worshipped Act. 19. 27. and counted Paul a Sacrilegious fellow in dispising her
Magnificence, and turning away people from her worship, as Demetrius did, who
got his wealth by her standing, had they been alive at that time: yet this is
the Doctor we are sent to for furniture with knowledge of the truth by you
Ashford Accountants.


His second, Caepio the Consul, who spoiled the Famous Temple at Tolouse.
Alias, the Great gaudy building, that was there in as much veneration as Paul's
Church in London is, (for that is the Church with some, whom a stone Church,
and wooden Priesthood, pleases better then a spiritual house of living stones,
and spiritual ministry in it.


Thirdly Crassus,

Fourthly Herod, both whose men of war were ruined for rifling the Sepulcher
of David.

Fifthly, Be^hazzer who was frighted with an handwriting for carousing in the
vessels of the Temple.

Sixthly Copronymus that had a Carbuncle arose in his forehead for taking a
Crown out of a Christian Church (alias, Steeple house) which was set with
Carbuncles.

Seventhly Julian together with Felix, who both had Gods vengeance lighting on
them for carrying away the Golden Vessels, and rich presents which the Devotion
(he should have said the Superstition) of Constantine and Constantius dedicated
to God in the new Temple at Jerusalem. Built by Queen Helena, who (if you
consult the Story) in no less Superstitious Devotion, then they the Vessels of
the Temple, did consecrate the Temple it self to the Honor of Christ, Pueri
sacer est locus extra meiite.


Eighthly, Rotman with Cniperdolin, who seized on the Church, alias high place
dedicated to St Mauritius, a Saint of the Popes canonizing.

Ninethly Munster and P^yser, who being it seems in war, made their magazines,
and cast their ordnance in the covent of the Franciscans. Alias the holy
habitations of the most abominable holy Friars, who no question fried in the
fire of holy wrath and rage, to see their holy Cloisters and Chapels
sacrilegiously profaned to civil uses, which by them, and their Lady Abbesses
were wont to be made use of (saving their holy Superstitions) to nothing but
uncivil and unclean.


Tenthly, John of Leyden, who sacrilegiously converted into apparel for
himself, and others the holy things of God, (for so he must call them, or else
he keeps not to his text, and his own interpretation of it, which is that the
Anabaptists are a sacrilegious sect) viz. the holy Copes, holy Altar Clothes,
and holy vestments which the Priests were wont to wear, in their holy Masses,
which John of Leyden I should have thought he had been lost, if he had not come
in at the last, since at first or last I find him serving every turn of Dr.
Featley, insomuch that the whole six fold tale, he tells of the Anabaptists,
would never handsomely have hung together, if John of Leyden the Tailor did not
stitch it up, for John of Leyden serves to prove them an Illiterate and sottish
sect, John of Leyden a blasphemous and lying sect, John of Leyden an impure and
carnal sect, John of Leyden a cruel and bloody sect, John of Leyden a profane
and sacrilegious sect, John of Leyden a sect whom Gods vengeance follows,

Who ere is another, John of Leyden is one,

You may thank John of Leyden, else all were undone.

These are the many instances, wherewith your Dr. patches up two or three pages
of that fifth piece of his Remarkables, wherein he tell tales the Anabaptists to
be a sacrilegious sect, in which, if ye were not bedoted as much as your ipse
Dixit (O ye disciples of Dr. Featley) you might see of your selves, first that
if the actions instanc't in were sacrilege, yet the men were no Anabaptists,
for the last are more called then proved so, and the rest, which are well nigh
two parts of three, were never so much as named so since the world stood,
secondly that if the men had been all Anabaptists, yet all the actions were not
sacrilege, for set aside what Belshazzar did, whose action of common drinking
in the Temple vessels, was then sacrilege, as now it now it would not be (all
that relative holiness of Temples, and Vess^ls, Places and Things dedicated,
the Doctor so much prates of, being ceased since Christ crucified John 4. I say
set that aside and all the rest, viz. rifling of the things which he calls
Churches, viz. the Temple of Appollos at Delphos, and that of ^olouse, that of
St. Maurice at Munster, of Queen Hellina at Jerusalem, and the Friars Covent
(whether they may be called Theft or no, I know not) were are as far from being
sacrilege; as the places were from being holy places in truth, and that is as
far as the Popes holiness is from Gods: but to conclude this matter, its much
of a price to you (O Priests) whether the matters of fact that Featley fains,
to be sacrilege, and would fain fasten, and father as well upon the
Anabaptists of this present age, as that above, be so yea or no; for this we
are sure of however, that either the things he defines it by viz. the
demolishing, alienating, or common using of hallowed Temples, Friars Covents,
Tables, Altars, Altar Clothes, Copes, Cups, and other rich Vestments, Vessels,
Utensills, Fonts, Pulpits, Profits, and Emoluments, Gleabs, Centries, Tithes,
first fruits, oblations, and other Obventions is no sacrilege, nor robbing of
God, nor fingering of holy things (as I utterly deny it to be) or else if it
be, that the Protestant Priesthood are more deeply guilty of it, if not in
affection, yet at least in action then the Anabaptists of this age: for if we
ask, who sacrilegiously sacrificed, and in their sacred zeal for King Charles
against King Christ coined to his common use, and unholy war, the plate devoted
to their College uses in the holy Benevolence of Benefactors? did not some of
you Masters, Provosts, Fellows of Colleges and such like? who, toward a
Reformation from Rome, demolished 645. holy Abbeys, and Monasteries, 90 holy
Colleges, 110 Hospitals, 3314. holy Chanteries, and Chapels, and diverted the
infinite riches, which was devoted by the freewill offering of devout persons,
and assigned for the Maintenance of the ministry that then was, viz. the holy
Priests, Monks, Nuns and Friars from the Ecclesiastical use of that Spiritualty
to the Temporal Revenew of the Crown, did not thou O Prelacy flatter King
Henry the eighth into this, and the subversion of the Roman Supremacy that thou
may have a Supremacy of thy own, under a color of giving it to the King?
who have confiscated the holy Palaces and devoted profits of two
Arch-bishopricks, 20 Bishoprics, 26 Denaries, 60 Arch-deaconries, 544
spiritual dignities, and Prebendari^, to Auxiliations and Augmentations, have
not thou O Presbyterian? did not thou alone uncover the sin and nakedness of
thy old father Episcopacy out of a covetous and ambitious desire to steal away
the birthright from the elder brethren the Deans, Prebends, and Canons; and
now that heaven deceives thy longing expectation, so that thy Kingdom falls
irrecoverably, and men will no more fall down before thee, nor do the worship,
and double honor of observation and maintenance to thy Lording Eldership, but
impropriate all that thou gapest for to themselves, together with all thy
Vicarages, besides 5439 Parochial benefices, being no impropriations, so that
neither thou nor the true Ministry neither shall have any of it, unless thou
forsake thy errors for it, and they the truth, is it these Independents whom
thou falsely call Anabaptists, or those whom we truly call Antibaptists,
that are now acting all this sacrilege? and more lately yet, who did a way, I
mean directive, for indeed the civil power, whom youin your pulpits sub pena'd
to it, did it corrective, who I say did a way most sacrilegiously the sacred
crosses, viz. Coventry, Cheapside, Charing, and others? who councel'd away the
curious crucifixes? who spoiled the holy Cathedrals of their holy Organs, and
Popish pipes and pictures? who profaned the holy Fonts in all the holy
Churches and Chapels, because they found the people Idolizing them? upon which
account they ought as well to demolish the very churhces themselves: who
profaned all the holy days, and feasts dedicated to the honor of Saints by
the Pope (which were more then days in the year) and those that were in use
under Prelacy viz. Easter, Christmas, Whitsunday, etc. did not thou O
Presbyter? who altered the holy Altars, and alienated to other use the holy
Altar Clothes? who robbed the old Church robbers the Bishops, and the sons of
that Hierachy of their holy Robes, and Divested the Churchmen of the holy
vestments, wherewith they were adorned, and wherewith also they adorned (much
more then by their conversations) the doctrine of God and our Savior Jesus
Christ, viz. the 4 cornerd cap, and holy hood, the sacred Sandals, and costly
cassokes, lawn sleeves and consecrated copes, silken girdles, plush, velvet,
and Sattanical gowns, and cancelled that very Canons themselves that their
Holinesses contrived, wherein they commanded the wearing of them? who pulled
away the holy railes from before the sanctum sanctorum in every holy quire
where they were stated? did not ye O Presbyterians? hear therefore ye deaf that
ye may understand, and look ye blind that ye may see, for if this be sacrilege
and Church-robbing, and holy theft, and robbing God etc. to casheere all the
forenamed consecrated commodities, then thou O Priesthood art deeper in the
guilt of it then any Baptists, yea we are not so much as accessory to that
violent ablation of these things, as whose principle leads us to lend leave to
those, not in the Church, but in the world, that will use these fooleries, to
use them; yea if we wish the abolition of what your Divines call sacrilege to
remove, yet our strength against them is to sit still, and save our pains, and
see all this kind of Sacrilege committed on them to our hands; but in very
deed as we are not the men, so this you call so is not the thing you wot of,
but a mere scarcrow and bugbear to fright fools with indeed, and not a
purloining of holy things For then by my consent they shall be counted
Sacrilegious too, that shall ever happen to be spoilers of the tripple crown
, for as for outward things (contradict it O ye classical Clergy if ye can)
there is no holiness in them now as of old there was, neither in places, nor
in Utensils, nor in Ornaments, nor in Monuments, nor Emoluments, nor in Altars,
nor Glebes, for those things that are truly holy, are laid up in the soul, and,
to answer your Doctors question, though I have heard of a twofold holiness
viz. inherent, and relative, in the subject, and in the object, yet as I may
truly say this with the Dr. that inherent holiness no intelligent man ever
attributed to inanimate things, so this against him that relative holiness,
none but a superstitious Christian ever attributed to any thing under the
Gospel, that is of man's invention, donation and dedication, as almost all Dr.
Featleys furniture, and rinkets are, but such only as are Relatively holy, as
are in such special relation to Gods that he claims, and challenges, peculiar
interest in, as his by donation, dedication, ordination, institution, etc. in
which regard some Temples are holy, e. g. his people in Church Fellowship,
living stones built up an habitation of God through the spirit, but not such
Temples as Dr. Featley means of dead stones, as are by men hallowed to his
name; some days as the feasts dedicated by himself, but not any dedicated by
men to his honor; some persons as Priests and Levites under the law,
Presbyters and Deacons called i. e. gifted and qualified by him (not ungifted
dumb dogs, drones, and drunkards, so denominated, dedicated, donated by mere
men) under the Gospel; some lands, profits, and preferments, reserved, and
assigned by God as the inheritance of his Saints and Ministers i. e. servants
viz. not Glebes, Tithes, Centries, but the heavenly Canaan, the holy City, the
holy Jerusalem that comes down from God out of heaven, incorruptible, indefiled
that fades not away, some certain Utensils, instruments, Ordinances, and means
of serving him, and of communion with him here for a time, till we come to the
perfect, and immediate enjoyment of him, viz. the Table, the Font, not such as
Dr. Featley means, but the Lords Table, and Baptism it self, the laver of
regeneration; some Vessels, but not silver Chalices, nor the whores Golden cup
full of trash, abomination and filthiness, but the Earthen Vessels i. e.
homely, and (to outward appearance) silly, empty, weak, plain d^spensations,
and administrations, which Christ has chosen, whereby to save them that
believe, and to bring to naught the gaudy forms, and ways of man's wisdom;
some vestments, not the Cope, nor the Miter, black coat nor surplice, stained
with the filthiness of the whores fornication, but fine linen white and
clean, i. e. the righteousness of the Saints, employed in the immediate
service and worship of God, for I will be sanctified of every one that comes
near to me says the Lord; any of which holy things to alienate, unjustly
detain, deprave, profane, or p^rloin from any of those places, or persons to
whom (what ere the law of the Land does) the law of God, and the Gospel has
appropriated, and apportionated them, is that (call you it what you will) which
we call sacrilege, and is a sin that was never so much committed by any rank
of men under the sun as it is by you CCClergy men, that yet of all men seem
most to abominate it, and of all sins in the world cry out against it; for if
as ask who Lords it over Christ's holy heritage? who has trodden down the holy
City? who slew the parsons of the witnesses? who has broken the Laws, changed
the ordinances, broken the everlasting Covenant, for which a curse now is
devouring the earth? who has made void Christ's commands by their own
traditions? who has taken away from the sacraments, the right subjects, and
manner of administration? who have justified the wicked for reward, and taken
away the righteousness of the righteous from him? who has defiled the true
Temple, and made the house of God a house of Merchandise, slaves and souls of
men Rev. 18. a den of thieves? have not you the CCClergy? yea your Dr. talks of
the Font, and the communion Table, and the pulpit, but who stole away baptism
and the supper, and preaching it self, so that there is nothing but sprinkling
bells, babies, and confusion, and one moity of a dinner, and more Pulpit, and
Pew, and Belcony, and Canopy, and Cloth, and Cushion, then preaching, and plain
publication of the Gospel as it is in Jesus? you talk off robbing God in
matters of the law, and Tithes, offerings and things that came by Moses, and
now are not at all; but who hathrobbed him in matters of grace, and truth, and
ordinances, and things that came by Christ, one tittle of whose Testament shall
not be contradicted by man nor angel under pain of cursing? you talk of golden
cups and vessels, in which the whore fills out her abominations and filthiness
of her fornication to the whole earth, but who has taken away the key of the
Kingdom of heaven, i. e. from the people and Church? in whom the power lies
fundamentally, and primarily (for it is but derivatively from the church under
God, secondarily, executively, and ministerially in the Officers: not only
Papa but P P too; see Rutherfords Presbytery, wherein he wrests the power of
the Keys from the people: who has taken away the key of knowledge, and shut
up the Kingdom of heaven against men, as neither willing to go in themselves by
the right way and baptism, nor to suffer them that would? who but ye O Priests
have been in these things more sacrilegi church-robbers, then sacerdotes, or
givers of holy things? yea what evil of this kind YYYou have wrought in the
sanctuaries of God, how you have laid them wast throughout the whole earth, how
you have defiled the pure waters thereof, and did so Claudere rivos shut down
the floodgates, that the people could have none of these to drink, and caused
all discourses, and all placesto overflow with muddy and brackish waters, if I
should hold my peace, the stones out of the wall, even those living sto^s out
of the true Temple, that are living monuments of Gods mercy at this day, in
that they are alive from the dead, even the dead night of your errors, will
proclaim to the everlasting infamy of that generation, that have been the
nearer the church, the further from God.

Thou make thy boast of God (O P P Priesthood) and would seem to approve of
the things that are most excellent, and art confident thou thy self art a guide
of the blind, and a light of them that sit in darknsse, an instructor of the
foolish, a teacher of babes, but indeed thou art a blind guide, a dark lantorn,
a foolish instructor, and have need thy self to be taught by those babes, which
live upon the sincere milk of the word, which be the first principles of the
oracles of God thou have a form of knowledge, and of truth as it was in the
Law, that was ((...)) long since abolished according to which thou Enthusiasts
to thy self a Iudai al, Pontifical, Political, Pollitical, Religion of thy
own; but thou art grossly ignorant of the truth of the Gospel, and that form
of doctrine that Rome obeyed from the heart of old, before it came to be a
mother of harlotry, and of such a crew of corrupt children as have since then
come from her to the corrupting ing of the earth; thou teach another, but
thou teach not thy self, thou preachest a man should not steal, but thou
stealest, thou say a man should not commit adultery, but all the Kings, and
their people in the christian earth have committed adultery with thee, thou
seem to abhor it, yet thou more then any committest sacrilege, yea thou o
P P Priesthood art that holy harlot, that holy thief, that have fingred the
most holy things, yea even the holy Scripture it self, which is the storehouse,
and under Christ the treasury of truth, and hid it from the world under unknown
tongues, and a heap of unsound senses, which thou have put upon it, therefore
thou art inexcusable O woman when thou judge the now churches of sacrilege,
for wherein thou judge them thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge
do the same things, which thou say they do, but they do not, and
therefore is he now killing thy children with death, and we are sure that the
judgment of God is according to truth against them that do such things.

Yea woe unto you O ye blind guids, ye strein at a gnat, and make it sacrilege,
and church robbing, to take Fonts, and railes, and pipes, and pictures, and
altars etc. out of your stone Temples, and keep a do about cleansing, and
hallowing, and having these outside decencyes, and orders, and offerings, but
swallow a camel and demolish the true temple of God, and the vessels of the
sactuary, i. e. the ordinances thereof, which is holy indeed, which Temple the
Saints are, that are built together a spiritual house unto him, and your selves
are full of ravening extortion and excess: you are as graves that appear not,
and the men that walk over you are not aware of you, nor how they are rid over
by you, nor how very well to be rid of you, wherefore the wisdom of God even
Christ Jesus now sends you prophets, and Apostles, and wisemen, and Scribes to
warn you, yet these you kill and crucify, and scourge and persecute as your
enemies, because they tell you the truth, that the blood of all the Prophets
that have prophesied in Sack cloth, and tormented you and your forefathers, and
your people that dwell on earth for 42 months, may come on this generation,
and so your house be left unto you desolate for ever.

And fourthly there needs no more to prove you to be what you say of us, that
we are, viz. a lying and blasphemous sect, then all these forenamed falsities
which are asserted o^ the Anabaptists, when of right they belong more properly
to your selves.

Yea great need indeed and good reason, that you should be the Plantiffs in
this business of loading with disgraces, belying and blaspheming, who have bin
your selves nex^ and immediately under Satan Supreme false accusers of the
brethren to the world, and the powers, Courts, and consistories thereof civil,
and ecclesiastical for Heretics, Schismatics, Sectaries, seditious deceivers,
hypocrites, blasphemers, enemies to Caesar, trouble Towns, and what not, with
which kind of nick names you the false kingdom of the Priests, have
overwhelmed the true royal Priesthood as with a flood, the burden of whose
scandals, blasphemies, tales, and disgraces, wherewi^h you have loaded the
saints per mill ducentos sexaginta annos, 1260. years, exceeds any (id genus)
that the saints have loaded you with in number, weight, and measure, per
millies mill ducentas sexaginta I^s 1000000260 l.

You have clothed the precious sons and daughters of Sion, as the persecuting
Emperors did of old, with the skins of wild beasts, and so cast them to the
dogs to be devoured, i. e. with the names of Monsters, and so exposed them to
the hatred of the world, with the which kind of sport not only Dr. Featley,
and Mr. Edwards, while they lived, made themselves merry, and their friends
too, by bestowing Legends a piece toward the support of their several false
ways, as one great Benefactor did a Legend of lies on the Papistrey, to the
maintaining of that which they call the golden Legend, but others also, belly
the nicknamed Anabaptists of this present age, and nation as denying So Mr.
Bailey, and Mr. Baxt. Featly p. 161. 167. also Featley and Pagits title pages.
any obedience to civil Magistracy, any propriety in goods, as holding
plurallity, and community of wives, divorce for difference in religion, as
dipping men and women stark naked, and such like.

Yea just the same lying shifts, and inventions that the Popish Clergy did use
to help their Religion by against the Protestants, when they began first to
protest against them, and their abominations, do you the Protestant CCClergy,
i. e. both Prelacy and Presbytery strengthen your cause by against the
Anabaptists, especially of all sectaries.

1. They detain the People from reading the Scripture alleging to them the
perils they may incurr through misinterpretation, Helin p. 161
you likewise would not have the Scripture meddled with by this Clergy of
Laics, Mechanic, fantastic Enthusiasts, profound watermen, Sublime Coachmen,
Illuminated Tradesmen, etc. Apron Levites, Sectarian Preachers, as Dr. Featley
and Mr. Baily call them, See Ba^. Ep to the Read. also Feat. in his Epist. to
the Read and p. 161.
for they (say you) are dunces, and ignorant both of tongues and arts, and so
must needs run into errors, and are insufficient for these things, let the
smith keep him to his Anvile, and the Cobbler to his last.

2. These bred Antipathy between the Papist and Protestant, and debar them all
sound of the Protestant Religion as much as may be, by prohibiting books of the
reformed writers, and Traffic with such Heretical Countries, or such places
where those contagious sounds, and sights (as they term them) might make them
return infected. You also forbid your good Protestants all society, and
commerce (as much it is possible) with these pitchy persons, as those that they
cannot come near, but they must be defiled with them.

3. Those by the severity of their inquisition, and so you by your high
commission and spiritual (alias, spiteful) Courts, while they stood, and by
complaints to the next Classis, Synod, etc. as in Scotland, and threats to have
an order taken with such and such (as here in England) crush as far as you can
in your people the very beginnings, and smallest suppositions of being this way
addicted.

4. They teach their people to Believe that the Protestants, and so do you that
the Anabaptists are basphemers of God, and his Saints. Those that in * Sae
Featleys Epist. to the Read.
England, Churches are turned into Stables, you that the Anabaptists preach in
Tubs, that Stables are turned into Temples, stalls into Quires, Shopboards into
Communion-tables: Those that the people, i. e. Protestants are barbarous, and
eat young children, that Geneva is a professed sanctuary of Roguery Helin p. 189
etc. you that the Anabaptists are filthy, and base in their Conventicles, and
are for Murder, Adul^eries, Butchery, Bawdery, the veriest villains in the
world.

You tell the world that the Anabaptists would have no rules, nor bonds of
laws: because of their dissoluteness, which (though it be true enough of the
Ranter that Peter and Jude speaks of, that separate themselves from their
churches sensual, presumptuous, self-willed, despising Government Peter the
second Epist. chap. 2. yet is most false of our Churches that separate from
you) that we would have no discipline in the Church, no learning nor
universities. No coercive power in the civil Magistrates to restrain us
because we walk inordinately, whereas though we cannot away with your Canons,
yet we are the only men in the world for the rule, which Christ himself has
set for men to walk by, even the word, the Scriptures, which only, and not
Synodicall constitutions, nor holy chair we stand to have the standard for
truth to be tried by to the worlds end, and are for all laws in nations, save
such as obedience to which makes us palpably rebellious against the law of
Christ, viz. laws for tithes with trebble damages, for Christ never appointed
men's goods to be streined, and they sold out of what they have to pay his own
Ministers for preaching his own Gospel, much less to pay the Popes Ministers
for preaching a Gospel of their own? also laws to come to mass in Latin, or
Mass in English, or any service of man's making under penalty, we also stand
for a true Church that has right matter viz. professed believers baptized, and
right form viz. free, not forced fellowship in breaking of bread and prayers:
we are also for the true discipline i. e. Christ's (not the Clergies) in that
Church, we hold also that Magistrates, though their persons should be wicked
men and heathens (for the notion of Christian adds nothing to their power as
Magistrates) are the ordinance of God, To maintain all civil justice and
righteousness, between man and man, and to restrain abuses such as murder,
treason, adultery, drunkenness, theft, false witness, though they have no
coercive power to keep men from s^ving God according to his own will, that
power we deny, yet go not about by violence to withstand it but in quietness
suffer under it, when it is put forth against us: we are also for learning, for
it is a good talent, to use for God, and too good for the Devil, a good servant,
but a bad master, and we wish that there were more of it then there is among
you CCClergy (if it may be also well improved, as it seldom is by those of you
that have it) for as those of you that are more singular scholars then the
rest in humanity, and that mere Anthropo-Theology that is among you, which you
call Divinity, are deep dunces for the most part in the school of Christ, and
most opposite, through the wisdom of their flesh, which is enmity against God,
to the follishnesse of the Gospel, so no less then legions of you are little
learned (...), or (...) either.

Yea verily, and fifthly, howbeit among other things you brand the Anabaptists
with the names of an illiterate and sottish sect, cut as chips out of Nicolas
Stock (whom Featly faines to be the father of the Anabaptists, and styles a
very blockhead, and such as know not how to teach, nor dispute for truth)
because they know not the original, and cannot conclude, in m^od and figure p.
113. 164. 163. nor make able ministers of the Gospel, because they understand
not the Scripture in the Original languages, and cannot expound without
Grammar, nor persuade without Rhetoric, nor divide without logic, nor found
the depth of any controversy without Philosophy, and School divinity p. 118
yea Dr. Featley defeats 1000s of his fellow Clergy men utterly in so saying,
from the name of able Ministers, yea as he says of us in another, so may we of
them in this case, hos suo ingulamus gladio, we may wound them with their own
dudgeon dagger, for if ignorant and unlearned men are not fit to make
ministers; then not only, their La^y (which are millions) are unlearned for
the most part, and so by Dr. Featleys own confession unfit to be teachers of
truth, but even multitudes of their CCClergy too, for it is none of the least
brands says Dr. Featley p. 164. of the Roman Antichrist that he filled the
Church, with a number of ignorant Mass Priests, Monks and Friars, who blind
guids (as they were) of the blinder people, fell with them into the ditch of
Superstition, Heresy and Sensuallity: and (say I) the English Antichrist i. e.
the Archbishop of Canterbury, a chip of the old block, that was an Apprentice
at Rome in old'n time, till he set up for himself here, and became indeed what
the old Caiaphas, Pope Urbane the second, prophesied of him in a complement
about 1099 (little thinking then (God wot) that he would serve him such a trick
as to set up his posts against his posts, and take away his custom, and
trading here in England) Papatus alterius Orbis: this English Antichrist I say
has multiplied many teachers, and feeders, that are far better fed, then
taught in matters of either God or man, and as few Scholars as are among the
true Churches (if there were none, the truth would stand without them, and God
delights in no man's legs) but if there were need of that to the making
ministers of the Gospel, there is proportionably fewer among your churches,
considering how little Christ's flocks is, and how voluminous the fold of the
WWWhore, and how few truly are so, that go under that name among the people,
with whom haud tam cult us quam cucullus facit monachum? for though you talk of
secular learning, yet if that were so necessary to a Minister, as the Ministry
say it is, it would not only cut off Peter and John from that denomination,
who were though better gifted, yet less learned in that sense then the least
of you, but most of you CCClergy also, among whom through out your whole
dominion of Christndome, there is few Country Curates are well studied Scholars
indeed, in Logic, and other arts and sciences; and as for the tongues and
original languages of the Scriture (I speak it to the shame of the Ministry,
who unminister themselves in saying it is so necessary) there is scarce five of
20. know the original in the old Testament, and not twenty to 5 so well as you
should do in the new; and as for the only true learning and original of all
wisdom, the fear of God, growth in grace, and the knowledge of Christ, and
mysteries of his kingdom, and the spirit, that Christ promised to his people,
to teach them all things, which it were better for you by all your learning
that you had more of, unlearned P^ter himself may truly term the most of you
such unlearned ones, as wrest the Scripture to your own destruction p^va est
vobis cura linguarum, minor Artium, mini* ma pietatis. were most of you as
little learnd, as good, a pea^cod shell might make you gown and hoo^.
Act. 4. 13. 2 Pet. 3. 16. yea so ungifted are the most of you so much as to
pray, and then well may you be to preach, (and that is to be unlearned as to
the ministers office) that unlettered, or at least unspirited Artificers, may
be the proper name of some Clergy men, as well as of the teaching tradesmen Dr.
Featly speaks of, for these receive the holy spirit, that gifts them to it, but
not many of the Clergy are gifted to pray extempore without book: if I only
said this you would not believe me, but since your great Patron Dr. Featly, to
whom you send us, is my Patron as to this, you must believe it whether you will
or no (unless you would have us believe him, whom you will not believe your
selves) who gives this good reason, p. 95. why its necessary to have set forms
for the Ministers of the church of England to pray by, if they pray at all in
public, for there is not one Minister (says he) or Curate of an 100
specially in Country Villages, or Parochial churches, who has any tolerable
gift of conceived (as they term them) or extempore prayers; which if so, you
have small reason to cry out of others, as illiterate; yea verily your selves
will appear to be (as the Anabaptists are styled by you) an illiterate and
Sottish generation in things principally pertaining to Christ, and to Ministers
of Christ to be skilled in, for that indeed is to be truly learned or unlearned
in quoquo genere viz. to be raw or ready either in that which men supremely
pretend to excel in, as the Divine does to excel other men in the things of
God, or else in that which is most excellent in it self, and most worthy our
being learned in, as the highest and most excellent objects that are knowable
being Christ and the mysteries of his kingdom, those consequently are the best
Scholars in the world that are most deeply insighted thereinto though elsewise
never so ignorant. Si Christum nescis nihil est si caetera noscis,
Si Christum noscis, nihil est si caetera nescis.


Now count which of these two ways you will, the greatest Clerks will appear
to be the greatest Novices, the greatest Doctors the greatest Dunces, the
greatest Schoolmen the least Scholars, the prime of the Priesthood the prime
Ignor amus's that the Christian earth does carry: for howbeit, O ye PPPrists,
some of you (for the most of you will never be mad with much learning) even
surfeit on inferior literature viz. arts, tongues etc. andare taller then
other men by the head in the reading of History, Oratory pieces of pibald
Poetry and such like, yet as to the misterious plain Gospel, wher^in are hid,
and whence are handed out unto us the treasures of eternity, in earthen vessels
i. e. the homely, base, foolish, weak ways and dispensations which are of
Christ's choosing, which it concerns Christ's Ministers of all men to be more
clear in th^n in any thing else, they are low, and therefore too high and
wonderful for you high studied men to reach to; they are far about out of your
sight.

Yea I think thee (O father) Lord of heaven and earth that thou hidest these
things (because seeing they will not see them) from the wise and prudent and
revealest them unto babes: yea O Lord how great is the multitude of mere
Humanists, that feed only upon the common Theory of that Theology they have
framed to themselves, and relish nothing but what is of man? how are thy
depths, even thy downright deliveries of soul saving truth in plainess of
speech by the mouths of stammerers stark dunce^y to them? how will not a poor,
marred, mocked, misreputed Savior, and gospel in any wise down with them? who
did of old, and who do still stand out most stiffly against thy gospel (O
Christ) but the proud self conceited Pharisees, Priests and Lawyers, who while
the people believe and justify God, being baptized with the true baptism, do
generally reject the council of God against themselves, being not baptized
therewith? where had thy message by the mouth of Paul less acceptance then at
the university of Athens? where has the word now less then in the Academies,
Christian Academies, seemingly reforming Academies? where, if thou did not
tell us that Christ crucified should be foolishness to the wise men after the
flesh, and disputers of this world, who could believe that the Princes of Zoan
should be such fools, such idiots as they are in the matters of thy Kingdom?
where does thy truth meet with more difficult entrance, more course
entertainment, more malicious accusatious, more captious questions, secret
underminings, open oppositions then among the CCChristian Ministry, which
therefore is not thine, but Antichristian, because it is both for thee and
against thee? yea who so blind as those that seem to themselves to be the only
Seers both for themselves and others? ever seeking to thee for thy spirit, yet
ever resisting thy holy spirit, speaking to them out of the mouths of babes, as
a very babbler, ever teaching yet never learning which be the first principles
of thy doctrine, ever serving thee, yet ever thinking they do thee service when
they affront thy servants, O Lord let as many of them as do it ignorantly
obtain thy mercy if it be thy will, and let thy truth shine into their souls
that they may be saved: as for such as are more malevolently disposed, if it
may not be otherwise but that the main body of the CCClergy shall evermore be
adversaries to thee and thy Clergy, Amen sobeit.

And now have showed the Reasons, why God suffers Heretics, and has suffered
the Arch-heretick, and Schismatic, and mother of Abominations of all
Christndom i. e. the CCClergy, that have been Wolves rather then Pastors to
Christ's sheep, the last of which reasons was this, to provoke the true Pastors
to diligence, and watchfulness, to prove them whether they be hirelings or
not, such as will flee when the wolf comes, or lay down their lives for the
sheep, and having discovered whom I mean by Pastors viz. not the Priests, but
those of the truly gathered, and constituted churches; that have separated
themselves from the Priest, and his parish popish posture, I proceed yet a
little further. For

This last Reason administers the matter of this ensuing discourse concerning
the ways how Pastors of right constituted Churches, such as those of the
Baptists only are, should oppose, or rather should have opposed the coming in
of these wolves the CCClergy (for the Pastors of old, through their negligence
did suffer them to come in) and drive them out being entered: What the
Magistrates duty is in this case it presumes not to set down here, partly
because the Magistrates duty is discovered, and discourst on above, and partly
because it presumes the Magistrate will be wise enough in this age, to know
what he is to do toward the freeing of himself from that infinite care and
cumber that has crushed him in former days, by the CCClergies constant
clacking to him to correct Heretics, Schismatics, and Sectaries, and crying
out to ^m ^o lend them his helping hand, and the edge of his civil sword about
Churchwork: yea and if God who did once put it into the hearts of the Kingdoms
of the earth to fulfill his will, and to agree and with one mind to give their
power, strength and Kingdom unto the beast, and to serve the whore that rode
them Rev. 17. 13. 17. and as ten horns to toss the Saints at her will, will now
put it into the minds of these ten horns, even all the Kingdoms of Christndom
to hate the whore, and make her desolate, and naked, and eat her flesh, and
strip her of all (...) ^ith, and spiritual glory, revenue, dignity, and burn
her with fire, and in the^ ^age to ruin great BBBabilon the City that in three
PPParts or PPProud PPPriesthoods has reigned over them, as I believe he will
Rev. 16. 19, 17. 16. 18. throughout, as I can neither much help or hinder it,
so I find no warrant to cry Alas, Alas for it, as the Kings, and Merchants that
come down with her shall do, but rather All^lujah with all the people, Rev. 18.
9. 11. 16. 19. 1. 2. 3. etc.

There are two public ways, for private are suffering, fastings, and
prayers, and tears etc. matters wherewith the CCClergy (for the most part of
them) never yet killed themselves, nor approved themselves yet as the Ministers
of Christ by, as his true Ministers did of old, which have been practiced by
Pastors in those primitive days viz. Disputing, Preaching, concerning both
which this discourse intends only a short su^vey, leaving the proceedings in
them to their judgments, whom God has made faithful.

Disputation (say our Ashford Disputants) has ever been decried by most
judicious and grave men; Tertullian is bitter (say they against it; Perdes in
contentione vocem, nihil consequeris nisi vilem de blasphematione la^dem, and I
say so too, a man may very easily wrangle ad ravim, dispute himself hoarse, and
lose his tongue in contention, and get nothing, but a base repute of
blasphemation, specially when, as it was at Ashford, and somewhere else within a
mile of an oak the contention is so sharp, that there is not only six tongues to
one or two talking for it, tuning altogether against the truth, but six bells
balling out also to bear it down with:

And another magni res est periculi veterem fidem quasi novellam otiosa
disputatione discutere, and so indeed it is a matter of great disadvantage
id^ely to dispute the old faith, as if it were some new one whereupon, that
truth may receive detriment by us in nothing, hence forward we do all men to
wit, that howbeit the CCClergy and their creatures claim antiquity to be on
their sides still, both in the point of baptism, and other differences between
them, and the men called Anabaptists, and delude their people into a blind
misbelief that all that truth^, which now comes to light, is to be taken for
granted to be heresy before Hang out your lights here, your new lights quoth
he, scoffingly, who in pride prints himself Capape, Captain general of all the
Presbyterian forces in England, etc. viz. Dr. B.
hand, new faith, new ways, a new Gospel (and this they do more easily and
effectually, by how much it is true that the fog of their errors has been so
thick, that men can find but little of that, which now shines forth, in the
days of our m^e immediate forefathers, though there were many righteous men no
question then disiring to see and hear what we now do and could not) howbeit I
say they have prepostest people thus, yet in order to the dispossessing of them
of that praejudication, by reason whereof the primitive truth, which (however
God winkt while it was a time of ignorance) must, now it comes to light again,
be received in the love thereof, that they may be saved, and in the rejection of
which they will be damned 2 These. 2. g^ts little entertainment into their
hearts; I here proclaim it again to all people upon earth (as that truth,
which, as I have showed above, God will show the Clergy once to their shame)
that the baptizing or dipping believing men and women in that way, wherein we
do it, is no new faith, practice, nor baptism, but that one only true baptism,
which was instituted by Christ, and used in the primitive times of the Gospel,
and that their sprinkling infants is a mere trifle, a toy, a new trick, and
tradition of the church, in its beginning to degenerate into darkness and
superstition; and also that it is a tradition (though more ancient, and reverent
then some others: as Mr. Rogers said of it, and of which the church has been
pos^est for 1500 years, as Mr. Marshall (a little more then he could
undoubtedly prove too, said of it) is confessed not only by the Italian Clergy,
as Bellarmine, who said it could not be proved by Scripture, but (as simply as
our Clergy wrests the Scripture into the proof out) by the Remonstrants also,
who held it but as a very ancient Rite, that could scarcely be left off without
great offense; yea and Dr. Gouge also, that would not be entreated to say ay or
no to it at Dr. Chamberlains request, now he sees people begin to pry into it,
did once acknowledge that it was a tradition of the church; see Dr. Chamb. to
Mr Bakewel p. 3. where he says he has under Mr. Barbers hand that he said so,
and used it as an argument to persuade him to take the oath ex officio:

And I desire all men to understand by these presents, before whom we may
happen to dispute this point hereafter, that we declare against
infant-sprinkling as a novelty in the faith, and when we plead the dipping of
believers, as we are not in jest, intending otiosam disputationem such idle,
dribling demi disputes, and dainty dispatches, as the Priesthood put us off
with, wherein he flams us ith mouth for an hour or two with the flap of a fox
tail, and lends us two or three licks of Latin, and Logic and away again, but
a more serious, earnest and constant course of conferring, till the truth be
tried to the utmost, so what we are so careful to contend for, it is no new
one, but that old faith and baptism, which was once delivered to the Saints,
this course of continued discourse, though it suits not with such as seeing see
not, whose ways and courses are so much the more suspicious to be naught, by
how much the less they abide the light,

And a Modern Author whose Learning and Judgment lives in the Memories of many
of our Kentish Clergy, Sir Henry Wotton.
passed this sentence on it, Pruritus disputandi scabies Ecclesiae, yet I say
is that, the very li^e of the truth is so far concerned in, that there is very
little of it comes to light in the CCClimate of the CCClergy, by reason of
their subtle sneaping things as much as may be out of sight, that make against
them; I know the perverse disputings against the truth of men of corrupt minds
destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness, that it is reformation
enough to mend the means of Presbyters out of the Bishops superfluities, is the
scabb of the Church of England indeed, but I speak not of the pravity, but
purity of the disputation, when plain minded men destitute of all self ends are
minded to be serious and self denying, and single-hearted in this work in order
to more then either money or mere dispute it self: nor is it Pruritus
disputandi an itching simply after dispute (for who are we simple Cobblers,
Cartars, Smiths, Fishermen, Farmers, etc. to stand before the wise and the
Scribe, and the disputer of this world in that work, if God had not rejected
them, and made his wisdom foolishness) but it is pruritus disprobandi, a deep
desiring of disproving your practices as Popish, dispelling your smoke of
errors, and endeavoring to the utmost of our power according to what you have
sworn us to in that kind, to root out, not by the civil sword, but the
plainness of the word, your superstition, heresy, Schism, and whatsoever
shall be found contrary to sound doctrine, that disposes us to desire it.
Indeed The Heathen said it was a wicked custom to dispute about the Gods, for
thereby Cice^. 2. de na^ deor.
things certain are often called into question, nor have they said thus without
reason, considering what little strength of Reason they had wherewith to
assertain it, that their Gods were Gods at all, but me thinks it should not be
counted therefore a wicked custom among true Christians, that own the true God
(unless to put forth such curious questions about God as the Sch^olmen do, viz.
A^ deus potius non suisse? whether God could have chosen, whether he would have
been God or no? and such like fooleries) to dispute about their God, and about
his worship for fear it should grow more doubtful by discussing; and howbeit
considering the strong causes that commonly stiffen and harden the CCClergy in
their Heresies, or the utmost of their ends in disputing, and some of those
sor^y effects that ensue, there is but little encouragement to that work of
disputing with them, yet since truth can likely be no looser by coming to the
light nor, is diminisht, but displayed the more by how much it is discussed, I
see no reason why it should be declined, and why Heteticks are not to be
disputed withal: and here it cannot be amiss.

If we consider, 1 the Causes, 2 the de^ign of Heretics, 3 the Common effects
of disputation with them.

Among the causes of the CCClergies Heresies may be reckoned, Amor 1 Causes.
sui, a conceit of themselves, a fancied perfection and purity in them more
then others: Amor sui primum aedificavit civitatem diaboli says St. Austin)
self love first set up the devils Kingdom,

Even that great City BBBabylon that in three PPParts reigns over the Kings and
nations of the earth: for though there were many superstitions grown in upon
the Christians before in the first three hundred years, yet the pompous
Kingdom of Priests had no foundation whereupon to rise, so long as the Roman
Empire remained Heathen, for then the very Bishops of the Church of Rome, whom
the Devil has since made his Vicegerents in the world, were persecuted to the
death by the devil himself, acting in the heathen Emperors in bloody butchery
against Christians, yea the Ministers went under miserable martyrdom as w^ll
as others, and kept indiff^rent close to the truth, but when once the Dragon
who fought against Michael and his Angels with open rage before, and acted
against them under the very name of Christians, by his Angels the heathen
Emperors, and massacred Millions of Christians when he saw the Emperor himself
Constantine the Great turned Christian, and resolved to vindicate Christ's
cause, and rescue the Christians from their bloody sufferings, and finding that
Michael and his Angels did now prevail against him, and his cruel Cutthroats,
so that place must be no more found for them in heaven i. e. the high places of
power in the Empire, and that he could execute his wrath now no longer by them
against the saints, as Christians, a Christian being now come to the Crown, he
had no other remedy now then to play his cards about another way and turn
Christian also himself, that he might have the fairer advantage to crush the
true Christians, that kept the commands of God, and the faith of Jesus, under
the new nicknames of Heretics, Schismatics, etc. that would not obey the
orders of the Church, insomuch that who but the devil? who so busy as he now
to have Christian Bishops favored, cherished, advanced, honored with all the
honors that might be, next to that of the very Crown Imperial it self? who so
earnest as he to have all the world brought about by all means possible, and in
all the have to become Christians, and to become one holy Catholic Christian
Church? and so within a while (Deo permittente non approbante) having set forth
the beast, or Roman Empire in another shape, and christened it with the name of
Christendom, he scrambles up his Kingdom to himself again, makes over his
power, seat and great authority to this beast, thus transformed, and this beast
gives it all up to the Whore, he sets him up a Vicar General, and names him the
Vicar of Christ, the head of the Church, Bishop of the Universal See, and such
like, and by him, and the Ministers (of Christ) that issued from him, fills all
the earth with abomination; and reigns with as full force, though not so open
face, but under a mask (having all things in a kind of apish imitation of
Christ's kingdom) to the suppressing of the truth, as in former days he had
done, and all this came to pass through this sin of self love in the Clergy,
which as it grew great, so love to the truth grew smaller and smaller, till it
came to be totally extinguished, and the light of it wholly ecclipsed from the
earth, for when the good man Constantine in his zeal, to the truth, gave them
great Revenues, to which other princes added more still After the o^throw of
the ex^chate, (...) Emp^rs now neglecting Italy, the Roman, began now to be
governed by the advice and power of the Popes: Pepin and his son Charles having
overthrown the Lombards give unto the Popes the Ex archate, Urbine, Ancona,
Spolero, and many other Towns and territories about Rome.
according to the voice that was then heard in the air, viz. (...) vene^
insusum est ecclesiae so it sell out, for the Cle^y fell to make much of
themselves and things of the earth, to serve and seek their own interests, fell
to wrangling and jangling about Primacy, Superiority, who should be universal
Bishop, and such base, unworthy, abominable and self-pleasing practices, so
that the truth took no more place in their hearts from then ceforth for ever.

From thenceforth they began to grow in high esteem of themselves, and not only
to fancy, but also to inveagle both Princes and people to fancy some
perfection, holiness, choicenesse, spiritualnesse and purity in them more then
in all other men, and to distinguish themselves from the people by their garbs,
and titles of Holy men of God, the Spiritualty, the Clergy, or Heritage of God,
the Tribe of Levi, the lot of Gods own inheritance, the Priesthood, Ghostly
fathers, Divines, shutting out the people from sharing with them in these terms
of honor (which belong only to Gods people, whom of all the rest in the mean
time, they villyfyed with the names of Heretics) as if God himself had no
^egard almost to any but themselves, and did behold all manner of men, but
these Ministers, afar off, calling other princes, and lords (for the Clergy men
were become lords and princes too now, i. e. spiritual ones) Temporal Princes,
Lords Temporal, Secular men, and the people the Laity, Mechanics, that must
not meddle with the Scripture, so much as tolook in it (for so it was in old
time) not so much as to take upon them to be skilled in it, much less to speak
out of it, or expound, or understand any otherwise then as these Divines say is
the meaning of it; yea under the reign of these latter Lords, the Protestant
CClergy, though they have it in such plain English before their eyes, yet what
a horrible thing was it, but a few years behind fancied by Featley (and still
is well nigh universally by the CClergy here in England, who appropriate all
the wisdom about the Scripture to themselves, what a horrible thing I say, for
the people to talk on, or have more to do with Scripture, then to take it as
the Priesthood gives the sense of it: The Shoemaker goes not beyond his last,
nor the Tailor beyond his measure (quoth he) only the trade (and well might he
so call it, for by that craft they have their wealth, as handicrafts men theirs
by other crafts) of expounding Scripture is a mystery, which every Artizan
arrogateth to himself, the Physician here will be prescribing receipts, the
Lawyer will be demurring upon Dubi a Evangelica, and every handicrafts man will
be handling the pure word of God with impure and unwashed hands: this the
prattling huswife, this the old dotard, this the wrangling Sophister, in a word
this men of all profession, and men of no profession take upon them to have
skill in: sic ille: and quid ni quaeso O Sacerdos? what was the Scripture given
for thee only to look in? or wast thou set to keep people out from it under
lock and key? or may the spirit blow no where, but where thou listest? must not
all people search it? or must they search and find no more truth in it then
thou find? or must they not take it into their mouths, lest they defile it,
as Bishop Wren thought, who prohibited the people to talk on it at their
tables, for fear they should profane it?

It should seem so by Dr. Featley who cried down the people as Asses, Apron
Levites, Russet Ra^bies, the Clergy of L^cks etc. wondering that their doors,
and posts and walls did not sweat, upon which any note was fixed to give notice
of the exercises of men of any manual employment: yea it is a thousand pitties,
quoth he, that such owls and bats, and night bird^ (as if the Clergy only were
the children of the day, and the people the children of the night, and
darkness) should flutter in our Churches, and sil^ upon our fonts, Pulpits and
Communion Tables.

This was the cause of that great Schism of Corah, Dathan and Abiram Numb. 16.
all the congregation is holy, But this is the cause of that schism of Pope,
Prelate and Presbyter from the primitive freedom, that gifted Disciples,
whether offi^ers or no, had to speak to exhortation, edification and comfort,
and that the congregation then had to admonish her Ministers upon occasion Co.
4. 17. viz. all the congregation are profane, only the Priesthood holy enough
to draw near within the rails, and to preach to the people out of the Pulpit,
they are afraid (I wot) least the preaching of others there should sile and
bewray it, what need else of causing the pulpit to be washed, as I have heard
one of our Kentish Clergy men did his, after two tradesmen had preached there
in his absence: they think they are men meliore luto, of some better mould, and
taller by far in Gods affections then the People are; This conceit makes them
go apart, look upon themselves as sons of Anack, their Brethren as Grasshoppers,
shun commerce and society with them, as with publicans and sinners; In
detestation of whom, as not consecrated, they say Odi Profanum vulg^s: and in a
kind of proverbiall spel, procul hinc, procul este profani: an^ as dislike of
others, so 2. Dislike of their own places is another cause of the Heresies of
the Clergy: the foot will be the hand, or not of the body, the hand will be the
head or else will be no body at all: the Servant regarding neither the
Council, nor the command, nor the Example of his Master, who came not to
minister to, but to minister and gave in charge that there should be no
dominion among his disdiples, and bade them that meant to be greatest to be
last, and least, would needs be above his Master, and he that was sent greater
then he that sent him, and by this he entered exceedingly into error: the
Minister could not endure to be the foot, to have the whole body of the Church
stand above himself, though sure, if he were, as a king is, Major singulis, yet
he is Minor omnibus, and must stoop to the vote of the congregation: he could
not bear it to be the hand only to execute what the head directed in, but he
must be the head to give laws and ordinances of his own: Corah could not be
content with his place, but sought the Priests Office, the CCClergy could not
be contented with such Shepheardship as the Gospel had at first, but they must
need, be made Priests after that more pompous way of the law; nor to be Priests
only in sensu diviso from all the Saints, but they must seek the High Priests
office too, and have Arch-Patriachs, Archbishops, Lord Bishops etc. they could
not brook it to be amonst the Saints as them that serve, but they must be as
they that sit at meat, having all others to serve them: and in no mean manner
neither have some of their Holinesses been served, when Kings and Emperors
have stood b^e before them, bare foot at their doo^s, (as Henry the fourth
Emperor, and his wife, and son did at Pope Adrians gate before they were
admitted to the speech of him) and not only so, but held their stirrups also,
and lay down to have their necks trod upon by him (as Frederick Barbarossa did
to Pope Gregory, saying non tibi sed Petro, and was answered again by the proud
Prelate, et (...) et Petro) in a word have held it honor enough to kiss his
feet.

In the state Absoloms ambition O that I were a Judge! was the cause of his
rebellion, and the same kind of aspiring mind after no less then all power
both in heaven and earth, Church and State too, made the Clergy, when time best
served their ambitious turn, to rebel so abominably against all civil power,
as not only to exempt themselves fully from the jurisdiction of Temporal
Princes, but most wickedly to subjugate all civil power to such depency on them
and their Lord God the Pope, that when they have not been slaves to the
Clergies Imperious will, and carnal concernments, he has took upon him to act
according to that power he claims, most blasphemously saying, by me Kings
reign, to force them to surrender their crowns, and sacrifice their lives too
to his lust (witness the case of King John here in England) and in scorn to
kick off the crowns of Emperors with his feet, and in testimony of their
taking all civil power as well as spiritual to themselves, Eugenius the second
took on him within the Roman territory, the authority of creating Earls, Dukes,
and Knights, as the Exarchate had done before him, Helin p. 182. also Innocent
the third held a council in Rome in which it was enacted that the Pope should
have the correction of all Christian Princes, and that no Emperor should be
acknowledged till he had sworn obedience unto him Helin p. 184. upon the same
ambitious account Pope Boniface the eight, by a general bull exempted the
Clergy from all taxes, and subsidies to Temporal Princes, whereupon Edward the
first, put the Cl^gy out of the protection of him, and his laws, by which
course the Popes bull left r^ring here in England, He. G. p. 184. the same
Boniface boasted one day in his pontisic^l attire with the keys of the Kingdom
of heaven in his hand, that all spiritual power was committed to him, and the
next day in the Robes of an Emperor, with a naked sword born before him, that
all civil power was committed to him also, ecce duo gladii hic: yea after the
translation of the E^pire from France to Germany the Popes began to make open
protestation that the Pontifical dignity was rather to give laws to the
Emperors then to receive any from them Helin G. p. 188. and as in the state
ambition, so in the Church the des^re of a change from Membership to
Mastership, from Servantship to Lordship, over the true Clergy, is the true
cause of the Clergies Heresy and Schism, for being raised by earthly power and
greatness, they forgot the sal vation of souls, sanctity of life, and the
commandments of God, propgation of Religion, charity toward men; and to raise
arms, to make war against Christians, to invent new devises for getting
money, to profane sacred things for their own end, to enrich their kindred and
children was their only study, says Helin out of Guiciardine Geog. p. 188..

3. Gloriae secularis ^ucupium, a desire to be somebody. Judas, Thudas, Simon
Magus are Instances of it, which Simon sinned and erred so grossly out of his
vain glorious desire to be looked upon as some great one, as to offer to buy the
gift of the holy spirit for money: of which sin and error of Simon, no men
under heaven are more guilty then the CCClergy, for as they endeavor to to get
gifts and endowments for the honor, and office of ministry in the Church by
laying out money at Schools, and purchasing to themselves degrees, as if the
spirit must undoubtedly gift men for the Ministry that mean to bestow
themselves that way, when once they are trained up to be Masters of Arts in the
university, so, to say nothing how they pay for their ordination, and actual
admission into the function it self, when so fitted, though themselves call it
Simony, or the sin of Simon to buy spiritual livings, (these with them we see
are the gifts of the holy spirit) yet such is their unsatiable greediness
after glory, and greatness in the world, that as hateful a sin as Simony seems
to be among them, few of their spiritual gifts shall be lost for lack of
buying, if a fee be looked for, yea how few are dispens^t freely: and fairly
from the spirit, and not rathet from the slesh i. e. some base, corrupt,
rotten, fleshly respect and selfish end or other in the spiritual patrones? how
little or no spiritual preferment is there to bigger benefices, Bishoprics, or
what ever ecclesiastical dignity in any almost of the three Hierachies, but
its either bruitishly bought for money, or basely begged for some trencher
service, or bestowed on men, qu^ befriended, more then qua befitted with Gospel
spirits, for Gospel service, or in some sinister way of legerdemane or other
most paultrily purchased, but specially under the Papacy, where si nihil
attuleris ibis Hemere for as.

Calvin says vix cente simum quodque beneficium in papatu sine Simonia
conferri etc. searcely every hundredth benefice is bestowed at this day in the
Papacy without Simony, as the old writers desined Simony, I do not say that
they all buy them with ready money, but show me one of twenty that comes to a
benefice without some by commendation, some either kindred or alliance
promoteth, and some the authority of their parents, some by doing of pleasures
do get themselves favor. Finally, benesices are given to this end, not to
provide for the Churches, but for them that receive them, therefore they call
them benefices, by which words they do sufficiently declare, that they make no
other account of them, but as the beneficial gifts of Princes, whereby they
either get the favor of their soldiers, or reward their services, I omit how
these rewards are bestowed upon Barbers, Cooks, Moil-keepers, and such dreggish
men. And how judaical Courts do ring of no matters more, then about benefices:
so that a man may say that they are nothing else but a prey cast before dogs to
hunt after. Is this tolerable even to be heard of, that they should be called
Pastors, which have broken into possession of a Church as into a farm of their
enemy? that have have gotten it by brawling in the law? that have bought it
for money? that have deserved it by filth services: which being children yet
scantly able to speak, have received it as by inheritance from their uncles and
kinsmen, and some bastards from their fathers?

But this is more monstrous, that one man, (I will not say what manner of man,
but truly such a one as cannot govern himself) is set to govern six or seven
Churches. A man may see in these days in Princes Courts, young men that have
three Abbacies, two Bishopwricks, one Archbishopric, but there be commonly
Canons laden with with five, six or seven benefices, whereof they have no care
at all, but in receiving the rev nues, Inst. lib. 4. cap. 5. Sect. 6. etc.

Thus they: yea the Popes studied nothing more says, Helin Geog. p. 184. then
to advance their Nephews, for by that name the Popes use to call their
bastards: hence came the saying of Alexander the third viz. the laws forbid us
to get children, and the devil has given us Nephews in their stead: and though
L^her add Calvin were themselves men of more moderate minds then to purchase
pre^eminencies, titles, dignities to themselves, yet, though somewhat better
then at Rome, it has been too bad among the Successors of both in Clerical
capacity as to that corrupt kind of climbing to the chiefest punctillioes of
earthly eminency they canattain to^yea verily there is very few of them but they
are Papalis Ambitionis homines of Popely aspiring minds, seeking superiority,
gaping after glory (of this world, not that to come) liking to be looked upon
with distinction, as men not like other men, as men of worth, when their worth
lies more many times in what they have, then what they are, affecting to be
applauded for their very Sermons, to be humb'd when they come to a period, in
order to which (I bl^sh to think how they were wont to pause and look fo^'t in
university pulpits, and sometimes too when to their greater shame they went
without it) and to be thankt for their great pains, when they have done: thus
surfeiting upon self-conceit, and being drunk with affectation, they err in
affection to the rule of faith (for how can y^ believe (says Christ) when ye
receive honor one of another, and seek not that honor that comes from God
only? John 5. this honor from beneath is the very element in which, and not
in God, (save as they are his creatures) these Cha^aelens the CCClergy live,
move, and have their being.

The a^r of popularity is the breath, by which the Heretic lives, vain glory
the stirroy by which he mounts into such magnitude, and towers so high as to
overtop not only all other people, but all other Princes also of the earth,
and to exalt himself above all that is worshipped and called God, he lack^ to
make himself a name like to the name of the great men that are on the earth,
for the name of Minister or Servant, to so plain and disrespected a Master too,
as the Master Christ was, whose name was cast out as evil, who made himself of
no reputation, and would have all hisServants specially the Servants of all his
Servants to be of the same mind and follow him through scorn, shame, suffering,
and not be above him here, if they mean to reign with him hereafter, this was
too mean a name for him to be known by, he must be Dominus Dominorum here, and
KKKing it over the Kings of the earth: Paschalis the first caused the Priests
of certain parishes at Rome, by reason of the neernesse of his person, their
presence at his election, and to honor their Authority with a more venerable
title, to be called Cardinals, they are now Mates for Kings, and numbered about
70 Helin Geog. p. 182.

And howbeit Christ forbad his ministers the seeking of glory from men in this
world, as not the time for them to come to the crown in, or to any thing but
the cross; yet his desire was Dicier hic est to be cried up by the people as
Supreme Moderator in all the matters of Christ's Church, and civil State too,
against the plain will of the old master in his word, and to be sought after as
a new Master: Our Savior says of the Pharisees they loved the praises of men,
and the present priesthood of the Protestant nations lay this to our charge,
who are Christ's Messengers and Servants to his Churches, whom they call
Anabaptists, calumniating us so far as we are zealous, and follow on (according
to the many covenants, which both they and we have taken) to reform fully by
the word, as if we sought nothing but glory and to be seen of men, and merely
to make our selves Masters of a sect, and such like, which if we do we shall
dearly answer for the sin of seeking, and serving our selves of Christ's service
at the last as well as they, but me thinks (if blindness in this point had not
happened to them) they should see of themselves, that men cannot seek secular
honor to themselves by siding with such a sect as ever was (and ever will be
whilst the world stands, such is its hatred to the truth) every spoken
against; yea verily the name of these churches, that own and keep close to all
the principles of Christ's doctrine, and own the whole truth, for Christ's sake,
whose they are, both are, and yet will be cast out as evil by all other
churches: yet grant these Churches should grow into more request, and favor
among men (as they do at sometimes more then some Act. 9. 31.) ye their
Messengers to the world must expect to be continually under clouds and to be
counted deceivers, disturbers, trouble towns, turners of the world upside
down, where ere they come, and to be in tumults, and disho^ors, and evil
reports among most men 2 Cor. 6. 4. 10. yea woe un^o those Ministers that desire
all men should speak well of them, it is a shrewd sign they are none of Christ's,
I think God has set forth us Messengers last of all (says Paul of the Messen
gers to the Church of Corinth, when it was at rest 1 Cor. 4. 9. 13.) as men
appointed to death, for we are made a spectacle to the world, and Angels and
men, we are fools for Christ's sake, we are weak, the Church themselves may be
honored, but we must be despised, we hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are
bussetted, and have no certain dwelling place, and labor working with our
hands: being reviled we bless, being persecuted we suffer it, being defamed we
entreat, we are made the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of alls
things unto this day.

So that I marvel men should think we seek to be cried up among men; yet thus
are we censured by the Clergy (and all that ever were forward for the truth,
and sought to vindicate it in any part thereof, since it began to return from
under those clouds, wherewith the Clergy has overcast it, were so censured by
the Common Council of Clergy men, in their several climates) as drawing
disciples after us, that they might be called after our name, and not Christ's,
and so we, and not he be glotified: The papists calumuiated Luther with it,
that he affected his disciples should be called Lutherans, but he denied it:
non s^o fatue, non s^* oro ut meum nomen taceatur, avs^t of mihi faetido^ermium
succo accederet, ut filii Christi meo vilissimo nomine d^ cerentur; in like
manner say we to them, who are insatuated into the same faith concerning us,
Non sic O sacerd^s, non sic: Oramus non ut nostrum, sed ut Christi nomen
nominetur, et ut quisquis nominat nomen Christi ab iniquitate ista abscedat 2 Timothy 2. 19. Imo absit a nobis gloriari, nisi in cruce Jesus Christi, per quem
mundus nobis cru^isixus est, and nos mundo Gal. 6. 14. novit dominus qui sui
junt: as for your selves O Priests non vide^is idmanticae quod in tergo est.
It Is the praise of men that most of you seek, much more then the praise of God,
this makes you so err from the way of truth, this makes it more tedious to
you, then it is ordinarily to other men* to be of that sect that is every where
spoken against, and to see the Gospel, whose constant companions disgraces are,
when it shines upon you: you are impatient of hearing so much ill as poor
Christ in his disciples must, and so are for the most part capable but of
little good.

4. Covetousness St paul calls it the root of all evil, al in the church al in
the commonwealth grows out of the root of Papal, Prelatical, Presbyterian, (I
had almost said, and might say it, if they turn Tith-mongers too, whether per
se or per alios) Independent covetousness: Achans lar^iledge, Naboths Murder,
Naamans Idolatry, Iudas's treason, Demetrius's persecution. Demas's apostasy;
even all the mischief of all these kinds, which have been acted by the CCClergy
throughout all christendom, who, as is showed above, are in truth the most
sacrilegious, cruel, false worshipping, Christ selling, truth treading, and
Apostatical generation that age, from Apostolical purity, does proceed from
this rotten root of covetousness, which has so corrupted the whole Mass of
men called Ministers, for this 1260. years and upward, that vel duo vel nemo,
few or none of them have ever preached the Gospel, nor freely, and fully held
forth the truth in all points, as it is in Jesus, from thenceforth to this very
day.

And indeed how can any other be expected, then corrupt doctrines from men of
corrupt minds, which hold gold to be godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 5. and pose liberal
and bountiful maintenance, and rich Revenues to be the chief corner stone in
their church work? yet thus the Clergy by their wonted clamors for it not only
at Rome but at Westminster also seem to me to suppose; yea the higest pitch
that many of them seem to point at in reformation of religion is, the restoring
of impropriations,, and crushing the pride of the swelling Poppies or Episcopal
clergy, and conferring that large allowance on the Presbyterial: you cry out
that a base Ministry can never do good upon the people, and that the poverty of
the Ministry is enough to bring them into contempt, and that the church is
robbed of a painful Ministry, because there is not honey enough in the hives to
feed a drone.

But I say you have made your selves more base by far, and brought your selves
into more contempt by your covetousness, and greedy gaping after riches, then
ever yet you came into by poverty, and that one Drone will devoute more
maintenance if men put into his mouth as long as he will open it, as many
honest, selfdenying ministers will make a good shift, not only to live, but to
live to Christ on: they are not seducers that preach on cheaper terms, but the
basest Ministers, if you count that baseness, to be destitute of liberal
maintenance, were ever yet the best Ministers of the Gospel, and the most
enriching Ministers to the people: Christ foresaw clearly enough that a rich
ministry would make but poor work in his Vineyard, therefore in his wisdom
chose not many rich, nor mighty, nor noble, but the foolish, weak, base,
abject, despised ones in the eyes of the world, and earthen vessels to send his
treasure by into the world 1 Cor. 1. 26 27. 28. 2 Cor. 4. 7. yea those
Ministers of Christ that were in afflictions, necessities, distresses, hunger
and thirst, cold and nakedness, poor and having nothing, that neither had, nor
provided silver nor gold, nor brass in their purses (as Peter and Paul and the
rest of the primitive preachers had not) were the most precious, plain,
painful, profitable preachers of the Gospel that ever the earth bore, Matthew.
10. 9. Act. 3 6. 1 Cor. 4. 11. 2 Cor. 6. 4. ad 11. 2 Cor. 11. 23. ad 28. and if
mighty means were such a mighty means to make able Ministers of Christ, as is
pretended by you Clergymen, that tell the State they may as well set Carpenters
to build without tools, as send forth Ministars without liberal maintenance, I
wonder there are no better Ministers at Rome, where they are maintained more
like Monarchs then Ministers of Christ: but it is a true proverb, that their
golden cups made them become such wooden Priests: Cum ecclesia peperit divitias
filia devoravit matrem: you tell the Magistrates that theyl discourage persons
from meddling therewith, if they allow not large maintenance to the Ministry, But
I pray God they may never meddle more with the Ministry, that are encouraged to
enter on it with respect to maintenance, such ever more maimed then maintained
the Gospel: such which loved the gold of the altar dearer then the altar, and
Corban more then conscience, and minded the wages more then the work as
(exceptis excepiendis some few only excepted) the national Ministry ever did
since donations of dignities from Temporal Princes fell upon them, were ever
more murderers then Ministers of the Gospel, nil tam sanctum, the Heathen said
but gold would expugne it. You would be rich, and so fall into temptation and a
snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, that drown men in destruction
and perdition; your love of money was the mother of all mischief, which while
you coveted after, you were seduced from the faith: yea in these days wherein
you vow, and protest for the faith, as if you would fain follow on to find it
fully, as it was once delivered to the Saints, you will neither find it further, nor
follow it faster then it keeps pace with your outward enjoyments, so that we
may say truly Quantum quisque sua nummorum servat in arca, tantum habet et
fidei: so much money as you can get by it, so much faith, religion, reformation
you will be for, and no more; yea like Lawyers, that look more at the greatness of
the fee, then the goodness of the cause, nay being feed better, leave their
old Clients and turn to the other side, so do many of you in these days
(wherein many run to and fro that knowledge may be increased) turn to and fro
that livings may still be established on you, from mass, to liturgy, and back
again, and back again, and then to the directory, from all which, while you
stood in the practice of them, there was no moving you by Scripture nor reason:
but qui pecunia non movetur hunc dignum spectatu arbitramur. But you plead that
the mouth of the Ox must not be muzzled that treads out the Corn, that it is
the will of God that such as have sown in the Church spiritual things should
reap their carnal things, that such as preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel.

I answer it is most true there is a power, and liberty allowed, for such as
serve the Church to eat and to drink, and to subsist (in case they cannot
subsist otherwise) at the charges of the Church, when she sets them apart for
her service, 1 Cor. 9. but it is most commendable, and thankworthy in the
Ministry to serve the Church and preach the Gospel freely, and as far as it is
possible not to be burdensome in this kind at all, as namely in case they have
any estates of their own, or can improve themselves in any such outward
employment, labor or lawful calling whereby to obtain a competent livelihood,
and lay out themselves and the gifts, that Christ has freely given them, in
the service of Christ freely too, as men may do many times, if they be not
idle, and loving their own ease more then to ease the church of Christ of
unnecessary pressures in their purses.

And thus the Apostle Paul, and the first Ministers of the Gospel did, and
though they pleaded a power to live upon them, in case they could not live
without them, that the Church might know it to be their duty freely to minister
to their Ministers necessities, when they saw them willing freely to expose
themselves to necessities, for the truths sake, rather then seek supersluities
to themselves, yet they did not use that power they had, much less abuse it
too make a trade of it, but did rather suffer all things that they might make
the Gospel as little chargeable as might me 1 Cor. 9. 12. 18. yea they received
wages sometimes when they went out to warfare, i. e. to preach the Gospel up
and down, so as was utterly inconsistent with the total maintaining of
themselves, which while they abode more settledly at one place, they did attend
to with their own hands: for its evident that to this end they might not hinder
the Gospel from taking place in men's hearts by seeming too much to make a
trade of it, they labored, working with their own hands, as ost as they could
conveniently, and their own hands ministered to their own necessities, and they
had some honest outward occupation (as also Christ himself had, and sollowed
too, till he was wholly taken up in travel to preach the truth, therefore Mark.
6. 3. is not this the Carpenter?) wherein they wrought at all times, saving
when they were actually employed in some service of preaching to the world,
writing, disputing, visiting etc. as is plain to him that consults these
Scriptures, in the last of which, least any should think they did more then
Ministers now need Act. 18. 3. 4. Act. 20. 33. 34. 35. 2 Cor. 11. 7. ad 12. so
12. 13. 18. 1 Cor. 4. 11, 12. 1 These. 2. 9. 2. These. 4. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
to do, Paul says plainly they did not use their power, that they might be an
ensample to others to follow them, so Act. 20. 35. and therefore howbeit he
bids Timothy, that was a Minister of the Gospel, not entangle himself in the
affairs of this life (for it is not good indeed that Ministers, mind the world so
much as to cumber themselves with over much business in it, that they may be
more free, then other men to please Christ, who calls them in a more special
sense, then all Christians, to be his soldiers, yet I believe he is far from
prohibiting him in that speech from following any civil calling at all, for in
the very verse before 2 Timothy 2. 3. 4. he bids him endure hardness as a good
Soldier of Jesus Christ: yea Ministers of all men should be patient of all
things for the Gospel sake, that they hinder it not by their delicacy viz. of
hard work sometimes, and hard fare too, if occasion be, and hunger and thirst,
and cold and nakedness, and extremities, and necessities, and distresses,
rather then lie too heavy upon the flock of Christ, which is a little flock,
and those few mostly poor folks too in this world, though rich in faith, that
may have more mind then ability to Minister to their Ministers, and many of
them more need to be ministered to by their Ministers, if at any time they have
abundance, then to have their household stuff strein'd, and sold, (as poor folks
kettles, pots, pans, and platters are by the Priests, and their publican
tith-gatherers) to pay them.

You tell us that the first Ministers were gifted from God to preach the Gospel
extempore, and therefore well might they work, and yet easily preach the Gospel
too, but the Ministers now must attain to it by much study, and hard pains, and
therefore had need to be sequestered wholly from all earthly employments, that
they may give themselves wholly to that work of preaching, and to have such
sufficiency of means allowed them, as may free them from all thoughts of other
things, and furnish them to buy abundance of books, without which tools you
say in the trade of preaching, you cannot set up possibly to any good purpose:
thus Featley p. 101. prophecy (quoth he) is an extraordinary gift of the holy
spirit, preaching a special faculty acquired by many years study, and Mr.
Evans, in his Sermon to the Lords my Lords (quoth he) we know you would have a
learned Ministry, but it is impossible for learning ever to flourish without
maintenance, you may as well set carpenters to build without tools, as send
forth Ministers without their parchments: we plead not my Lords, for our backs,
and for our bellies, but for good books; and furnished brains: there are some
that will seduce upon cheaper terms, but there must be honest provision made
that every Minister may have a good library, or else the Land is like to have
but an ignorant Ministry, and a perishing people: again my Lords, we know you
would have a gracious people, to fear God, honor the King, and obey your
honors; but it is sufficiently known that a base Ministry can never do good
upon the people: the general pride of man is such, that poverty is enough to
bring a man into contempt, etc.

As if because the pride of man specially of great men, is so great that the
poor mean Ministers of Christ are subject to be despised by them, therefore
they must have a kind of pompous Priesthood that may delight their daintines,
and fit their vain fancies, and haughty humors: what the Lords of the earth
would have I know not so well as themselves, I believe they would have a
learned Ministry to lean to, and live at ease on, and a people to fear God as
far as themselves do, among whom the fear of God has been taught still after
the precepts of the men called CCClergy; and to honor the King, and obey their
Honors: but this I know, and therefore it is but flattery (not to say foolery)
to tickle them up with talk of their great zeal of the Gospel, as their fawning
Chaplains do, that few or none of their Honors are effectually called to
Christ, or have ever yet honored him so far as to honor, own, and acknowledge
his truth in that primitive purity, wherein it was at first given out, partly
because the CCClergy claws them too much into odd conceits, and with untempred
mortar dawbs them into a belief of an Omnia been in that easy gaudy gospel
they sow as a pillow under their elbowes, and partly because not many of these
mighty and nobles ones will stoop, when it is discovered to them, to that
plainness, and simplicity that is in Christ 2 Cor. 11. 3. to that foolishness
of mechanic preaching, that baseness of baptizing, that streightway of
self-denying, that needless work of Scripture searching with their own eyes,
that weak nothing of Christ's choosing, by which to confound, and bring to
naught in the end, the prudence of the Scribes and wisemen of this world, whom
they wonder after; so the great King of Kings and Lord of Lords Christ Jesus
was not over-seen, and yet he chose such base things, and sent forth such a
poor base Ministry of illiterate mechanics to preach his Gospel, at the first
beginning of it too, which surely he would not have done if it were his own
mind, that the contempt of his ministry, which by their poverty, illiteracy,
and outward baseness is apt to arise in the hearts of the proud, should be
prevented by putting the outward pomp of much earthly riches, and that low
literature of this foolishly wise world upon them?

Mean while I am not against a Ministers having learning, let a man have as
much as he will on it, so he use it as a telent to serve the truth with, when
once he he has found, and owned it: but against that necessity of outward
learning to the Ministry of Christ, so as to say (as the Priesthood does) that
ordinarily a man cannot be a Minister of Christ without it: for verily the
spirit, which only makes a Minister, blows where it lists, and does (for ought
I see) bestow it self now, as of old it did, more frequently upon poor
Mechanics and illiterate Artizans, then learned Scribes, and Schoolmen.

Nor am I against a Ministers having a library, and looking into other books if
he have a mind to it, and have money enough of his own to buy them, so be he do
not lose himself therein (as the CCClergy in all ages have done) from his
serious study, and sincere search of the plain Scripture it self: but I am far
from desiring that poor people should be charged to fill, and furnish Ministers
studies with books, and their brains with notions out of other Authors, that
are no more to be heeded then themselves, further then they speak according to
the word: nor shall I ever acknowledge such a necessity as you plead that men
must needs busy their brains about abundance of other men's writings, or else
cannot but be ignorant Ministers of the Gospel, since the Scriptures themselves
are of themselves (if the CCClergy could once consider it, or one could
possibly beat it into their brains) profitable for all things, and able to
make Ministers, and people wise enough to salvation, and to make a man of God
perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto all good works, but that they do not store
their hearts (as they should do) with study of them only, or at least mainly,
as the primitive Ministers of the Gospel did, and the purest Ministers of it
now do: 2 Timothy 3. 14. 15. 16. I wonder what our Clergy men would do to preach
the Gospel if there were no other books extant but the very bible, they would
surely either cease from being Ministers any more at all, or else make better
Ministers then they are.

I do not speak this to excite men to make such a bone fire of all books, but
the bible, as Dr. Featley says John Matthias made p. 165. and yet (by the
Clergies leave) I dare not say as Dr. Featly there says, that twere better all
those who (in his sense) are obstinate Sectaries (for many such are precious
Saints) were burnt at a stake, then that such a bone fire were made, for I know
no absolute necessity to the salvation of men, of the being of any book in the
world but the bible; which as it was once alsufficient to make men wise to
salvation, without looking into any other, and before there were many other
besides it, so I know not (since we have them in such plainness as now we have
(maugre all the malice of the Pope and Clergy, who would once have made a bone
fire of the Scriptures) why it is not as alsufficient as heretofore, whilst yet
there was no more Gospel Scripture then in self: but I speak it to excite the
CCClergy (for whom I have great sorrow of heart to see their miserable neglect
of, and wretched ignorance in the Scriptures) to give more attendance to the
reading of them* as which are alsufficient, and only necessary to a Minister,
if there were no other books at all besides them; and to fix them that have
been erratical in the misty moon shine of men's inventions, under the sun shine
of that unspeakably glorious Orb, I mean the Scripture, which many Clergy men
in Christndom have been so far from being skild in, that we may well conceive,
that they never so much as look into it at all * Witness Al bert Archbi. of
Mentz, who being at the diet at Ausbourge An. 1530. and finding a bible on the
the Table, and reading some leaves thereof where by chance he opened it, said,
t^uly I know not what book this is, but this I see it makes all against us:
. Sure Timothy and Titus, and Clement and the Ministry that was Coetaneons, and
immediately succedaneous unto them, were more precious Ministers then any are
now adays, and yet they never read Saint Origin, nor Saint Austin, nor any of
those millions of Rabbis, Schoolmen, and Scribes that have scribled since,
having learned no more Gospel then what the Scriptures learnt them, for I do
not think they had such libraries of books as are now pleaded for, which
Scripture we have as free access to as they then had; and have time enough to
read, and preach, and do somewhat else toward an honest livelihood too, as well
as they, if we be not idle, and fith its pleaded that their prophesying was an
extraordinary gift, of the holy spirit, but preaching now is a special faculty
attained not without many years study, and the constant course of it maintained
by constant study: I say our prophecyings in the Church, and preachings to the
world too, either are or ought to be all one with theirs, or else we are not as
we should be: and as no man was a Minister then, but by a gift from above, so I
know no man (though Dr. Featly knew so many, that not one among an 100 of the
Country Clergy, had any tolerable gift of extempore prayer) that is a Minister
of Christ, but the same way as they then were viz. by a gift in some fort to
make out the mind of men to God in prayers, and the mind of God to men in
preaching, whether to the Church in way of exhortation, edification, and
comfort (for that was Prophecy 1 Cor. 14. 1.) or to the world in publishing
the glad tidings of Gods love to it, which is more properly preaching: I know
no new way that Christ has chosen to make Ministers in, since the primitive
times, he did not make his Ministers then by gifts, and now by no gifts, nor
yet by new gifts, he did not make Ministers then by gifts given, and now by
gifts gotten, then from above, and now from beneath, then from heaven; and now
from the universities, then from mere knowledge of the Scriptures, and now from
a muddy minglement, and mixed mess of science falsely so called, or skill in
his Scriptures, and men's Scriptures together; then by a simple spiritual
Donation, and now by a simple fleshly Dronation in the Hive of such humane
preparatives, as the Clergy conceive the spirit to be in a manner so concerned
to blow upon, as if he could scarce have their free leave to breath besides
them, but as he gave then, and powered out his spirit as he saw good, and more
ordinarily upon men that were not learned, and wise with the wisdom of this
world then on those that were, so he does now in these latter days, not tying
himself to men, whose education is at universities, more then to others, but
rather more frequently filling men illiterate, as to such science, and secular
Artizans then such as those.

I confess the CCClergies preaching is a faculty attained by many years study,
and yet when they have been seven years, and oftentimes seven more, Apprentices
in the Universities, they are fitter for a living then for preaching too
Magister art is ingenii que la^tor venture docuit negatas artifex sequi voces.
, but the preaching of the true Ministers is no such thing.

Nor am I against any man's studying in order to the receiving of any good, or
gift, from Christ, and his spirit, and in order to increase, ^and growth in any
spiritual gift, that Christ has freely bestowed upon them 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16.
, so their study be that of Timothy, who from a child was verst in the holy
Scriptures, yea I wish to the Lord our men in order to the Ministry would
meddle more there then they do, for school students are too great strangers to
the study thereof, whilst they surfeit on Logical and Theological systems so
much, as to suffer themselves implicitly to be seasoned besides the true sense
of Scripture thereby: but I hope the study of the Scripture which may fully fit
a man for good a improvement of himself in the Gospel, need not claim so much
honorable maintenance, but that a man may maintain himself by some other
calling, and treasure them up in his spirit too in good time, by his daily
commerce with them, so as out of that good treasury of his he art to bring
forth good things without much a do, and such a do as Clergy men make about a
text and sermon, dividing, devising, and inventing, more then freely venting
the word from the richness of its dwelling in them, yea and so as to be like a
good Scribe thoroughly instructed to the Kingdom of God, and bringing out of his
treasury extempore upon all accasions, things new and old, and not be like a
narrow mouthed bottle long in filling, and as long in flowing out again.

Though therefore there is a power to take pay in some cases for the work of
preaching, yet first its good that power be not used without necessity, but you
O PPPriests, through covetuousnesse do much abuse that power, by using it to
the utmost when yet you need not, yea though many of you have means enogh of
your own, and may live fully and preach freely too.

2. It must be upon the Church only, upon the brethren, on believers, and not
upon the world, nor the Gentiles or unbelievers, that the Church-ministers must
ly, for that will hinder the receipt of the Gospel very much among them, if
they find it a chargeable Gospel before they own it, therefore those that
preached to unbelievers and infidels to convert them to the faith, went forth
at first freely, for the name sake of Christ, taking nothing of the Gentiles 2.
Ep. John 7. 8. But you OPPPriests receive pay from any men, all men of whom you
any can way have it, as well infidels, or unbelievers, as such as are obedient
to the faith, for in your national and parochial Churches, there are not half,
nor a tenth part of them believers, by your own confession, yea your Ministry
supposes them to be infidells as yet, why else do you preach to convert them to
the faith, and cry out there is few of them have the knowledge of God, that
they are in a damnable state, and such lik^? or if you say these are not your
Church, then it confirms what I am saying, viz. that you expect pay from men,
whether in church or out, whether Gentiles or Church Members, contrary to the
primitive times, wherein the ministers of Christ were not maintained by the
nations.

3. It must be every Minister upon the particular flock he Ministers too, and
feeds, and not another flock, that are fed by other Pastors, and do not choose,
nor own them to be their Ministers at all, for though the Messengers, whose
ministry lay mostly in preaching to the world, and assisting all the Churches
where they came, might and did as occasion was, not otherwise, take wages of
more Churches then one, and sometimes of some churches (that might be richer
and more free) to do other Churches service, that might happily be neither so
full, nor forward, as see 2 Cor. 11. 8. yet the Scripture speaks thus, that
such should eat of the flock that feed it 1 Cor. 9. much less did the Pastor
of one Church ever take pay of the Pastor of another in the primitive times.
But you parish Priests claim pay often of other flocks then your own; of the
people of other parishes, that you never preach to, of the gathered Churches,
and their Ministers too, as they happen to live, or to have or use houses or
lands within such or such precincts, that never own you nor never will do to be
their Pastors.

Yea so it falls out sometimes, when one man occupies several pieces of land in
so many several parishes, that if not seven, yet four or five Priests take hold
on the sk^t of one poor sheep of Christ, that belongs to some separated
congregation or other, and ownes never a one of them all to be his Pastor,
saying we must have so much of thee for such land that lies in such a place;
and so you shall have several sheepheards at once at sharing time upon the back
of one sheep, every one of them precending to have some right or other to share
him, when none of them all have any interest in him at all as his sheep,
whilst he stands in relation to some other pastor: yea the true church may say
of the Clergy constreining her to pay to them, and so to serve their false
church and Ministry, as the spouse says Cant. 1. they made me keeper of their
vineyard, paymaster to their Priests, but my own vineyard have I not kept nor
paid to my own pastors, for indeed how can they pay to these and them too?

4. This is to be done gratis willingly and freely to, by the church, but not
wickedly to be forced from them by a foraneous power, and by other weapons then
those of the Churches warfare, which are not guns, prisons; summons before
Committees, strainings, trebble damages, nor taxes from the civil Magistrates,
in whose nations the churches live, for no minister of Christ's flock did ever
run to beg of the civil Magistrate to force his flock to feed him, and to flea
(...) flock for him with his cutlash, if he could not constrain him by the
considera^n of his love, and service, and freenes, and forwardness of his own
accord for their good, as freely again to consider the necessity of his
condition, and that in no wise in the way of ^es neither.

But the parish Priest will not be contented with what is freely given him by
them that own him, nor them that own him not, and are none of his neither, but
he will have it whether they will or no, and be his own carver too, and have
the tith, which Christ never alloted him to take, or rather the sixth, if it be
of corn, considering the Husbandmans charges of plowing, sowing, reaping,
binding, and standing to all hazard; for the Parson takes no pains, but to
take the clear tenth when its ready shockt to his hands, and is at no charges
at all, save barely what it consts him to carry into his barn: and this he will
have by fair means of foul, it matters not in what ravenous, hasty, trebble
dammaging, forcible, shameful, scraping, ridiculous way, so he have it. Populus
me sibilet at mihi plando and (...) I blush to see their baseness in this
particular.

5. It Is the Ministers duty to preach constanly, to be instant in season and out
of season, to do his work as an Evangelist, and fulfill his ministry, and that
freely, whether the Church do their work, their duty to him, yea or no: yea; if
from the world he be rewarded with naught but stripes, mocks, fcoss^, and all
the base usage that may be, yea the spoiling of his goods, yet must he preach,
if he be a messenger to them: and if his flock be so poor that they cannot, or
so hard hearted that they will not minister to his necessities, yet necessity
lies on him, and woe to him if he preach not, and, if he be able, help not those
that are poor among them too.

But many of you Priests if ye have never so much means of your own beside,
whereby you are called to relieve such poor people as you rather peel, if it be
but twopence almost that you say is due from them, will have your pay, or else
it may chance to cost them three times three pence, and a better penny before
you have done with them, you know no more necessity lying on you to feed them,
then lies upon the people to feed you, though they be far poorer then your
selves, and you better fed then they taught; no pay no preach is your
principle, so far at least that if one people give better pay, and one flock
better milk then another, you are not only under a liberty, but under a clear
call also to leave one and cleave to the other.

6. It Is the Gospel he is to preach too, or else he can claim nothing at all by
any order of Christ, the Church is not bound to maintain men, though in the
name of ministers, that preach down, that preach against the Gospel.

But the Lord will maintain a poor people in these latter days that shall
maintain it to the faces of you PPPriesthood of the Nations, that you have
been, and still are, till you repent and be baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus for remission of sins, the most inveterate enemies the pure primitive
Gospel has, or ever had, since you reigned, to this very day, yet for all this
you must be maintained, under the notion of the ministers of the Gospel, and
that too in part by them that preach the Gospel freely, and a thousand fold
more truly, purely, perfectly, and plainly then your selves do; whether you do
the work or no, yea though you work against the Gospel, yet you must have
Gospel wages, thus run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, though
you have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray from the Gospel, and are
found defying, and some of you cursing, rather then building up, and blessing
the true Israel of God that do his will, yet following the way of Balaam the
son of Bosor, you love, and look to have wages, and that of Israel too for this
unrighteousness 2 Per. 15. Jude 11. But the love of the wages of Balaam St.
Jude and St. Peter too makes the character of false teachers, cursed speakers:
Thus though you do not what is your duty to the people, which if you did
Christ's people at least (and from none else are his ministers to require and
expect maintenance, how far they may accept it is good to query) would be free
to theirs, yet you will force the people to do that which is more then their duty
to you, and if men put not into your mouths, which are more open to call in
tith then give out truth, you prepare war: and if any say unto you or your
Assassinated Assigns, which you send for your tith, as some said of old to the
Priests servants, when they came to take the Priests due, or rather more then
their due out of the sacrifice, before they had offered, or done their part of
service, let them do their duty first, and then take for them as much as thy
soul desires, but we desire them to stay, and forbear to take the wages before
they have done their work, or preached the Gospel, which they pretend to take
pay for, but for ought we find they preach against it, then these hasty
hirelings, or the hirelings they hire to help them, like the rude servants of
those wicked sons of Belial, the sons of Eli the Priests, who made themselves
vile in this kind of fatting themselves, and many more (whose sin was therefore
very great before the Lord, insomuch that the name of a Priest stunk, and was
odious unto the people, and men abhorred the offering of the Lord for their
sakes) make answer, nay but thou shall give it me now, and if not I will take
it by force, 1 Samuel 212. ad 30. 7. It Is but a Ministration of mere necessaries,
and merely to necessities of Ministers that the Church is bound to Minister,
even of them that do preach the Gospel, and not to Minister such supersluities
as shall sink themselves, and hoise their Minister up to be a son of Anack, and
themselves grasshoppers, worth more then almost all the flock besides him, see
Phil. 4. 10. 11. 12. 13: ad 17. so that he shall think himself too good to lay
his hands to any labor.

But you the Priesthood of the Nations have given your selves such an
universal Supersede as, and disingagement from all manner of manual
occupation, and secular callings, that it is as great a wonder to the world to
see you about any business of baseness as Dr. Feat. deems that, wherein Peter,
Paul, and Christ Jesus were exercised, who were (as to their outward
profession) a fisherman, a tentmaker, a carpenter, as it is to see the true
Clergy of Laics, whom you have Lorded it over, improving what God has given
them in the pulpit: and whereas Paul was of opinion that twould not hinder the
Gospel, if the power to live on the Gospel were much used, you are not of this
mind, but suppose it to be much hindered if it be not made use of to the very
u^most, and live at least at the length of that Christian liberty: and whereas
he deemed it not a little honorable to the Gospel to keep it from being
onerable, and without charge, you fear there is plus oner is quam honoris in'^
to your selves, and therefore do even abhor, detest and abominate to have it
meddled with by Russet Rabbis Apron Levites, Mechanics, Featly p. 113.
or to meddle at all your selves with Mechanic matters, yea coachmen, weavers,
felt makers, and other base Mechanics, quoth Dr. Feat. p. 120. exercise in
public Churches, to the great dishonor of God, profanation of his
ordinances, and scandal of the reformed Churches, as if Christ's, and Paul's, and
Peter's being tradesmen before, and some of them after, and even while they were
actually in the Ministry, were an unworthy unsuitable thing, because the
Priesthood, who are too proud to preach, and take other pains too for their
livings, are pleased to say so:

Yea such is the covetousness, and greedy mind of you the Priesthood of the
Nations for the most part of you, that you are ever crying give, give, and
howbeit some of you have too little, yet those that have most, have never
enough, but are most eager after more, Ier 6. 13, from the least even to the
greatest of you, every one is given to covetousness: from the thread bare
Curate to the silken Cassock, from the Paritor to the Proctor, from the
Parochial Bishop to the Diocesan, to the Provincial Archbishop, from the
Deacons to the Archdeacons, Deans, and their Officials, Parsons, Vicars,
Curates, and all spiritual persons hanging on that Hierarchy, from the Classis
to the Aecumenical Council, from the Presbyter to the Pope, by whom he stands
so (unless he say the Magistrate made him a Minister) from the Friar to the
Prior of his Covent, to the Provincial, to the General of his order, from the
Chorister to the Cardinal, from the meanest and most inferior fry to the
whole fraternity of the spiritualty, from the parish Clark and Sexton to the
whole Priesthood, every one is given more or less to look to his own gain from
his quarter, Yea Oh thou BBBabilon or TTTripartite Tower, and CCCity, that
sit upon many waters, tongues, Nations, Kinreds, King^ and people (compare
Ier. 51. 13. with Rev. 16. 19, 17. 1. 15. 18. 18. per totum) abundant in
Treasures, thine end is come, and the measure of thy covetousness, thine eyes,
and thine heart are not but for thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent
blood with them that are greedy of gain, Prove. 1. 13. and for violence to do
it. Thefore as thou entredst Christndom like a fox, and reig^'dst like a lion,
so will thou die at last like a dog, and be buried with the burial of an ass,
and yet for all that they shall not lament for thee (except such as love, and
lie in bed of adu^ltery with thee, and shall perish with thee Rev. 2. 22.)
saying alas alas, ah Lord, or a^ his glory, but celebrate thy funerals with the
dirge of Hallelu^ah: (compare Ier. 22. with Rev. 18. per totum 19. 1. ad 8. Oh
the infinite capacious gullet, and concavity of the CCClerical coffer! how has
it swallowed down, and devoured for ages together (and yet is not choakt, by
cries out more maintenance, more maintenance) without streining, not only the
g^at of great and petty tithes (by which much more then every tenth year
(happily every seventh they being at no charge but bare taking the tenth of
corn) the profits of all Christ^dom falls into the mouth of this Caterpillar)
but also the camel of free gifts, glebes, first fruits, oblations, and other
obventions, Arch-deaconries, Deaneries, Prebendaries, Bishoprics, and
Arch-bishopricks, and I know not how many kinds of spiritual livings, spiritual
Lordships, and spiritual dignities, spiritual Patrimonies that are assigned for
the maintenance of the CCClergie? among whom its catch as catch can too, so
that some get all (the devil and all) and some none, and yet some of those poor
wretches that get least, get as little of God, as those that lose him
altogether, and sell him for the mess of pottage, of some fat parsonage, or, as
sometimes men do, whom I am ashamed to call Ministers (unless I mean of the
Pope) for two or three fat parsonages, or special benefices together: it is a
shame that for all the night is so far spent here in England, yet even here
there is such endeavoring for preferments still, such heaping up of more
spiritual dignities, and Ecclesiastical emoluments then one, and plutalities of
profitable places, ingrost by single persons, and such as would be singularly
accounted of too, but never will be, by wise men, had in so little as single
shame, whilst they harp so much after such double honor: the Pope and
Archbishops in the Popish times were, till of late they grew more corrupt,
complainers, and correcters of this greedy practice: Alexander the third, and
301 Bishops in a Lateran council says Mr. Den in a Sermon of his concerning
John the Bap. p. 64. concluded no Priests should have 2benefices 1179. and
1231. Richard the costly Archbishop of Canterbury complained to the Pope that
Priests in England held more livings then one: and though it has been thought
that many livings are a good step to a Bishopric, yet I have read of one John
Bland says he, elected Archbishop of Canterbury, but refused by the Pope
chiefly for holding two livings without dispennsation 1233. and John Pecham
Archbishop of Canterbury made aCanon that no Clergy man within his province
should hold two livings 1304. what a stinking shame is it therefore that to
this day there is such inhauncing, engrossing? for my part I am well assuted
that though it be not yet, yet long it will not be before stick and stone of
the whole fabric of the tripple BBBabel, or National Ministry will fall, and
all their several sorts of forced maintenances fall with them throughout
Europe, but first here in England, for the tenth part of the City, i. e. the
Clergy here falls first, yea as there have two woes to the Clergy fell on them
here already, which have cast out the two corrupter sorts of these spiritual
men, and all their spiritual maintenance and revenues, the first whereof fell
upon the slat Popish false Ministry viz. Cardinals, Votaries, Friars, Abbots,
Nuns and Abbeyes, and with them all their maintenance, and the foolish forms of
their false ministrations viz. their golden legend and book of false miracles,
bulls, indulgences, Masses, dirges, trigintals, and other trumpery, the second
upon the second part of the great City or Clergy viz, the Archbishops, Bishops,
Chancellers, Comissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons and their
Officials, and with them fell all their land, means, and maintenance, together
with all their false manner of ministration viz. the Common Prayer, liturgy,
book of ordination of Priests and Deacons, Homilies, and all the Crutches of
that lame and lazy Clergy: so the third is now nigh to come upon the
Presbyterian Clergy (whether they see it or no) for the face of the skies, and
Scriptures do both look and lour a like upon them, with whom will fall that
their still pleaded for maintenance by (...), Gl^s; Parsonages, Vicarages, and
all their Ecclesiastical Profits, and emoluments whatsoever, together with all
their Church const^tions, Synodical directories and forms of worship and
government, Classes, creeds, Catechisms, parochial posture: yea their Euphrates
too is daily drying up in the hot sunshine of the Gospel, though they for the
most part, scorched with great beat, rather blaspheme the name of God that has
power of these plagues, then repent to give him glory, Rev. 16. 9. I say most
certainly all these false national, parochial constitutions of Church and
Ministry, Babi-baptism and maintenance must down in due time, but in the mean
time though I wish its fall, yet I heartily wish that you Clergy were ^o
charitable as to share the maintenance that's yet alloted you as the National
Ministry, a little more evenly among your selves, and not be so basely covetous
as to sherk one another without reproof, and to suffer some to have two or
three livings, or if but one, yet that worth two, happily three, perhaps four,
five, six, or 700 per annum, as some livings are, and some as honest and
painful, and worthy in their way, and godly in suo genere as the other, to be
pincht within the income of as few scores, as the rest have 100ds by the year,
some having but seven, some six, others but five, others four, three, two and
some scarce a score of pounds to bring the year about with, and yet have not a
farthing worth of help from the high slown favorites of their times: Dr.
Featley had two livings while he was alive (as it seems by himself in his
Epistle to Mr. D^nham to whom he complains that both his pulpits were taken
from him) but though Episcopal Parasites did hold no more then they could get,
yet we being six or seven years past the darkness of those times, me thinks
now the Clergy should cry out upon each other when they see any clambering
beyond a competency, and consider the incompetency of their fellows
voluntarily, whether the Parliament augment one out of another yea or no: but
no bubble stands higher then the rest of the water it rides on for a while, but
twill break within a while and be levelled to the residue of its element, in the
mean time they have enough among them if they can be contented to enjoy it in
equal portions, and not fall out about the shifting it: so much is yet left,
though so much already is confiscated, that moderate minded men that mean not
to err from the faith by the love of money, more then of Christ, need not set
up their Notes to the State to administer more. I Will tell thee what thou have
had, and yet have oh HHHireling SSShepheard, within this Island of Britain,
nay in England which is but the one half, the whole of which is but a poor
patch of about a tenth part of the rest of Christndome, and this out of thy own
mouth, I mean a man of thy own fraternity see Helin Geog. p. 464. 465, an
Episcopal Clergy man vaunting of the greatness of thy maintetenance, which
mouth of thine is still opening in some or other of the younger brothers of the
present Presbytery to this day to call out for more.

The Clergy says he, meaning of England only, was once of infinite riches as
appears by the Bill preferred to King Henry the fifth against the Temporal
nues of the Church: which were able to maintain 15. Earls, 1500 Knights, 6000
men of A^m; more then a 1000 Almes-houses, and the King also might clearly put
up 20000 pounds: as they now are not so rich, so are they far more learned and
of more sincere and Godly carriage, wherein they give place to no Clergy in the
world, and for learning I dare say cannot be any where paralleld: neither are
they so dest^e of the external gifts of fortune, but that they are the the
richest of any Ministers of the reformed Churches: For besides 5439 Parochial
benefices, being no impropriations, and besides the Vicarages, most of which
exceed the competency beyond Seas, here are in England 26. Deaneries 60
Archdeaconries and 544 dignities, and Prebends all of which are places of a
fair revenue. And as for the maintenance of Priests, Monks and Friars before
the reformation, Mr. Camden reckons 90 Colleges, besides those in the
universivies, 110 Hospitals, 3374. Chanteries, and free Chapels, and 645
Abbeys and Monasteries, more then half of which had above the yearly imcome of
200 pounds in old ren^s, in Many above 2000 and some 4000 almost. So studio^s
were our Ancestors both in those times of blindness, and those of a clearer
light, to encourage men to learning, and then reward it: thus far he concerning
the wealth of the English Clergy: so that here was no lack yet I think, but of
a law that some should not sink, and the rest swim in supersluity, and hold two
livings (as Democritus would weep says Mr. Den, to hear some pluralists plead
they do) out of Charity: it may be o^ of it indeed, but it is in no charity to
their brethren, but on the bottomless pit of the Priestly purse beyond sea,
where poor Peter reigns in his posterity, who had neither silver nor gold in
his own person Act. 3. 6. of the gettings of that one great man the Pope, to
say nothing of the endlessenesse of his Priests eagerness after money, there is
no end; nor yet weight, number, nor measure of his treasures: twould make your
eyes dazzle to see it, and will make your ears tingle to hear what a deal of
this ministerial maintenance is at Rome, and her immediate Territories, where
there are no less then a million of Officers, mendicants and others maintained
at other men's cost, themselves disbursing not a penny.

The ordinary Temporal revenue of the Papacy (says Helia Geog. 192. 193.)
Boterus makes to be better then two millions of Crowns: the extraordinary and
spiritual to be wonderful. Plus Quintus, who ruled six years only, got from
the Spanish Clergy fourteen Millions. Sixtus the sixth took from the Jesuits
at one clap 20000 C^oxns of yearly Revenue, because they were too rich for men
that vowed poverty, and having s^e but ^ive years had coffered up five
Millions, four of which his Successor Gregory the fourteenth spent in less
then a year. Out of France they reap no less then a million of Crowns yearly,
out of England, when it was the Popes Puteus inexhaustus, they extracted no
less then 60000 Marks, which in our present money is 120000 pounds, being at
that time more then the Kings certain Revenue. And this was in the time of
Henry the third, before their Rapine was fully come to the height. Let other
Countries be rated accordingly. Next add the moneys received from the
particular pardons, for d^spensing with unlawful Marriages, the profits arising
from pilgrimage, from greats men's deaths and funerals, from the indulgencios
granted unto Abbeys, and Convents, in all which the Popes have a share, and it
would pass a good Arithmetician to pass his Entrado. Here take the saying of
Sixtus the fourth that a Pope could never want money while he could hold a pen
in his hand, yet is their Treasury seldom fall, for 1. the State they keep
because of their height of honor above all Princes; 2. the large allowance they
give unto their Legates, Nuncios and other Ministers; and 3. their greedy
desires to enrich their Sons, or Kinsmen with the Churches Lands, or money
(with which humor Pope Sixtus the fifth only was never touched) keep their
cosfers, exceeding low. Add to this the exceeding Gorgeousness of the Papal
vestmets, and especially that of the tripple Crown, for when Clement the sist
transferred his seat to Avignion, we read how with a fall from his horse he
lost a Carbuncle (with which his Crown was thick set) worth 6000 Ducats at the
least. Thus he.

And says Lord Napier on Rev. 9. 21. and note (q) thereof, It is more nor
notorious what Abbeys and Bishoprics from simple Princes, what lands and
yearley Revenues from landed men, what money and goods from men of all estates
has been deceitfully stolen for indulgencies, pardons, remissions of sins,
^rigentals, soul masses, dirges de profundis, and other superstitions, stealing
thereby not only men's goods, but even their souls.

If all this treasuring up of trash be not covetousness, excuse me if I know
not what else to make of it: it would make me laugh (as sorry as I am, for all
such hereticizing and Schismatizing among the Ministers from primitive
plainness, as has been) to see a Clergy man stand up and tell me now, that
much maintenance is a necessary means, whereby to enable ministers of Christ to
promote the Gospel, specially if they consider how this covetousness has
caused the CCClergy in all CCChristendome to err so miserably from the truth
thereof after the traditions of one another, that some of the great Ghostly
Fathers that had the greatest maintenance, if that could have maintained them
in, or had not rather bewitched them from it, did not only turn rank Heretics
but stark Atheists by their sin of covetousness, when maintenance increased so
much upon them: if either lucre or learning could prevent the corruption, or
cure the ignorance of the Ministry, the Popes had not proved such incarnate
devils as the richest, and the learned of them did.

Leo the tenth was indeed a great favourer of learning, and layer up of wealth,
but so little favored he of Religion, that he was often times heard to say
Quantas nobis d^vitias comparavit ista fa^ula Christi, a speech, says Holin so
blasphemous, that Lucian, Po^e, or Julian the Apostate could never match it: in
his time beg^n the reformation by Luther, and it was but high time for thee Lord
to begin, who wilt make an end also in thine own ti^e, for men, yea thy
ministers (for so they all call themselves) have throw covetousness utterly
erred, and universally made void thy law.

But enough if not too much says H^lin (and so say I) of these Ghostly Fathers
and of their sanctities I will (as he does p. 185) end with the Painter, who
being blamed by a Cardinal for coloring the vilages of Peter and Paul too red,
replied that he painted them so, as blushing at the lives of those men, who
styled themselves their successors.

I have done with the c^uses of his heresies and come to his design.

The design of the Heretic even this Heretic of Heretics the CCClergy 2.
Design.
is to propagate his Error, and as his grounds are wicked, so are his manners
in mannaging of them, intrat ut vulpes regnat ^tleo, he pretends verity, but
intends only vctory, that he may reign over the kings, and people of the
earth, and that they might all stoop to his commands, and directions, and under
pretense of verity at first, he did get victory at last over the whole world,
so that (Pape Oh strange) the whole world wondered after him. and doted upon
him as their Lord God, and became slaves in chains to his Priestly will; yea as
he loved to be supreme, and overcome, so the lord let him for a time, that he
might manifest his own power the more in the overcomming him for ever in the
end; yea power was given him to make war (by the beast that bears him, even all
nations of Christendom which he overcame first) against the Saints, and to
overcome them also, and so to be filled with his own inventions: he gives out
when any disputes against him, that his desire is to be satisfied by disputing,
and so perhaps he would, but it is with riches more then rightousnesse, with tith
more then truth, for in truth he seems if he must meet with such as charge him
with error in his doctrine of baptism, tith, forced maintenance, forcing
conscience, as if he would renounce his opinions, and practices in these
points, if any can prove them to be corrupt, but seeks only opportunities to
spread his odd opinions, of what sc'^ism, and sacrilege, and robbing of God it
is, if submission be not acted, and tithes be not offered to him, among the
vulgar, among whom his Ghostly pretenses produce a kind of aweful affrightment,
and dread of doing any thing against what he says, being resolved before hand
never to be convinced of the truth as it is in the word, for that overturns him
in all his preferment projects, and plucks him up from all the profits of his
present princely posture, which is such a right eye to him, that he has not
faith enough to believe that it can possibly be more profitable to him to part
with (though Christ himself till him it is) then to preserve and perish with it.
His disciples are for the most part not such as the noble Beraeans that would
take nothing upon trust from the very Apostles mouths, but searched the
Scripture daily whether the things were so or no, not only men, but honorable
women too not a few, but rather mere idle, implicit, forefather faitht men,
simple and weak women, who try nothing, but keep their Church, and believe as
their Church believes, and as their good churchman says, led away with diverse
lusts and pleasures, leaning only on their Priests understandings, pinning all
their Religion upon their sleeves, adoring all that their Orthodox divines
deliver at a venture, ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of
the truth as it is in the word, whose honest ignorant devotions he has won to
himself by his cunning artifice of pretended piety, voluntary humility, seeming
zeal to the truth, long prayers, or rather multitudes of short prayers, and
praises, Pater Nosters, Miserere Me^'s, Magnificats, Te deums, Gloria Patri's,
per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrums, and such like devoutries, and being once
gained, are so carried on with the streme of corrupt custom, present fashion,
foolish affection, that no reason in the world can reclaim them, he deterreth
lay people as much as may be from reading, expounding, or too much prying into
the Scripture, alleging unto them the perils they may incur by
misinterpretations, he has laid his foundations so firmly in the dark
consciences of men and women by persuading them of his own infallibity,
Ecclesiastical Authority, his Ius Divinum in the Government and guidance of the
Church (as here in Britain) and even of his Temporal jurisdiction too (as at
Rome) over both heaven and earth, hell and purgatory, of his power in the agony
of men's souls, to forgive sin, that men and women are becharmed into belief of
him: he has woven himself so far into their credulity, that all his sayings
are received as oracles, all his doings as divine, all his traditions as truth
it self, all his Adminstrations as Apostolical, all his doctrines as Orthodox,
all his Arguments (though confessed by himself to be weak) as unanswerable, and
all others Administrations, Actions, Answers, Arguments, though never so
consentaneous, to the true sense of Scripture, valued at that price which he
sets upon them; as if the holy chair of Papal determination; Episcopal
Convention, Synodical constitution, could not possibly be mistaken: yea the
Scripture it self is but a nose of wax with him, of what shape soever the
CCClergy casts it into, of no more authority then Aesops Fables with the
Papists, if the Pope say the word, so as to disdate, digrade it, or put any
part of it out of commission: of no other sense then the Bishops, and Synod
seem to say is the sense on it, with their good Protestants, so altogether
Oraculous is the Pope among his, the Bishop among his, the Presbyter among his,
and even all the three several CCClergies among their three several sorts of
CCCreatures, that their different ipse dixits are ipso facto divine directory,
and discharge enough too for these different doters on them insanire cum
ratione to dote to and fro by Authority, so as to do, and undo, and do, and
undo, and do by.

In a word he is too bold to be born down, not so much from such things as mae
the righteous witnesses to truth as bold as Lio^s before God, and men, viz. the
goodness of his cause, for that is stark naugh, and rotten, nor the clearnes
of his call ^ther to his Clerical function, or any actions he goes about by
virtue, and in persuance thereof, for it is clear enough that his orders,
emission, commission (as to the external etymology of them) are more from the
Pope, then Christ and the true Church; nor any good answer of a good
conscience, for either his conscience is so cloudy that he cannot, or so
cowardly that he dares not, or so resolved that he will not see, or else so
clear that he is condemned of himself when truth shines plainly upon his face:
but rather from either his great interest in, or directive authority over the
civil power, that has long back as well as bellyed him, as in England, or his
having it all in his own hands and dispose as at Rome, where ^e duo gladii both
swords are in the Clergyes clutches, so that he can quickly correct those that
con^radict him: he is too clamorous to be silenced, calling out with such a
heavy noise, and divine ditty against the truth, and cond^ing it with such an
outcry of Schism, Schism. Sedition blasphemy, Heresy, Heresy, before he has
half heard it, and so soon as ever its opening its mouths to speak, that all
the parish pulpits in a whole Country (and now and then their steeples) ring
out in such combustion, to the tune of Great is D^ana of the Ephesians Act. 19
28. 34. that truth has no way whereby to silence him, but to be silent her
self, for when she begins to declare, he with his Heresy, Heresi^ soon stops
men ears: he is too arrogant to be convinced, he has controuled whole nations,
cut of the spirit of Princes, bin terrible to the kings of the Earth, and
devinced invincible Emperors in his time, therefore may well sc^rn to be
convinced, abominate, detest, disdain to be dire^ed by Russet R^s, Apron ^os,
Minis^n Mechanics, illiter^ ^ns, (...) (...) Tradesmen, Christ the Carpenter,
Peter the Fis^rman, Paul the Tentm^ker, Aquilla, and his wise Priscilla, from
which kind of poor folks and babes, to whom it seems good in gods sight to
preach the plain G^spel, and reveal by his word and spirit what he hides from
wise men, when they will not see, this prudent PPPriesthood, if he were not
proud, might learn more truth and Gospel purity, then ever was taught him by
his Grandfather the Pope, or any of those Clerical Counsels, or Ghostly
fathers, which he consults more with then with Christ and Scriptures.

The Reason of all his obstinacy against tradesmens teachings is this, he knows
that his trade of teaching for hire, and divining for money Must fall, if
tradesmen begin once to turn divines and to teach truth for nothing, ye know
that by this craft (quoth ^e Act. 19. 25. etc.) we have our wealth, moreover ye
see and hear etc. he is well aware and so are we that if he lose the lives of
persecution for conscience, and sprinkling of infants, Iachin and Boaz the two
main pillars, and grand Supporters of his kingdom, his Temple will quickly re^d
in to more pieces then 3 PPPs from the top to the very bottom, and all his
matchless magnitude, and numberless priestly Prerogatives drop directly to
the ground, viz. his Lieutenantship to the prince of this World, his Lordship
over the heritage, his headship over the Church, his dominion over the faith,
his title to the tenth of every man's estate, his merchandise of slaves bodies,
and souls of men, his leave to trample the holy city, and slay at pleasure the
truth tellers that torment him, his rich revenues, dignity, glory, power, seat
and great Authority, together with all the privileges, profits, liberties,
immunities, thereunto belonging.

All this his royalty must fail if he give ground but a little, and would have
failed ere this ti^e, If he had a face could blush, at his own abominable
blindness, or ingenuity to confess himself hurt, or own the plain truth while
his lungs will serve him in reply, or Amor sui constrain him to cry heresy
against the truth: therefore this Diotrophes, that loves to have the
pre-eminence over all for ever, because he has had it for a while, receives
not truth, but prates against it in the pulpit, and elsewhere with malicious
words, and though he contradict himself ever and anon, in his own Sermons, and
discourses, ye^ if he say any thing at all, he thinks it much, when wisemen,
weighing it, find it little to the purpose: Tertulliau thus describes
Hermogenes, Loquacitatem facundiam existimaret, Impudentiam constantiam
deputaret etc. so he, when he bumbasts the pulpit, and slashes the Saint
Schismatics (in their absence) before his people, supposes he has spoken with
no small grace, when it is for want of grace that he did it, and that when he is
most audacious against all reformation, a^ at Rom, and even that he has
sometimes sworn himself, and others to, as here in England, when he finds it
more cross to his credit then he thought of when he undertook fort, he counts
them fickle unconstant, that change their minds, and mend their manners, and
himself only stable and constant to the CCChristian Religion.

Hence it is that the effects of Disputation with him have been not only
f^strate but dangerous, dangerous I say to him no otherwise then as it 3
Effects.
overturned his Kingdom, that the truth of Christ might take place, but to
them that disputed with him in this respect, as it has been no less then
their precious lives were worth once to oppose, or open their mouths against
him, witness Wickliff, Hus, Jerome of Prague, and all the executions done in
Queen Mary's days upon such as d^rst dispute against the Pope, or meddle
against the mass, and those done in Queen Elizabeth's upon Barrow, Greenwood and
Penry, who were hanged by Episcopal malice for professing against them, and the
Commonprayer, which now well high all England has renounced as a corruption,
and what should have been done upon such as disputed against, or depraved the
Presbyterian directory, is well known, for that Clergy has showed themselves
so much in their Fathers colors, that ere long all England will renounce both
it, and them: and in this respect it has been also frustrate as to peoples
conviction, for truths witnesses to dispute never so clearly against him, for
as much as he has still stopped their mouths with the stake, prison, or gallows,
and kept his own wide open against them in the pulpit, when he hath-secured
them from all capacity of storming him there: for The common sort are apt to
think those have the victory that live to speast last: and that their CClergies
cause is never wrackt by the cause of Christ as long as one is left alive that
can speak a word in that against the other:

And by how much error takes with our corrupt nature more then truth, by so
much there is more danger of its spreading, where the Roots i. e. the self
love, vain glory, ambition, covetousness, pride, Lordlines universally and
cruelty of the CCClergy, who are plants that our heavenly father never planted,
Stocks from whom stemes out a stench, from whom abomination branches it self
out to the corrupting thereof in all quarters of the Earth, Rev. 11. 18. 1^ 5.
19. 2. are not plucked up, and rooted out: for from the Priest and the Prophet
profanness, and heresy has gone out into all the world, and spread it self
like a leprosy, or some raging canker; and for the most part such is the
resolvednesse of the CCClergy to bind the people still to a blind obedience to
their blind guidance of them beside the word; that Disputations with them if
not carefully, I mean clearly, and also coolly proceedad in with love to their
persons, and almost without zeal against their evils (which yet we must not
abate them an ace of for all their anger, pacem cum hominibus cum vitits
bellum) they Raise more evil spirits of wrath and divellishnesse in them then
we can lay, because they see them raise more good spirits of doubts and earnest
enquiries after truth in the people, who before were wont to take their ware on
trust without trial, then then they can lay again while they live by all the
shifts and subtleties they can devise; for when once people are resolved to
believe things to be heresy by heatsay no more, but to fancy them according as
they find them in the word, and to see into the plainness of speech that is in
the Scripture with their own eyes, they see so much disproportion between the
national Church ways, and those of the primitive Churches of the Gospel, that
they commonly resolve not to see at all adventures through the unclear eyes of
CCClergy men any more:

This makes them fie^ and fume, and fain, and fiddle hither and thither, which
way to fasten their Heretical opinions further, if it be possible, on them in
whom they they stick, and into whose hearts they have eaten fowl, healthless
holes already, and to d^ive them deeper even with hammer and nails, if they
can tell how, or else to cleave whole Countries asunder with beetle and wedges:
Heresy is said by the Apostle to fret like a canker so that it is not the
clearness, nor yet the coolness, nor yet the heat of a disputation can correct
it in some men's hearts; the tongue may heal any poisoned wound with licking of
it sooner then that which the Heretic, the Pope and the Priesthood has made,
so deeply has he found his heresies in the dark cells of some men's implicit
consciences, Athauastus his disputation with Arrius, and Austins with
Manichaeus are sufficient Instances.

Indeed it is not possible to expect any good fruit from those former grounds,
as to the CCClergie themselves, and such of their CCCreatures, as stand bent to
believe all they say, and never doubt it, though otherwise much good may come
to others, that are inquisitive, by disputation with them, or that he which is
possessed with self love, and hunts so greedily after glory or gain as the
CCClergie does, should be persuaded to hearken to any reason, which contradicts
his principles, or to disclaim that wase which must advance his design.

What is the result of this discourse, to forbid all disputation with HHHim? no
by no means, it is necessary to stop the clamors of the adversary to the
truth, who will cry out victoria, if his challenge be not answered and make our
silence be a confession of the truth on his side, if he be not stoutly
encountered with. Saint Austin who was in his time called Malleus hereticorum,
of whom it is said that he never went so willingly to a feast as to a
conference when Pascentins the Arrian bragd that he had worsted him in his
dispute, and those believed it, which desired it, yet gave not out from
disputing, but was only careful to set down his disputations in writing for
the future, that the truth might appear vindicated from thofe false reports,
with which commonly it is blasted, either by word, or else by some such true
counterfeit Accounts in print, as that which is at this day extant of the
disputation held at Ashford.

A Disputation orderly carried, soberly proceeded with, without heats, and
distempered passions, not suffered to go out of its due bounds nor to follow
every new sent, that is taken up by the way, nor to degenerate into
quarrellings, and hasty falls chargings of the Anabaptists as this, and that,
and they know not what, without proving them such, or disproving their
doctrines (as, if others do not, I do know more then one place where, and where
more then once too, it has been so) will contribute much to the clearing of
truth the begetting of doubts (in them that yet never doubted) but blindly
believed the contrary, The removing of doubts in them that are already in
doubts about it, and putting it out of all doubt to them all in the end, that
all is not so well yet as it ought to be, with the very reforming Clergy, and
that their parochial posture is popish, and their constitution, ordination,
administrations, baptism and the supper, is all disorderly and out of joint, to
the conf^rming of the strong, that stand fast in the true faith, the recovery
of the laps't world that has departed from the faith, Gospel, Baptism, Church
order, which was once delivered to the Saints, and been seduced from Christ by
the Scholastical encroachments of the CCClergy: and (as it may chance in time,
if the civil powers that have preferred them, would come once to favor the
truth) the convincing the SSSeducer: it is rare so to manage one among an
unskilful multitude where the auditors take themselves no less engaged then
their champions, and will be ready, on all hands too much, but an 100 fold more
(for ought I find) among the parochial party then the other, disorderly to
break the lists which has made so many able Scholars not in man's only, but in
Christ's School also, almost averse from undertaking it; but unless their be
sufficient caution against such exorbitatances, as jangling with bells to
drowned all audience of truth, and counter speeches of nonsense, rather then
nothing, to interrupt him that is about to speak the truth, and noise of
shouting, if it were possible, to shame the truth, and such like geer as I have
met with in my days, better be no disputation at all, nor preaching of truth
among such, it being (if not a giving of that which is holy to dogs, and
casting of pearls before swine, which will turn again and rent you, yet) at
least impossible any thing should come of it that good is (and yet even that
shall be no hurt to the Ministers of Christ, that are approved in tumults, yet
cannot help it) but blasphemy to the truth, stumbling to the weak parishioners,
that stumble enough already poor souls (the Lord help them) to see their
preachers violently oppose preaching, and proving the truth out of the
Scriptures; a kind of shameful Glory to the adversaries of the truth, the
PPPriesthood from some, a glorious shame to the undertakers for it.

There is therefore a better way for the true Pastors of the true Churches, and
specially the Churches messengers to the world, in which to oppose the approach
of heresies, which the parish Pastors make mickle use of to oppose the truth by
under the names of Anabaptism, at least in their Respective flocks see the last
clause of the first part of the Ashford pamphlet p. 11.
and that is by preaching. To argue substantially against them, to convince
them soundly, is the best in the pulpit, if they can freely get in, a place
wherein one might have hid ones self for a month together or more, and
sometimes a year from some parish Priests, non-resident Parsons, divinity
Doctors, but specially the lazy Lord Bishops not very long since, but now, to
keep out the Anabaptists, more frequented by some Priests then else it would
be, a place, which is secured much, and yet not always neither when plain
truth tellers are in it, from those incursions to which disputations are
subject. It is worth observation that neither Transubstantion, nor
consubstantion have so much as appeared in these days, wherein so many old
Heresies, as infant sprinkling for one, which as, a mad bull having its deaths
blow on the forehead, struggles more then ever, are in a sort revived, and
stickled for, and plied, with new and fresh assaults, and unheard of arguments,
for it was pleaded for but as a tradition mostly in times above us, as well as
new ones broached.

And the reason is because all Ministers in these parts good and bad, true, and
false even the Priests themselves in their Sermons provided for the sacrament
have every where oppugned them, as having indeed no clear color in them of
either Scripture, common sense or reason, as neither has infantsprinkling, if
the National Ministers would once wisely consider it. The learned Hooker
observes that in Poland so many Arrians sprung up because the Nicence faith was
neglected there, and had we Baptists in our Ministry of old been careful to
preach for the true way of baptizing believers only, when the baptism of
infants first began to come up, and creep upon superstitious grounds into the
Church, It would certainly have hindered the propagation of that reasonlesse
Rantism, and freed the Churches, that now return to the only true baptism
again, which they let go, from that simple censure of Anabaptism, which now
they pass under from men that take rantism to be baptism: at least our flocks
in those days, that followed the truth, had been so well provided, as that
they would not so easily have departed (as they did) from that plain way of the
word in point of baptism: Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.

The Pastors are appointed by God for watchmen, their office is to to see
dangers, and to give warning; they are the dogs of the flock, such as the wolf
would have ^lent, woe be to them if they bark not: Narianzen was such an one,
(as some say) his mother dreamed that she had brought forth a white whelp, and
such (they say, for I knew him not) he proved that the wol^ (...) heretic
durst not enter but he spied him, nor stay but he hunted him out: if he did
thus, not mistaking heresy, and instead thereof hunting out truth (as the
Priests do, but I hope he did not) it was the better for the Churches, he was the
Pastor of: but woe be to the Church the CCCatholick aecumenical visible Church
called CCChrist^dome, whose faithful Pastors are gone from the truth, and turned
wolves themselves, that weary the very truth it self: Saint Paul tells those of
Ephesus, Act. 22. 29, I know that after my departure many grievous wolves shall
enter into the flock, and as he said so verily it it came to pass, for the
three sorts of National Church PPPastors, Pope, Prelate, Presbyter are in
sheeps clothing, but indeed ravening wolves, that have devoured the truest
flock of sheep that Christ has upon this earth: they are the dogs of the flock
indeed, but many of them dumb dogs that cannot bark, and others barking at the
sheep themselves, and others biting them with their teeth because they put not
into their mouths, and tearing them, though they never teach them: yea they are
greedy dogs that never have enough, looking each to his gain from his quarter^

The rest of this discourse shall be partly Paraenetical, to the people, partly
Apologetical to the Priests, and so end. As to the Paraenetical part,

It concerns the advice of the Pastors of the true Churches to their flocks.
and all people, that they would endeavor to preserve and recover themslelves
from all infection of Heresy and Schism from the primitive times, by which the
whole world is gone astray, and in order thereunto they commend unto them this
serious exhortation.

1. To endeavor to be thoroughly inst^cted in the principles of Christian
Religion, to be houses with foundation, that every wind o^ doctrine may not
shake them: Dui hu^ et illuc fluctuat, quovis momentur impellitur. He that is
not settled upon the true foundation, yea and that house, or Church that is not
built upon a right foundation, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ and the
primitive Prophets and Apostles, heard and obeyed, is driven to and fro to
this, and to that, and back again almost with every storm that rises, and has
a time wherein twill fall, and the fall thereof will be very great Matthew. 7.
21. ad. 28. Ephesians. 2. 20. 21. 21. we have experience plain enough of this in
the National, and PPParish Churches, and people, who because they are houses
without foundation, or else constituted upon nothing but the sandy foundations
of men's inventions, traditions, doctrines, and the prudentiall precepts of the
PPPriesthood, and not upon the primitive doctrines of the Prophets and
Apostles, neither were everperfectly, but at best in part only instructed in
the ABC, and first principles, or beginning word and doctrines of Christ (as
they ly plainly before us in sixth of the Heb. 1. 2.) because^ say they never
knew no^ owned all these, nor laid them as the foundation of ^eir building, and
Church posture, but are brought into that mongrel Church way they are in, by
principles of birth, breeding, abode in such a Town, custom, fashion, laws of
men,. Statutes, Spiritual orders, Popes, Bishops, Synods, Canons, implicit
faith, more then by clear knowledge of, acquaintance with, conversion by the
light of Scripture, therefore they are wavering like a wave of the Sea, tosled
to and fro with every wind, and turn of tide, and driven to any thing that
chances to please the Princes, or that civil power best, under which they
happen to be bred and born: yea as it was of old in Babylon, where Nebuchadnezzer
reigned, all the Lords, People, Tongues, and Nations within his jurisdiction
(saving two or three honest souls who saw Gods will and served him according to
it) fell down straight at his command, and threatenings of the furnace if they
did not, so has it been in BBBabylon the new, under the three PPPriesthoods,
wherever they have born sway, all the people (exceptis excipiendis, a very few
that keep their standing in every turn, being built upon the rock Christ, and
his doctrine) fall down, and do as they and the Princes that have committed
adultery with them have enjoined, yea they have reeled to and fro like a
drunkard, being drunk with the whores wine, and fell forwards and backwards,
and forwards and backwards, and forwards again in the lump, and been by turns
of what religion, or way soever has pleased the powers to impose under
penalty, Papists, Protestants, Papists, Protestants, Popish, Presbyterian, or
as it happens.

2 To love the truth and embrace it, those that yet scorn it, and let their
affections be ravished in the imbracings of it, such as have or shall yet atany
time embrace it; so shall they be stable in it, and not soon moved from the
truth.

3. To take heed of itching ears such as love to be gently touched, but not
plainly talked to, that say to the S^ers see not, prophecy to us smooth things,
that will not endure sound doctrine, nor any troublesome truth, that say of the
words of Christ, the doctrine of his baptism, that calls for self-denial, the
practice of which exposes to the cross, censure, scorn, shame, suffering,
loss of credit, custom, offense of friends, fathers, mothers, husbands,
wives, etc. which whoever loves above Christ, is not worthy of him, these are
hard sayings who can bear them: take heed I say of such ears as love to hear
some truth, but not all, that stand open gladly to any thing, but the loss of
Herodias, the darling lust, what ever it is, whether the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eye, or the pride of life, God in his Just Judgment su^ers such to
fall. Learn to be doers of the word not hearers only, and doers of all that
you know, and not some things only, as some do; and patient both hearers, and
doers of what God, and not what man says: Temptation hardly provails against
that soul that is built upon the practice of Gods commandments; but (as is
showed above and exemplifyed in the parish people that are so built and no
otherwise, and whose fear toward God is taught after the precepts of men) the
soul that is built on the practice of men's commandments in his religion,
faith, worship, is easily prevailed with to be of any Religion the State
pleases, as well a false as a true, as well Popish, as Episcopal or
Presbyteriall.

4. To beware of the ordinary converse, and needless society of these
Schismatical Seducers, the PPPriests, that have drawn the whole world into a
deep dotage after themselves, and desperate departure from the plain doctrine
of the primitive Churches, and Apostles, not to frequent groundlessely their
popish parochial, Antichristian Assemblies, that say they are Jews i. e. the
Churches of Christ, and are not, but do ly, and are the Synagogue of Satan: and
if any of the disciples or others, think themselves strong enough to encounter
with them, or if they be so indeed, yet to take heed of being foiled, and
spoiled throw their philosophy, and vain deceit, after the rudiments of the
world, and not after Christ 2 Col. 8. and however of offending weak ones by
their example, The Arguments of some, nay of all these HHHierarchian Heretics
have not prevailed half so much to the perverting of the says of so many
millions of men and women, as in all ages of their reign have been perverted
from the truth, as it is in Jesus, as the examples of some (shall I say) nay of
wellny all the Great ones in all nations, the gentry, the mighty, the wi^e, the
noble, not many of which can submit to own the Carpenters son in the homely
ordinances, mean ways, foolish and base things he has chosen 1 Cor. 1. yea
the Kings of the earth that falling ^uto folly, and committing fornication with
this cunning women the CCClergy, were besotted to sacrifice all their Crowns,
and the wealth, and power and strength of their whole kingdoms to her will and
to set up her ways, Rev. 17. 2. 17. Who perhaps only for noveltie or
curiosity at first, but at last after some few ages and generations, out of
principles of foolish custom, and pretended antiquity have been present
themselves, and not by their own example only, but extremity of Laws, and
Statutes, which the Saints only in each age have smarted for the breach of,
enforced others to be present at their will worships, superstitious services,
extravagant dispensations, and erroneous exercises: and yet the bare example of
great ones in a false faith, without other enforcement, is inforcement, great
enough amongst Parochiallists, and the carnal commonalty, who commonly live and
believe much more by example then sound reason; the faith of he Rulers right or
wrong is usually the rule of their faith, and Rex sum such a convincing reason
with them, as seldom receives other reply then nil ultra quaero plebeius.

5. Not to be too rash to believe every Spirit: nor to receive any more
implicitly the spirit of the spiritualty the PPPriesthood, no though it come in
never so ghostly shapes, and gorgeous pretenses of piety, humility, zeal,
prayers, tears, etc, for she is a mystery, and this is the very mystery of the
Whores iniquity that she hides all her guile with a godly garb.

In nomine domine incipit omne malum, says the old Proverb, and I wish that in
homine domini occidat omne malum, may be a new one, if it prove a true one, i.
e. that in thy fall O man of God, there may be an end of all mischief: yet
surely a worse mischief to the true Church sharp and, short, will arise out of
thy ashes yet before the end; false prophets must come in the name of the Lord
as well as true ones. Now gloriously did Balaam profess.

As Austin faith of Pelagius, whose doctrine he counted devilish, that his
life was like a Saints, so I say the Sancti Sanctorum of all Christendom in
pretense, have been in doctrine the veryest devils: Alexander of ^ales writes
(say some) of Bonaventure that Adam did not sin in him, and yet of all the
Papists none lest more blasphemy behind him: the Crocodile weeps till he has
got his prey, the Priesthood won the world to it self with the name of Jesus
Christ our Lord, and then set up the trade of being Lords, and Lawgivers
themselves, and rooted out his from off the earth.

6. having once found out and fallen into fellowship with the true Church, that
is rightly constituted upon the true foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
or principles of the doctrine of Christ, to be steadfast and unmovable in the
way of truth, not suffering themselves to be swayed aside in any wise, by any
deep devises, or perverse pretenses Satan of whatsoever, and in order to their
standing to avoid aweak and querrulous conscience, misliking. finding fault,
complaining, taking offense at every thing, where there is no cause, streining
at a gnat, giving over the company of the flock for every rub, forsaking the
assembling of themselves together as the manner of some is, seperating from the
Congregation, not so much for a ceremony as through a crooked and carnal
conceit that it is but a mere ceremony to assemble and meet, or meddle with any
outward ordinances at all, a matter in force only for that small moment of the
primitive age of the Gospel, and now of no moment to us, weak worships, low
things, carnal ordinances, unprofitable dispensations; em p^y elements, bodily
exercises, beggarly rudiments etc. like bruit beasts depraving the precious
precepts of Christ even those holy matters of his which they understand not the
weight and worth of: these and such like have made such as of old Jude speaks
of, and we see so doing at this very day, to depart, and separate themselves
from Saintship to sensuality, from Church Fellowship in the faith to fellowship
in filthynesse: thus the Seeker seeks to subvert himself and others, and all
that holy law of Christ's own giving as foolishness, to overturn all that is of
Christ, whilst Christ is overturning all that is of man, he scruples every
thing, till he is satisfied to own just nothing, as if because there is some
ways of error, therefore there can be no way of truth: he is weak in the
faith, believing nothing to be good till he believes every thing to be so, and
nothing to be bad or naught at all.

And wheresoever his weakness is at first, it thrives into wickedness at
last, so that how ere he seems modest against the truth a while, yet after
there will be ra^ censures, arrogant and bold speeches, and Judgments,
condemning, or at least contemning both of good persons and holy things.

Thus this man runs up to ranting by little and little, circumcising away all
flesh for so he now styles the ways of the word and spirit) crucifying all
that flesh of Christ, till he becomes wel^igh as spiritual as the devil.

7 To endeavor after the true temper of a son of the Church, which consists
especially in these two qualifications.

1 Humility or self denial.

2. Charity or love: humility is a being low in your own eyes, Christ bids you
learn it of him. Nothing has broacht Heresse and ^chism so much as self
conceit, and self love, as is showed above in the case of the PPPriesthood, who
conceive themselves to be those unerring orracles, from whom the law for
Religion and faith is to go forth to the people throughout the several Nations,
this makes men, these spiritual men especially to stand out in their own odd
opinions, as if all were heresy ipso facto that jumps not with them,
obstinately defend them, utterly untractable to any argument, though never so
clearly urged out of the word it self, that shall be brought against them;
resolved never to yield to any Judgment, nor willingly be in much less
embrace any company that ^olds contrary to them proudly prohibiting any (but
such as are approved of by themselves) disdaining to be discipled by any but
men in orders, as if that poor people, and those babes, to whom God delights to
reveal the Gospel, rather then such prudent ones, as they are in their own
sight, were all as they said of old of such, a people that know not the law,
and are accursed; for which things sake the Lord suffers blindness to happen to
them, and leaves them to live in error as men lea (ing to their own
understanding but true humility as she is ever conscious of her own weakness
and darkness, so when she is most sure that in the Lords power and light she
sees light, and is most diffusive of it, and desirous that all others should
see it also, and very zealous of promoting it, yet is she far from glorying
over others, or boasting as if she had not received what she has, much less
is she so impositive as by compulsion, or otherwise then by plain proposal,
round reproof, or earnest entreaty to enforce her faith as a rule for all
people to believe by: and howbeit it submits not, as some say she does, to the
judgments of others sooner then its own (for that verily is no other then that
humble ignorance, and implicit knowledge into which the PPPriestood has
beguild the earth, who as much as they persuade men to express their
humbleness by a voluntary submission of themselves to others judgments, yet
are as far from that expression of their own humility as men can be, that would
have all men see with their eyes, swear into their faith, and resign up
themselves to their judgment against their own) yet she submits her judgment
(as proud Papacy, Prelacy, and Presbytery never did) to such free examination
by others judgments, as to lend free leave to such as judge it wrong, and are
not satisfied to close therewith, to decline and reject it, and both to believe
and worship as they find occasion: and howbeit she must contend sometimes she
dares not contend with any, much less her superiors (as the Priest does with
his whole parish now and then about some trifle or remnant of tithes) for so
small a matter as a small matter, of means, or maintenance, but for matters of
much more moment, and of eternal consequence viz. that faith and Gospel, which
was once delivered unto the Saints, for here indeed she gives place by
subjection neither to ghostly father, nor holy mother, no not for an hour that
the truth of the Gospel may continue, and as it is Christ's things she seeks and
strives for, and not her own, so she assaults not without strong and evident,
and convincing reason from Scripture for her assertion, not such butterflies
and brown paper reasons as man's tradition, 1500 vears profession, nor mere
internal imagination, and spiritual persuasion, which the Rantizer and the
Ranter render: and even then too she prosecutes her cause with such candor and
dociblenesse as to be ready to receive what ever is made manifest in the
conscience to the contrary, without such arrogauty as appears in some Divines
when they dispute, who are more ready to call them faw^y fellows that dares
affront their false assertions, then to clear what they hold to be the truth,
and without the Spirit of contradiction, that is wont to show it self in every
haughty heart, which is more ashamed to seem ignorant then to be so, most
specially in the Priesthood, when the truth tendered is such, as if it be
acknowledged will not only crack his credit, but certainly pare his profit
also.

As for Charity alias love it is the very cognizance of a Christian the
property of it is to blow out the coals of contention not kindle them in the
true Church of Christ, though it contend sharply with the false Churches for
the truth, to seek, what in it lies, to prevent, not foment rents, Schisms,
divisions and offenses therein, contrary to the doctrine at first delivered,
the love of which occasions offenses in the world, it is the very rafters that
hold all the house of Christ (whose house they only are that are built upon
the foundation or form of doctrine delivered by the first Apostles, the
principles of which are set down Heb. 6. 1. 2.) together in most comely frame
and order: Oh that the Saints and faithful brethren in Christ of those
Churches, that walk in truth, would among all, yea and above all those precious
things commended Col 3. 12. ad 16. to be put on, would put on this, which is
the very bond of perfectness; this is that which will make them endeavor in
all lowliness and meekness and forbearance, and forgiveness of each other,
to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace Ephesians. 4. 2. 3. the love of
the Brotherhood within it self, which is hinted to us by Peter, Pet. 2. 17. and
harpt upon more then any other string by that beloved Disciple, John 1 Ioh. 2.
9. 10. 11. 3. 10. 11. 12. 13. etc. ad finum 4. 7. ad 13. 20. 21. 5. 1. 2. Ep.
5. 3. Ep. 1. is that more excellent way which the Apostle Paul so magnifies to
the Church of Corinth, as that without which all other gifts, tongues of men
and angels, prophecy, understanding of mysteries, knowledge, faith of miracles,
liberality to the poor, exposing the body to be burned, can make a man no
better then as sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal; yea knowledge puffs up,
and so plucks down the true Church, but love edifieth, builds it, and pulls
down nothing but BBBabylon, 1 Cor. 8. 1. love sufereth long, and is kind, love
envieth not, love and aunteth not it self rashly, is not puffed up, does not
behave it self unseeemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks
none evil, rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth, bears all
things, believe all things, hops all things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 13.
strengthens all things, beautifieth all things, composeth all things, the
contrary to which weakneth, marreth, ruinateth, consumes Gal. 5. confounds
all in the Church Iam. 3. it is not apt to see things amiss more then she must
needs, and if it cannot but see them, she will hide, and cover them what she
may, with a safe conscience, especially the nakedness of her father and the
shame of her mother, unless they both prove so abominably impudent and
shameless, as like to the false, National, and Parochial Churches, and their
ghostly fathers palpably to play the harlot under pretense of holiness to the
Lord, and then she may not hold her peace, but cry out upon it, as she will not
be held accessory to their sins, and guilty of the loss of love to the Lord
her self: ^he ^xtenuates faults in very enemies, so far as they are enemies to
us only, and not God, for she hates them that hate him, and can show but
little favor to their faults, however she will not aggravate them in brethren,
it is not a light matter will work dislike in her of the brotherhood, much
less departnre and divorce: she covers a multitude of offenses and will not
upon such trivial ones, such mere mole-hills, as the sensualists of these times
stumble at in the true Churches, break forth into diffemper and rage: oh where
is the charity of the true Church in these times? Where in the Cherub that
covers? certainly if this of love had been the temper of all Christians and
disciples in the true Churches (as it is pretended to be theirs in the highest by
such as are gone out from them mistaking lust for love) the breach, the rent of
the Ranters from the true Church had not been so great, nor the wound, or
separation of that Schismatic so grievous: it must be a great and unsufferable
crime, and that evidently proved must make charity break the bonds of peace,
even that of perverting the primitive Gospel, changing Christ's laws, and
falsifying his ordinances in their forms and subjects, depraving his Divine
institutions, defiling, corrupting, violating, adulterating his holy will and
testament, worshipping God in vain, teaching for doctrine the traditions of
men: and she will not then depart by separation till she despaires of Redress,
which was the Protestants case with their once holy mother the Church of Rome,
when she proved a strumpet, the Presbyterian with their Ghostly fathers, the
Prelatick Priests, the Independents with the Presbyters, the Baptists with the
Independents, and all the rest, but not the Seekers case with the Baptists, for
they act in all things according to the primitive pattern showed in the word:
as for all the rest, viz. the Po-Prela-Presbyter-Independent Pastoralty and
people, they are altogether out of the way, and more or less corrupt and
traditional in their constitutions, and dispensations to this day.

8. If doubts arise about the true form and right subjects of baptism go not to
Seducers, or parish PPPriests for resolution, for they are not very well
resolved about it, some saying it is of God, some of men, some that it is to be
done to this end and purpose, some to that, some upon one kind of account, some
upon another, as is discovered above in the Re-Review, they pretend at least to
be seekers themselves, and pray for more light for both themselves, and their
people, yet smoother it still as it rises upon them, yea many of them are so
taken up with minding means and money, that they mean not to find truth, nor
follow it faster, then it goes along with tith: go not therefore I say to them,
That is dubious ad dubios, caecus ad caecos (says Tertullian in another case)
for the blind to be lead by the blind yea these are the blind guides of their
blinder people, whom (having themselves forgotten Christ's Law) they cause to
err: these are the staff to which people trust and lean, that declare their
own falsehoods instead of Christ's truth, these are the stocks of which they ask
council, that would have all men hang up on their mouths, and take things for
truth as they come out by common consent from them; and tell us that Gods
advice is, Ask the Priest, and so it was concerning the Law, Hag. 2. 12, for
the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his
mouth, but verily as it was said of the Priests of old, Mal. 2. 1. ad 10. so may
it much more truly be said now, the Priests will not hear the Lords
comm^ndements, and will not lay it to heart to give glory to his name,
therefore God sends a curse upon them, and blasts their understandings, and
blinds their eyes, and curses their blessings, because they lay it not to
heart. Indeed they bid us Ask the Priest; as if they were very forward to
resolve men, but alas, as many of them are not much minded to be resolved
themselves in that point, which intrenches too much upon their interest, so
much less are they minded (for the most part) in order to the resolution of
others to render any reason of their way of baptism at all before their people,
I have been more then either an eye or an ear witness of not only the rigid
refusals to answer, but also, the rough repulses that have been given by some
of chiefest note in our County of Kent, to such as have never so modestly
propounded questions to them, or demanded an account of the truth of their
practice in their Mr. Wilson. Mr. Williamson.

public places.

And how no answer, but no answer, Dr. Chamberlain had from Dr. Gouge to this
question, Whether the sprinkling of Infants were of God or man? is known
sufficiently to all, though it was pressed on him in three or four letters by
all the rational and Christian considerations that could be possible, yea
though he entreated him to return him an answer for his own sake, to return him
an answer for Dr. Gouges own sake, to return him an answer for the peoples
sake, to return him an answer for Gods sake, yet how did he put him off with
delays (as if the business were now dubious to himself, when as formerly he
had acknowledged, that it was a tradition of the Church) and would give answer
nec per se, nec per se Synodum.

When therefore they shall say unto you ask the Priest, seek unto us, I say
seek not unto them, that say they seek, but are loath to find themselves, or at
least are afraid that men should find, and see all that, which they cannot
clearly deny to be the truth: seek not to them that peep, and that mutter, and
speak not out, as if the matter were not momentary to be mentioned, as if they
were in a quandary whether it be safe or no to seek too seriously after the
truth out, should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead?
to the law, and to the testimony your selves oh ye people, if they speak not
plainly according to the word, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8
19, 20.

Ask therefore the High Priest Christ Jesus and if you cannot be resolved so
speedily as you desire to your satisfaction and content, be content to stay
till God shall reveal: in the mean time, while you doubt, suspend the practice,
and do nothing doubtingly, but exercise your selves the while in searching the
Scripture and prayer, to which precious practice God has made many precious
promises in his word as namely, That they shall be undefiled in the way that
seek the Lord, with their whole heart: Psalm 119. 1, 2. That if thou will turn
at his reproof, though thou have been a simple one, and have loved simplicity,
a scorner that delightest in scorning, and jea^ing at the truth, and a fool
that has hated knowledge, which all are high degrees of sin, yet he will power
out his spirit upon thee, which happily has been thy laughing stock, and make
known his words unto thee, Prove. 1. 22. 23. that if thou will receive his words
and hide his commaddements within thee, If thou incline thine ear unto wisdom
and apply thy heart unto understanding, yea if thou cryest after knowledge, and
liftest up thy voice for understanding, if thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her as for hid treasure, then thou shall understand the fear of
the Lord, and find the knowledge of God Prove. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Yet be assured of this, humble ignorance in many questions debated in these
days by Divines, and also in old timebefore us by learned Schoolmen and
Casuists, and by the Popish priests, that reason about the unreasonable
fopperries, and refusely scum that arises out of the dead sea of their
divinity, is more acceptable to God then contentious curiousity: yet not such
humble ignorance about the ordinances of Christ as our Priesthood would hold
men in, as if the Law and Oracles of Christ, which are all plain to him that
understands, were in things necessary to salvation so difficult, and obstruse
that poor mechanics must meddle no more int then they have leave from them; in
facili et aperto postta est salus, the way of salvation is plain to be found in
the book of God, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved: Repent and
be baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord for remission of sins, and
ye shall receive the gift of the holy spirit: but the PPPriesthood has led men
the next way round about to salvation, and framed a new Gospel for their
followers, which Scripture makes no mention of at all: but as those Israelites
that were led up and down the wilderness so long God had sworn should not
enter into his xest, so neither shall those Christians, that, when the truth
lies plain before them, delight rather to trace to and fro in the thicket of
traditions received from their after forefathers, then in the way of the first
fathers of the Church, and love more to wander, then to walk in the narrow way
of truth, in the vast forest, wondrous wood, and wide wilderness of the
PPPriests inventions.

9. Consider sadly in heresy the sin, the punishment, the sin St. Paul places
it among the works of the flesh, Murder, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Drunkenness etc.
and well may, for it is only in favor of the flesh, and for some base fleshly
ends, or other that men depart from the way of truth, and not of the spirit,
for that leads those that are resolved to be led by it, as it speaks in the
Scriptures, into all truth, as it is in the mind of Christ Jesus, John 14.

The lea^ hereste cannot be excused, the nature of it is to gather as it grows,
it is to run downhil, and that's the cause why so many follow it and so few the
truth, for its an uphill, a narrow way that leads to life, therefore few find
it, but facilis descensus averni the way to the bottomless pit is an easy,
and broad descent, therefore many there be that go in thereat, even whole towns
Counties, Kingdoms, yea the whole world 1 Ioh 5. 19. Rev. 13. 3. a few only
excepted, that obey the truth, whose names therefore are written in the book of
life, the heretic that has begun it cannot stop when he will, but when once
he ceases to receive and retain God in his knowledge, and the love of the truth
that he may be saved, through some base love of the world, and the lucre and
lust thereof, that he may be pleased, profited, preferred, a 100. to one, but
he is hardened for ever in blindness, God also giving him over, as well as he
himself to deeper, and deeper delusion, and at last to the love of lies, more
then truth: Ieroboams rent turned into idolatry, and the rent of such as run
from the primitive doctrine of Christ is come to no less; the Rantizer and the
Ranter also are both sad examples to us, how fearsul a thing it is to run away
from the plain path of the word of Christ, the one whereof, when he ran down
once, but so far as to take upon him to mend Christ's ordinances, and teach for
doctrine his own traditions, never left adding more and more of his own odd
constitutions, till he sunk ore head and ears in a gulf of golden legends, and
a lake of lies; the other when he had once declined the Scripture, and denied
all ordinances, never left advancinxg himself into the clouds of his own airy
conceits, till his waxen wings melted with his soring so near the sun, and so
he fell headlong into a sink of sorbid sensuality.

The punishment is either temporal, the Donatists of old (as some say) the
Anabaptists as they are commonly called, of Germany, who, if ever they ownd the
truth, abode notvery long in it, are examples of Gods Judgments in that kind:
spiritual blindness of understanding, hardness of heart, seeing and not
perceiving, hearing and not understanding, and last of all eternal the worm
that never dies: Christ shows all men's labor in their religion is lost by
reason of it, in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrine the traditions
of men; the Apostle shuts heaven against it, 5. Gal. and twice over denounces
cursing to any, yea angels from heaven, that preach any other then what they
preached, and I am sure they never preached infant sprinkling, yea whoever is
an heretic vel dandi vel auferendi sa^ in either excess or defect, by adding
or taking away from the word, God will add the plagues upon him, that are
written in that book, and take away his name out of the book of life.

Saint Austin says of Arrius (how true that saying is I say not, but it is an
argument, (Adhominem) a good item however for every one that is any other way
Antichristianus) that his pains are increased in hell as often as any one
thorough his here^e is seduces from the faith, therefore va vobis Scribae,
Sacerdotes etc.

(...) of all to mourn for the calamities of the true Church, which has for
this 1600 years, been spoiled, and under clouds and partly by the Roman Empire
Heathen, partly by the Roman Empire Christian been trod under the feet of
tyrannical truth treaders, the loss of souls, the Scandal of true Religion,
which is, and has been every where spoken against: houses and lands, wives and
children, goods and liberties, when lost, consumed, destroyed, are lamented by
us, should not Ch^ists los^s be more dear? and how much more the loss of
Christ himself? who, as he told of that eclipse of that primitive intercourse,
which he had with his people then, by the interposition, and coming of the
prince of this world between him and them, so has now of a long time been a
great stranger in all Christendom: Oh What comfort had it been to have had the
Son of God walki^g with us, may the Christian world say, in the midst of the
flames that have devoured, and wasted in all corners of it, but specially the
third part of Christian men, which has been killed by the fire, and by the
smoke, and by the brimstone, which issued out of the mouths of the four Angels,
that were bound before in the great River Euphrates, i. e. the four cruel
Territories of the Turkish Empire, united all under one head, viz. Ottoman the
Great, some 390 years ago, and from thenceforth getting ground on this side
Euphrates, to no less then a third part of Christendom, as being indeed
prepared for an hour, a day, a month, a year, i. e. 391. years to slay the
third part of nominall Christians, with most inhumane mercilessenesse and
cruelty, Rev. 9 12. ad finem. I say what comfort would it have been to have had
not only the name, but the spiritual presence of Christ preserving, for those
that were consumed in that divellish devastation? but alas the Herestes,
Blasphemies, and abominable idolatries of the Christian nations have made him
depart, and leave the men, that merely by name are Christians, to utter
distress and darkness, without either succor or support under such bloody
sufferings: those sins where not so much suffered in civil States (for that may
be) as set up and stablished as the only Christianity to be allowed of (as
they have been by the national, Antichristian, Christian Churches) so that true
Christianity is suppressed and suffers for the sake out, and for nonconformity
thereunto, are ever, and ever will be the forerunners of the removal of his
Candlestick, and of the destruction of the very denomination of Church at last,
among that people, that have a name to live and are dead.

However let us (O ye that are the true Christian Churches) Mourn for our own
sins, those sins, which have provoked God so much to wrath against his true
Churches in former times, are beginning to be too rise among us, therefore why
may he not justly, if we lay it not to heart in time, deal so with us as of old
with them, so as to dischurch us, so as to lay open our sence^, tread down our
hedge, break down our ^ower, and expose his vine to every beast of the Forest,
let us be zealous and repent, and in secret let our souls weep for the
abominations done in the midst of Sion, let horror take hold on us, and rivers
of tears run down our eyes because men keep not Christ's law; lets mend what we
can, and mourn for what we cannot mend: and whilst, as the Ranter and his Rout
laughs our weak works to scorn on the one hand, so the CCClergy and their
Clients on the other, puff at our Mechanic buildings, as Sanballat scoffed at
the Jews Neh. 4. 1, 2, 3, saying in malice and mockage, What do these feeble
folk? will they fortify themselves against our Orthodox D^vines? will they
sacrifice without a Priest among them? will they make ^n end in a day to
reform, which is many a years work for a learned Synod? will they revive the
stones, even the dead bones of old Heretics, out of the heaps of ^bish that
are burnt? that which they build if a fox go up, he shall even break down their
stone wall; lets not be discouraged, nor afraid to proceed in the way and work
of the Lord: let them laugh, but let us weep for them, as well as not spare to
reprove them, so far as we have any hope to reform them, let them curse, but
let us bless; yea let us fast and pray, not with Wednesday, and good Friday
fasts, and Lent'n Letanies: nor with the Pharisees twice a week fasts, who paid
^th, and refused to submit to Christ's baptism: nor yet with Jezebells fasts,
who set honest Naboath on high, and accused him of blasphemy on that day with
so much the greater advantage and finer pretense, as, if the Clergy did not
when they obtained fasts against heretics, twill not repent them so much
another time, as some think it may yet, of those repentances: nor yet with the
Jews fasts, that fasted for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness, that hung down their heads for a day, like a bulrush; and thought
God was half beholding to them for it, because they spread sackcloath and ashes
under them, though they neither loosed the bands of wickedness, nor let the
oppressed go free, nor undid heavy burdens, nor broak every yoke, nor dealt
their bread to the hungry, nor brought the poor that were cast to their
houses, nor coveted the naked when they saw them, but rather hid themselves
from their own flesh, and hardened their hearts against the poor, and heaped up
riches for themselves, and oppressed full as much, and it may be much more then
before; shall we call these fasts, and acceptable days to the Lord Isa. 58
they are all abominable rather thenacceptable. Therefore let us fast as well
from as for iniquity, and what ever others do let us serve the Lord: let us
call for justice and plead for truth, let us not defile our hands with blood,
nor out fingers wiith iniquity, let our lips speak no lies, nor our tongue
mutter perverseness, let us not hatch cockatrice eggs, nor weave such spiders
webs, as have been woven in the Nations to entangle tender consciences in, and
make the poor harmless flies a very prey to their malevolent intentions; so
shall we cause our voice to be heard on high, let us thus fast and pray, and
with fasting and prayer, endeavor the casting out of every blind, and deaf,
and dumb devil, and beseech the Lord that the eyes of the Priesthood, and their
People may be opened to see, their ears unstopped that they may hear the
truth, and their tongues unloosed, that they may be preachers of it indeed, as
now they are in pretense, and in word only and no more.

Christian Reader, that ownest the truth, if thou be proffesd, so as to
discern between Christ's way, and the CCClergies more clearly then ever, give
God the glory, for naught but shame belongs to man; and pray for those that
desire, as the conversion of others to it, so thy preservation in the truth,
which oh how hard is it to abide by in these evil times of temptation from the false Churches and the non-chuches, which both seek what they can to unchurch
the true, which (thou continuing faithfully in it to the death) shall only
lead thee unto everlasting life: but if any man will be ignorant let him be
ignorant.

Now as to the Apologetical part I saythus to you O ye Priests, you are of all
men the generation whose great and general displeasure I expect to fall under,
and for this present works sake, to become your enemy more universally then
ever yet, because I here tell you the truth: but (as little hope as I have to
be heeded by you in what I say) I must tell you (and the Lord judge between you
and me whether I speak the truth or not) I am so far from desiring the
temporal, much more the eternal destruction of any one of you, that as far as
it is possible I would prevent both: yea if by the publication of all this I seek
any thing next to Gods glory, more then the salvation as well of your own
souls, as of such as are seduceed and ensnared by your spiritual sorceries in
ways of false worship, heresy, and Schism from the primitive truth will not
the Lord at last find me out? nay verily I love the persons of you all as well
as other men's; indeed I love you too well to spare sharpness toward you, or in
silence suffer you to perish, as I verily believe (and therefore speak the more
plainly to you, that by any means I may save some of you) without remedy you
will do, persisting in your wonted obstinacy against the Gospel: this being the
faith which God has begotten me to, by a serious search and observation of the
word and world together, the says which he has for some years made me to live
in, and will (I trust if he call me to it) strengthen me to die in, rather then
deny one ^ot of it to please men, good or bad, friend, or foe, unless it be
discovered to me to be a false one, I must not be ashamed to profess it for
fear of them that kill the body, for then woe unto me from him that is able to
destroy both soul and body in hell, and should I be altogether silent, as my
fearful flesh would fain be, least I should prove an intolerable offense to my
friends, and seem to be (as O my God thou know how far I am not) a self
avenger on my foes, and expose my self (as at no hand I desire to do, might it
be avoided) to the ha^ed and hard censure of you all, the light of this truth
would arise many other ways, yea the Lord pleads it before you day by day by
the tongues and pens of others besides my self, but I nevertheless might be
destroyed: I had at first illumination, and strong impulsions of spirit, not
perceiving (like Samuel, who thought it had been Eli that called him, and not
the Lord) whether it were the suggestion of Gods spirit or my own, and when at
last I understood clearly that it was the Lord himself, that told me he would do
such a thing to the house of Eli i. e. the Generation of the Priesthood as
should cause the ears of all that hear it to tingle, I feared likewise to show
Eli the vision, and was as loath to declare, as you OPPPriests are to hear the
things concerning you here declared; I was ready to say to the Lord, send this
message by the hand of him by whom thou will send, but necessity was upon me,
yea woe unto me, my God had been a terrible one to me had I refused it, yea I
may say as Jeremy Ier. 20. 7 9. O Lord thou have deceived me, and art stronger
then I and have prevailed, for I said I will not make mention of this, nor
speak it in thy name, but his word was within me as fire in my bones, and I was
weary with forbearing, and I could not stay; he whose face only I seek, that I
may not be deceived, the light or louring of whose countenance is more to me
then the favors or frowns of all faces, has pressed me in spirit to tell that
on the house tops which he has told me in the ear in a close^: what shall
befall me in so doing I know not, save that the spirit witnesses that
afflictions do every where abide me, and all those that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, yet none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear
unto me, that I may finish my race, and the ministry I have received of the
Lord Jesu, s to testify the Gospel of the grace of God Act. 20. 24. if your
Ministry, Gospel, doctrine, Baptism be right, then ours is wrong, and if ever
it appear we shall come back to you, if ours be right then yours is wrong, and
must be declared that you may return to the truth. I know there are many things
you will question (not to say quarrel with) me about,

First, you will ask me why I do not for the peace sake of the Church forbear, and
keep my opinions in these points to my self, rather then publish them so
plainly in print, as well as by word and pen, to the disturbance thereof?

To which I say, if it be the truth I hold, and matter of weight withal, it
will excuse the promoting of it self, if it were to the distraction of the
Church (which is to be subject to the truth, and not the truth to her) and also
to the destruction of the world, fiat just^, aut pereat mundus,

Secondly, the matters held forth here by me, which are mainly the falsness of
your Ministry and baptism, are, as truth, so of such consequence as to be well
worth discovering, if either ^uther did well to declare against the Pope and
Clergy of Rome, or your selves O Presbyters against Prelates, Deans and
Chapters etc. without regard to the several disturbances that were like to be
consecutive thereto: yea the true subject and manner of administration of
baptism, which (when it serves your turn so to do) you call a circumstantial
matter, a ceremony for which (if you should err therein) none but weak and
querulous consciences will complain and separate, an indifferent thing for
which why should we make so much ado? a g^at, not to be streind at and such
like, is so necessary a matter, one of the most necessary points of Religion,
which those that err in do most fearfully err, and are totally deserted by
the spirit of God, these are your own words.

Thirdly, you talk much (and it is the language of the Pope to your selves since
you reat from his Church) of the Church, and our holy mother the Church, and
Ghostly fathers of the Church, and good and true tempered sons of the Church,
and the peace of the Church, and Schismatics in the Church, etc. wherewith you
astonish the vulgar, but I protest this day before God; and men, not only
against him, against whom you are Protestants also, but against your selves
also his Schismatical sons, who own his ordinations, and still walk in some of
his ordinances, viz. Rantism, Parochial posture etc. as those that are little
less ignorant then he, and his good sons, of both the true Church, and true
peace thereof, whilst the truth, to which she should submit, is not regarded by
you, and the very things that make a true visible Church, and are de esse and
constitutive of it, so that abstract them, and you null it viz. true matter i.
e. believers baptized, and true form i. e. free and not forced fellowship, both
which are so in the Churches of England, Scotland, Italy, France and Spain, are
not only wanting, but also trodden under your feet.

Fourthly, the peaceable way wherein we propagate these opinions, were you as
sure they are erroneous, as I am tha tyou'l once find them to be truth, will
yetexcuse, and acquit us from all guilt of disturbing the peace of either the
world, or your Church, which is the world in reference to the true one; and
unless you can say the Gospel of peace, which where ere it comes, occasions
dissentions, is the cause of them, as in no wise it is, but men's lusts rather
that rage, and take on against it, you cannot say our Gospel is; for it
propounds them to the world in no other way then that, and that way was no
other then bare propounding them: and as Christ and his disciples did not judge
them here, though they will judge them most severely hereafter, who reject
their words, by the power of the Magistrate, by the civil sword, by nailing to
pillories, cutting off ears, slitting noses, whippings, fines, confiscations,
prisons, bonds, banishments, fightings, fire, and faggot, the bloody ways
whereby BBBabilon has edified it self to that height of abomination, the
Arguments whereby the CCClergy were wont to convert Heretics quickly from all
error to dust, and ashes; so if any man hear our words and reject them, well
may we rebuke him sharply, as they also did, but we judge him not, in that way
whereby the Tribe of Levi, that has levied war for his lusts sake against the
whole earth, has bereft all men of peace: nevertheless the words that we
speak to him, being those that Christ and his disciples have spoken in the
world, the same will judge him at the last day.

Secondly, why (since it must needs be supposed there be many Godly men among
the Ministers of the Nations, though the most of them be wicked yet) I do not
except, and exempt them, when I inveigh so heavily against the CCClergy? or why
I do not rather forbear, and spare to speak so broad at all, and so generally
as I do against that generation as an evil one, for the sake of those good
ones, that are among them?

To which I say,

First, that (...) godly men properly are those only that worship God aright,
i. e. according to his own will and institution, (...), which well weighed
might possibly * Mat. 15. 9.
put the best men among you to your trumps to make good your title to that
title, and denomination of godly by Scripture record, since while you stand
among the rest, even you as well as the worst do preach, and practice for
doctrines of Christ some traditions of man, if you had no more enjoined you by
them, on whom you wait for your instructions, then barely the sprinkling of
infants, by which you make void, what in you is, the true baptism of Christ.

Yet not denying but that there is a sprinkling of honest hearts quorum meliori
luto sinxit praecordia Titan, whom the sun of righteousness, as he lightens
every man that comes into the world, has hatched up into a higher predicament
of Godliness then their fellowees, who are drawn up into some higher streins
of devotion then the rest, I add further.

Secondly, what are these littles to the lump? what is the gleaning to the
vintage? here and there one good man to the whole corrupt crew of them, that
like Locusts, and Caterpillars have spread themselves together with the smoke
of errors over the earth in three several swarms or armies? can some scores of
well meaning Priests give the denomination of an holy PPriesthood, godly
Ministry to those legions of them that lie in wickedness? you may as well say
there is a million of Saints among the men of the world, therefore reprove not
the world for their sakes: such as these, who out of mere simple honesty,
rather then sinful sophistry and mystical iniquity do stand, and act, and argue
against the true way as they do, are Rarae aves, very few to the multitude of
humanists, and sensual ones, and subtle subverters of the Gospel (which yet
they would seem to be Ministers of) for their own ends; by whom they are
commonly so hated too so far as they have any more strictness and sincerity
then ordinary, that they are among the other of their brethren (as I was for
querying after truth while I stood among them) as owls and bats baired by
other birds: which few good grapes were they better then they are, cannot
denominate the whole vintage, as una ^irundo non facit ver: BBBabilon is
BBBabilon still, and SSSodom is SSSodom, and must be called so, though Lot live
in it, and he called out of it too, unless he mean mean to perish with it.

Thirdly, those good men that are there (the mores the pity that they are so)
ought not to be suffered nor spared, but spoke to the rather themselves, and
that very roundly too, for being and abiding in a bad way, and not the way it
self, and those many bad men that are in it escape declaring against, as bad,
because of them: there must be downright dealing with upright men, when they
are in a wrong way, and that indeed is the most upright dealing with them of
all: yea Sirs, you that are upon the Account of these times for godly
Ministers, let me say this to you, for verily I have sorrow of heart for some
of you of my old acquaintance, my own flesh and blood, for whose sakes flesh in
me would fain be silent, as knowing flesh in you would fain be let a lone, but
I must urge you to be serious in seeing how unsafely you satisfy your selves
in your present fellowship with a carnal Clergy: what make you among the
profane Ministry of the Nations, that has in all ages sat with such weight
upon them, as to sink them into a gulf of error, so that all truth almost is
heresy with them now, and under hazard of being smoothered as soon as it
peepes out from under that veil of traditions, that has covered it? what make
you keeping a Court of guard among the Babilonians to help to hold them in
captivity still, at least in the Suburbs, and by the borders of Babylon, where
you yet linger and loiter for all your pretenses and protestations to go quite
home with them, that are resolved for Sion? what mean you to stand so near in
affinity as to make one spiritualty, one spiritual fraternity with such fl^shly
minded men, as the main body of the national ministry consists of in all
Europe? for it is evident you will enter into the lists, and make head with the
worst of them, even with the Pope himself, against any further discoveries of
truth, then will stand with your standing among them, though the Lord makes out
the truth more clear, and you seem in your prayers to desire him so to do^
(...) yea I am almost ashamed to utter what I see, I see preciseness and
profaneness go hand in hand to keep out the true Righteousness indeed.

So that if I speak to the whole body of the CCClergy throughout the earth, as
very often I do, yet I bespeak you no otherwise then I find you viz. whether
for this or for that in particular, yet all banded in one general body against
the truth; for as Herod and Pilate though at enmity could yet agree as friends
against Jesus, so you though of never so different complexions, and
constitutions, lives, and conversations, doctrines, and disciplines, forms and
fashions, and goverments and Gospels, yet are all friends to Christ's crucifying
in his disciples: yea how implacably are you at odds among your selves, one
sort of you being for the supremacy of the Pope, another for the
Super-intendeny of the Bishop, a third for the superstitions of the Synods,
others for they scarce know which, and they care not what, but as the temper of
the times does dispose them; some Rantizing infants from one ground viz.
because its a tradition, some denying that, and disclaiming it as both a
rotten, and false one, yet Romanizing still from some other, some, and those
the most, more loose, a few more strict in their manners, notwithstanding all
which variety, you are at unity still, i. e. at emnity against the Gospel of
Christ.

But should you help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? surely
wrath will be upon you with them from the Lord: If you Iehosophats i. e. the
honest Presbyters in whom good things are found, who have taken away the
groves, and much more of that Romish rubbish then your father Asa i. e. the
good old, Bishops did before you, if you good Iehosaphats I say, will after all
this join with the wicked Ahabs that trouble Israel, in imprisoning the
Michaiahs, at least by a silent assent, and with the Ahaziahs that do wickedly,
so as to lay your heads together for shiploads of Gold, 2 Chronicles. 3. 31. 19. 2.
20. 35. 26. 38. for more means and maintenance, saying to them, we are in this
point as you are, our people as your people, our parishes as your parishes, our
Articles of faith herein as your Articles of faith, our way of maintenance as
yours, and we will be with you in the war to reduce the Giliadites, the
sectaries, that should be subject to us, to our obedience: your ships and all
your projects, works and councels will be broken, and disappointed as the
others, what ever may become of your persons: true men in a false way are out
of Gods protection, as well as hypocrites in a true.

Therefore depart ye from the tents of those ungodly men, yea arise and depart
from that Papistical posture of parish Churches, and Pastoral relation to such
as are not sheep, which not Christ Jesus, but the Pope stated men in at first,
for this is not your rest because it is polluted, it will destroy you with a
sore destruction; whereupon come out from them and be ye separate, yea come out
of her come out of her, ye that are Christ's people (for Christ's Ministers you
are not, though never so good men, by Antichrists orders) and partake no longer
with her in her sins, least ye partake also of her plagues.

Fourthly, the Godliness and honesty of men's persons does not prove the
goodness and truth of the outward form and way of Church Order they are in,
nor must hinder the overturning it if false, who will say many of these under
the Episcopacy were not good men? if good men stand in a bad place, soil, or
posture, they have so much the more need to be removed as trees, and
transplanted into a better: for many of you Presbyters that go for godly were
as godly every jo^, while you st^d in that false Episcopal form as now, and
some of you somewhat more (for its much to be feared that the settling of you
in the same Hierarchy over the faith, and chair of infallibility here in
England, out of which you justled the Bishops, and they but an age above
removed the Pope, and the enjoyment of so much of their means, has been a
means of abating much of your godliness, and righteousness too (if ever you
had any) or else the Priest surely would not so have so soon forgot that ere he
was Clark as to have gone about (so high Presbytery did but that God prevented
him of his purpose) so soon as ever he was gotten out of his own growning
condition, and kept from the clutches of those that crushed him, to crush those
that groaned under him for the same liberty of conscience, out of Smectimnus
his own mouth.) There were therefore (if not as many good men) yet many as good
men and (to their then light sincere souls owning Prelacy, and some (its like)
owning the Papacy it self H^tness Luther himself, who, though he wrote bitterly
against indulgences, yet durst not (...) ought from the (...) of (...) most
holy Father Leo, See an Epistle of his to Pope Leo the 10^
, as may seem to be among you that now disown both, yet did not this forbid
you, nor stop your mouths from using sharp invectives against their Authority
as usurped, their Government as ill, their spiritual Courts, consistories, and
seveveral sessions as spiteful to the truth, their ways as violent against
tender consciences, that could not close with them, their Liturgies,
Ordinations, administrations of Ordinances, Baptism and Supper, Discipline,
directories for worship and Catechism etc. as altogether superfluous,
superstitious, unlawful, and abominably corrupt, their revenues too great
(though little enough for your selves if you could catch it) their power too
absolute (till it came into your own hands) their Synods too supercilious,
arrogant, arbitrary, and impositive upon the state both powers and people (till
you had a Synod of your own) their pluralty of benefices too much of all
conscience for one man (till conscience in some of you was made wide enough to
have and to hold as many cures as ever you can compass) and themselves an
untoward and perverse generation, the Whore of Babylon, (so Rutherford) and the
very best among them, too bad, and much more to blame then others, for not
seeing your model to be better, and for once effering to set their shoulders to
the upholding of so rotten a fabric: why therefore since your domination is
the same, and your government as Tyrannical as the other, the extent of your
dominions the same, for they rule but over all, and you over no more then you
can subject, the subject matter of your churches the same viz. whole England,
whole Scotland, whole Commonwealths, the whole world at once, if it would as
Catholikely submit to your directory, as it did once to the Popes, in point of
worships, and payments, at least, whether godly in their conversations or no,
your parish form the same, your Ministry a Ministry by the same orders, and
mostly of the same men, new molded, not so much in mind and manners, as in
manner of ministration according to the laws for alteration, in a word your
whole Hierarchy, though new suited, so far the same, that you are no less
Cozen Germane to them, then they two are one unto another, why may it not, I
say, be proportionably reproved, notwithstanding a number of honest and godly
men among those, that are not more numberless, then so godless, that they may
well say of themselves, Nos numeri sumus fruges consumere nati?

5. Specially since the best men are by so much unworthy to be justified, and
favored in the false form they are found in, by how much, in some respects,
they do more wrong to the truth, then the very worst that are in that wrong way
with them.

For though the wicked Ministers are the worst, both to themselves and to all
others otherwise, whether Popes, Prelates, Presbyters, or Popish Priests of of
any kind, yet herein the best are worst, and even more injurious then any viz.
as they are greater stumbling blocks to some, and, by standing still in a
superstitious way, stand more in the way of such as (living more at a venture
by their example in all things then the word) would else escape it, then
profane ones are capable to do: thus pious Priests, that are adored as Popes
in their several parishes, more dazzle their peoples eyes from discovering the
whole mystery both iniquity and godliness, then dissolute, rude, proud,
paultry ones possibly can, when once the Gospel comes among them: yea, Pope
Caelestinus, Pope Clemens, Pope Innocentius, Pope Pius, Pope Formosus, Pope
Urbanus, do more captivate their cures to continuance in crooked customs, then
either Leo, or Helbrandus. When men in a false Ministry are any better then
ordinary in their persons, though never so Antichristian in their performances,
yet how many are hardened to the heeding of these, as Christian enough for
their sakes: but when they are not only traditionary in their services, but
impious and impenitent in their lives, this renders not only their deformation
more discernable, but also reformation more desirable then else it would be; so
as corruption optimi est pessima, the pervertures of good men are most
prejuditious, if not pernicious to the truth, ex malis moribus bonae nascuntur
leges, the parish Ministers immodest manners makes modest men look out for some
better laws and Gospel.

There Is one thing more I know you will charge me with (for you Ashford
Disputants did once before thousands, when there was (seemingly) less occasion
then now, viz. that I am too sharp and Satirical, that I rail at and revile
you, in stiling you an Adulterous generation, Antichristian, Heretical,
Schismatic

To which I say, first that, though some of you would have muzzled me up then,
by an Article, from that which you call reviling, least happily I should have
unmaskt you too much, yet, in your sense, that Article shall not bind me at
this time (with your leave) for you call that reviling that is not so: would
you set your selves soberly once to reason things out, i. e. to discern them
properly as they are, you would find, that no man is reviled that is seasonably
and soberly declared, and denominated to be but what he is: for be the titles
we note men by never so gross, yet are they but their proper names, if in all
things suitable to the subject: hence (though I can excuse your ignorance in
terming me Anabaptist, for that's impropriation indeed) yet I Will more then pardon
you, print me out how you will, so you print me no worse then you prove me: and
as for me whatever style I put upon you, as I do it in a serious and not lusory
way, so I make it out to be your due: as also what you Presbyters put upon the
Prelates, and you Prelates upon the Popedom, viz. the denomination of
Antichristian, Strumpet, Babylon, and such like, you make plainly enough appear
to be their due, and therefore I cannot possibly be said properly to revile
you, forasmuch as upon the self same Account as you cry out upon each other and
use these disgraceful and opprobious terms (as you term them) toward one
another, I (as justly) cry out in the same language against you all; unless
you will yield to it, as I know you will not, that you are Revilers your selves.

If what I say of you be indeed more then the truth, I Will not only expect your
contradiction, but accept thankfully your correction of me from the word; but
if you cannot from thence deny but that I call you what you are, then as you
will not be guilty of overcharging your selves as well as me, you must acquit
me from the guilt of reviling, for as I lend you no worse language then you
lend one another in the like cases, so as I plead my innocence in it, must you
plead your own else can you be held guiltless no more then I, but we must all
be revilers togegether.

When the Pope challenges the Prelatical party for stiling him the Roman
Antichrist, See Dr. Featleys dippers dipped See Dr. Helins Geography, where
speaking of Pope Joan, he calls her both the literal and the mystical Wh^re of
Babylon.
and the mystical Whore of Babylon See Rutherfords Presbytery, in the Epistles
Dedicatory and to the Reader.
, and the Prelates likewise come upon Presbytery, for making them as much
Babylon as the other (for so does Mr. Rutherford the Scotchman calling the two
Governments of Italy and England, the Popes and Prelates lawless Church
Monarchy, saying of the Prelate that he could not find his Father, and was
ashamed of his native Father Diotrephes, i. e. the Pope, and that the Pope was
his Godfather, and Rome his Godmother, and the Antichristian Prelacy was but
spilt Popery, half dyed Papistry, terming them also children of Babell One of
the three parts, Rev. 16. 19. of the great City BBBabylon, viz. the Pope and
his carnal crew of Clergymen, the Prelate found out, but (in nostris talpae in
alienis linces sumus) was so pitifully purblind at home that he could never
find out a second: the second part of that Babylonish WWWhore, which are the
Prelate and his Priesthood, the Presbyter found out, and began to cry out upon
them also as an harlot, but, standing so much in his own light that he cannot
see himself for himself, and cannot see wood for trees, to this day he cant hit
upon the third, but even that also, which is the Presbyterian Clergy, is in
Tyranny so like the rest, that the name Babylon will appear upon their
foreheads too within a while.
when also (I say) you of the Presbytery are challenged by the Bishops, and the
Prelacy by the Popes for revilers, in the words, wherein you challenge us, and
wherein Paul was questioned for his term Thou w^ited wall, viz revilest thou
Gods high Priest? you can excuse your selves no otherwise then he did, i. e. we
wist not that you are Gods high Priests, but are assured you are rather what we
call you; even so, if you shall say to my self revilest thou the Ministers of
Christ? I say (Sirs) I wist not that you are Ministers of Christ any more then
the Pope himself, i. e. as much as just nothing, for as quod (...) tale must be
magis tale (vertually at least if not formally) so n^l (...) quod in se non
habet, so that the Roman Antichrist being no true one himself, and in no
commission from Christ to make his Ministers, could not (secundum te O
Presbyter) make those true Ministers, that made those, that made them, that
made these that make you, and so what ere you are (as from him) yet (as from
Christ) you are no Ministry at all, but in very deed the very same that I call
you, v. z. of the Beast, and of the D^agon, as also the three fold
CCChristendome (of whom you say that they are Jews, i. e. Christians, when
they are not) are no other then the Synogogue of Satan.

In all which so far am I from reviling, that I speak the words of soberness,
and truth, which whoever does may not unlikely be reviled as a reviler, by you,
but is a faithful reprover indeed: for it is not simply vile terms spoken that
make a reviler (if spoken both seriously and in season) but their non
agreeableness to them they are spoken of: for else undoubtedly not only your
selves (who spoke as v^lely of the Pope as I of you, but John Baptist, Peter,
Paul, yea, and Christ Jesus himself (none of which reviled at all, though upon
occasion of their enmity against God they called men (whom else they respected
well enough too) by the name of Satan The term Christ used to Peter for his
subtle selfishnesse, immediately after he had honored him with the name of
Peter Mat. 16. where the actions are Satanical, the reproof cannot be too
Satyri call to whom soever.
, evil and adulterous generation, Generation of Vipers, children of the devil,
enemies of all righteousness, bruit beasts, Foxes, Dogs, Swine, etc.) must
all be revilers with you too.

This take therefore from me (and let it satisfy) viz. that I Will never fasten
any terms upon you, which by your works you first fasten not on your selves,
yet know that persisting as you have done under the notion of Christ's
Ministers) in pride and perverseness against his Gospel, though I should never
call you Deceivers, Antichristian and the WWWhore of BBBabylon, yet you will prove
your selves to be so in the end.

Now therefore Oh HHHarlot hear, and fear, for I have heard from the Lord of
Hosts a consumption determined upon thee throw out the whole earth, thou have,
being well mounted, harnased, and attired upon the back of thy beast, made war
against the Lamb in his Saints (thy Heretics) for forty two months, a time,
times and a half, or 1260 years, and power has been given thee, and the beast,
which thou spurrest, to overcome them, and over kindreds, tongues, and nations,
so that all that dwell upon earth have worshipped him, and thee on him, whose
names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation
of the world: yea thou have opened thy mouth in blasphemies, and caused thy
beast under thee to blaspheme the name of God and his Tabernacle and them that
dwell in heaven, yea thou have spoken great words against the most High, and
worn out the Saints of the most high, and thought to change times a^ ^wes and
they have been given into thy hand, so that who was like to thee and thy beast,
who was able to encounter and make war with him? but now behold thy proud times
are ended, and the Lamb will overcome thee, for he is King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, and they that are with him are called and chosen and faithful, and
thou that have led into captivity shall go into captivity, and thou that have
killed with the sword must be killed by the sword, here is the patience and
faith of the Saints: And the very ten horns themselves, even all the kingdoms
of Christendom, into whose hearts it has been put to give thee all their
power and strength, ^s well as the tith of all their glory, and riches and
carnal things, upon thy pretense of ministering to them in spiritual (all which
thou have swom upon, been born up, and fortifyed by, as Babylon of old by the
River Euphrates, and with all which thou have as with so many horns of a
savage beast, tossed, bruised, gored the sides of Saints under the name of
Sinners) even these shall now turn upon thee, and unhorse thee, yea they shall
hate thee O Whore, and make thee desolate and naked, and burn thy flesh with
fire, so that all thy lovers great and small, and thy Merchants that have been
rich by trading, as in other things, so especially in bodies, and souls of men
shall bewail and lament, when they see the smoke of thy burning, saying Alas,
Alas for thee, whilst Gods people that are first come out of thee, yea whole
heaven, and all the holy Apostles and Prophets, who now suffer under thee for
telling thee the truth, and shall be avenged of thee, shall rejoice over thee
at thy downfall. You will hardly give audience O ye Priests to this word, but
some of you rather cry out against me, as multitudes of your Churches good
children did some few days since in Smithfield, when by one of the City
Marshals, merely for preaching the Gospel to thousands there assembled to hear
it, I was betrayed into their hands to be a bused, saying away with him, away
with him, hang him, it is pity but he should be ^oned, and such like (...) and
cries as were heard of old: others of you Seers may be ready to call to me
scoffingly out of your mount Sier, watchman what of the night? watchman what of
the night? but whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear, I tell you
Sirs the morning comes, and also your dead night, therefore if you will
enquire, enquire quickly, return, and come to the truth, before the fierce
anger of the Lord come upon you: or, if it may not be said, as of old it was
that many of the Priests were obedient unto the faith, yet Oh that many of your
people would know in their day the things that make for their peace, before
they be hid from their eyes, and partake no more of your sins, least they
partake of your plagues: but if IIIezeb and her lovers will lie in bed
together, and not repent, when God gives the space to repent of their
fornications; then me thinks I hear a noise among them, as of those that are in
hellish tribulation yelling out from beneath (...) Alas, Alas, whilst from
above a voice of much people in heaven saying, Hallelujah.

Hallelujah! for now our Lord will reign,
And judge that Scarlet WWWhore, who still does fain
Her self to be Christ's Spouse, and so maintain
Her self a Qeen, the world her slaves in chain.
Though, like a Queen, she does the whole earth stain
With Whoredoms, and Saints blood, whom she has slain:
Three PPParts, three CCCrowns, three HHHeads of subtle brain,
A TTTripple TTTribe Rides Christndom, it is plain:
And, like Hells three mouthed Monster, stands to strain
Souls that escape thence, and bark them back again:
Yet, when it is told, this Minx, this whore in grain
Frowns, Frets, Hates, Tears, Fumes, Threats, Storms, Fom^s a^ain:
But (IIIezebel) woe to thy house, refrain
Thy pride, thy lies, thy wrath, like that of Cain,
Thy filth, thy self, thy greediness of gain,
Else, as thy mirth has been, shall be thy pain:
This is told to, and by me and John Brain,
Both being once of thine one children twain: See Brain's Babels fall.

Thou see, yet wilt not see this, but remain
Silent, least friends turn foes, and thee disdain;
But some must shew't (or else they see it in vain)
Through England, Scotland, Italy, France, and Spain.
Amen Hallelujah.
Nos Rusti^ci haud cu^anus quan^i^tatem Syllaborum.
TTTripartita Tribus, Tribulaes, Tribulusque Triunus;
Discipulis Christi, Triplexque Tricepsque Tyrannus;
Trico Tricornis; Trifurcif^ atque T^;
Tristisicus Sanctis, toti (...)
Ter decimas sapiens, capi^ (...)
Reges ipsa regens ipsos, super (...),
Te credent ((...) vana fides!) genus esse deorum;
RRRoma* O RRRoma, Tibi mulier formosa videris,
At tame^ MMMeretrix, vix (heu) pendenda Triuncis;
Viri^u^ ipsa ^uis te perdis, quo peritura es
T^ (...)st, aderitque brevi tibi Terminus ipse.
D(...)d magis malus Piscator ac tu, ac tui (O SSSacerdos) estis Pessimi Pis^
qui, nisi resipiscamini, Reiiciemini in ete^m Mat. 13 48. In Domino viz. via
Domini Salveto^e.

FINIS.

