An Account of some Transactions in this present Parliament, in a Letter to a
Person of Quality in the Country.
SIR,
I Received yours ten days since, but could not sooner inform you of the
Proceedings of this Parliament; some expected they would have examined and
undone all the last had done, and that several of the Members would have
refused the new Oaths, and taken the old Ones, without naming the King; but in
a little time they saw their mistake, and that this truly reputed Church of
England-Parliament is well pleased with their glorious Deliverer from Popery
and Slavery, and secure that the Church of England, as established by Law, will
flourish and be safe under his Protection.

A Noble Duke, who formerly personated a singularity of Humor to preserve
himself for great Services, as yet not arrived to be a Minister of State,
though very active and instrumental in preserving our new Establishment,
brought in a Bill to Recognize their Majesty's the Lawful and Rightful King and
Queen of these Realms, and to declare the Acts of the late Parliament, begun
Feb. 23. 1688. were, are, and of right ought to be, by the Laws of this Realm;
which certainly (if any thing his Grace undertakes can be so) seemed altogether
needless; for the Bill of Rights Recognized them, and the Votes of the last
Parliament, having the Authority of Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons
Assembled, as well as the Royal Assent, were received for Laws, and the Lives,
as well as Estates and Liberties of many have been determined accordingly;
therefore this declaring and enacting of them now, in the Opinion of many,
seemed not only needless, but dangerous, as striking at the Foundations and
rendering the Authority of the late Meetings questionable, as well as the
Establishment of this Government: For if the Convention, however called without
what some Men style Legal Authority, could make or Vote an Abdication and
Vacancy of the Throne, dispose of the Crown, and abrogate the Oaths essential
to such Meetings, they might surely, without the formality of Writs, be created
or transformed into a Parliament, and be, de Facto, a good Parliament,
otherwise their Majesty's Title is founded only in Possession, or, which I dare
not say, Usurpation.

In that famous President of Richard II. we find 35 Articles of Mis government
charged on him, by a Parliament called by Writ in his own Name, and he by them
declared unfit for Government, who like a good natured Prince submitted, and
resigned his Kingship, released his Subjects from their Allegiance, and
transferred his Right and Title to Henry of Lancaster, who thereupon claimed
it, was vested therein, Recognized and Crowned, held nine Parliaments, and his
Son Henry held as many, and his Grandchild lineally succeeded, was Crowned, and
held nineteen Parliaments; yet as soon as Edward IV. claimed his Hereditary
Right, all the confirmations of the 3 preceding Kings, amounted to no more than
to be owned by the Statute Kings de Facto, in Deed, but not de Jure, of Right.

This some fancied would have puzzled, or slackned proceedings, but it did not
consist with the Wisdom of the House to mispend their more precious time in
untying Gordian knots, or to lay much stress upon such Cobweb Laws, as were
spun out of the Brains of such a Temporizing Parliament, as that of Edward IV.
Our more refined Age is not to take Presidents from our doting Ancestors, but
make them. There are always Maxims suited to Times, Circumstances,
Convenience, and Necessity. In former times diversity of Religion gave no Bias
to Revolutions of State; Faction among the Nobility, and Secular Interest, and
Dubious Titles, or Ambition only disturbed the Succession of the Crown.

But the prevailing consideration now, among some moderate Men, is this, that
though they did not contribute to the Revolution, yet they would preserve it;
and though the things done cannot be justified according to the old Laws of the
Land, yet because dangers may attend the return of the late King, they adhere
to the present Government; which reasons will justify other things, which
neither give Credit nor Authority to this; but will oblige us to persevere in
the way we are in, and bid defiance to Repentance, because there may be less
ease and quiet in a new course of Life.

They who have been active in the Change, and have Dependencies, Offices, and
Expectances, must not give place to any Scruples, as others may, but must think
and say, He is Lawful and Rightful King; for although according to our Modern
Politics, a King de Facto signifies an Usurper; yet the P. of Orange's
concurrence, and agreement with the 3 Estates of the Kingdom, can create a
Right: Besides, when we see so many, upon this consideration, buy or take
Offices, Employments, and Honors under this Government, it must be a
sufficient demonstration that the Acts of the late Parliament need no
Confirmation, but stand firm upon an Original Right; and that it may clearly be
proved beyond doubt, that the People's Sovereign Power may fill, as well as
declare the Throne Vacant; so that it is of no mement to insist upon Hereditary
Right, or the examples of former times, or the Authority of Ancient Laws.

These matters occasioned some days debate in the House of Lords; but the Bill
had an unexpected dispatch among the Commons, who did not scruple the Words are
and were, as some protesting Lords had done; for the Authority of both Houses
justifies the good Sense and English of whatever passes with them; and there
is no obligation, I know of, upon the Members to gratify the Captious with an
explication of their meaning, since the Nation reaps the benefit of their Wise
results.

There is great reason that they who are entrusted with our Religion, our
Estates, our Liberties, and Lives, should Recognize Him whom so many invited,
and so few resisted, whom they have enabled to recover one of the four
Provinces of Ireland, and will soon Conquer the rest, and Triumph over France
it seif, which assists the Rebels there. In short, the Convention represented
the whole Body of the People; they declared, or created, the P. of Orange King,
and he being once constituted the Head, there must result as proper a Leviathan
of Government, as Mr. Hobs could describe, and I think the Authority of such a
Writer should satisfy all Men where the Supreme Power resides.

Yet notwithstanding what I have hitherto Writ, there were many, who thinking
the King no Wiser than themselves, judged he would not have passed the Bill,
since, in their Opinion, it being built upon a Republican Foundation, might be
a President hereafter to some popular Lord, who being Master of the Art of
deceiving, alluring, and cajoling the People, may arive to be the Captain of
the Mob, and thence be encouraged to send out his Circular Letters for Election
of a Representative, which having the same fondness for him that the Choosers
have, (the fittest and best Men in suh case^ often declining the employment,)
they who were chosen might Vote an Abdication, and Vacancy, and Elect another
King.

But, I think, we have little reason to fear this in our present Master's days,
who is so well served by Foreigners.

Surely they are mistaken, who say, that the Act of Settlement, which entailed
the Crown, is repealed by the Recognition; for it is established by the latter
clause otherwise, by Recognizing that their Majesty's were, are, and of Right
ought to be, by the Laws of this Realm, our Sovereign Liege Lord and Lady, King
and Queen, etc. Her Royal Highness the Princess of Danmark, who passed,
resigned, or disclaimed her Right, by prefering her dear Sisters Husband to the
Throne, may be excluded, with her hopeful Issue, from the Succession; which
otherwise might devolve to the King's Heirs; especially, if our King were
capable of an unjust Act; since it might be suspected, under any other Prince,
that where many Foreign Troops have the Guard of a Country, they will be better
affected to, and readilier aid a Foreign Prince, than any of the Princes of the
Blood, who are Natives.

I dare not go any further in the account I have from the House of Lords, nor
tell the censures past upon them, least I should encourage the Enemies of our
Gracious King.

I forbear also to give you an account of the Heats in the House of Commons,
their Zeal for the Church of England, and the rejecting the Oath of Abjuration,
which was an odd project, and I wonder the King's Friends so much favored it,
which seemed a fatal blow to our Liberties; and, in the Opinion of a most
Reverend Divine, was a setting our selves against Providence, and I am sure was
destructive to our Liberties, since the Monarchy is Elective, as by the
chusiing a Foreign Prince is evident, it would be very hard to incapacitate a
Native, for if a Toy should take the People in the Head again, to think of King
JAMES, (which would not be so strange as the Abdication,) this Oath would have
put the Negative upon the People, who commonly are troubled with the Disease,
called, Nitimur in vetitum, which would mad them that they could not have their
Wills.

But leaving these matters, I will touch upon some things done by the House of
Commons, which seems to concern you and all the Preeholders of England in their
Estates, for that they have liberally given the King Money; but you must not
think them too free in their supply; nor blame them for taking no more notice
of the multitude of Strangers, who must be maintained at our charge, since so
few Englishmen are fit for, or to be trusted with the defense of the
Government, or our Country. Indeed, the concern for Religion, and our
obligations to the Preserver thereof, ought to make us les^ tender, for the
Prorogation of the last Parliament, the very day the Money Bill was passed, and
the unexpected Dissolution, (before the Act of Indemnity was finished, or
several Grievances redressed,) merely to draw on this Parliament to give more
Taxes, and own the Authority of the last.

In King Charles the Second's time, we found several things tacked to the Money
Bill, least they should give to, without taking from the Crown: But the House
is now more generous, because we have a Prince we can trust with all that is
most valuable, and they are abundantly satisfied with the several ways there
are to expend the Treasure raised and granted: They know what Sums have passed
the Texel, the Pampus, the Mosell, Elb, and the Rhine; how much is sent to
Copenhagen, and Berlin, besides what Count Conningseck expected, and the Dutch
yet want, the equipping of the F^eet, the discharge of the vast Arrears to it,
and the Army, and the growing charge to both, till Ireland be reduced, and
Scotland thoroughly subjected to his Majesty's Obedience; so that we are not to
Murmur at their liberal Aids, seeing some compute that no less then five
Millions in a Year can defray these unavoidable Charges, which would exhaust
the Revenue of Potosa, if it were not in the Hands of extraordinary Managers.

If we may believe the public account, given us in the Foreign Intelligences,
we may compute how great a Charge the whole must be, from that Negotiation of
Mr. Cox at Zurick for the Aid of 4000 Suissers, contracted for there; which as
is expressed, is, that near upon 200000 l. English must be paid, the one half
down, the other in two equal portions some time after, as a cautionary pawn for
performance of Covenants, which is to be deposited in the Treasury Chamber of
their States, with many other circumstances too tedious to relate, whereby we
may learn how much must be drein'd from us by Foreign Troops, which we might
fear would prolong the War extravagantly, if they were not such as our King
has chosen.

I know this galls the Country, which considers the decay of Trade, and losses
at Sea, and that while our Traffic was as free and profitable as ever it had
been known; yet for near 15 years by past, there were neither Subsidies, Polls,
or Taxes: But to balance this we must consider, that we have a new and better
Government, which being hastily, though necessarily raised, requires
extraordinary supports, to secure it from the fate other new Buildings have
had, least by its fall it crash those who promise themselves security under it.

Upon these Considerations, and for the sake of those brave Patriots, who were
the Contrivers and Architects of this great Structure, we must not think Taxes
any Charge. The success of this Summer may recompense all, especially, if
according to his Promise, and declared Resolution, our Godly Sovereign will
adventure to Ireland, no doubt, but, according to the example of England, it
will submit, or be easily reduced; from whence he may pass to the Conquest of
France, and become the Emperor of the West, or the first Prince in the fifth
Monarchy, and the destroyer of Antichrist; which the Great Great Grandchild of
the old British Merlin, the Reverend Bishop of St. As. can make out, by his
own Dreams, Daniel 's Vision, or the Revelations.

But if these Glorious Things should not happen in our Times, we have our
Religion secured, so that none can hurt or destroy it but our selves; for
indeed we have so dressed and made it our own, that if some Reverend Fathers were
not Sponsors, we should think it changed; for the old fashioned Church of
England-Men say, it is not that which was at the first Reformation, nor what
our Forefathers or Primitive Christians professed.

But so long as we have our Religion as it is, let our Ships, our Trade, our
Estates, Lives, and Liberties go which way they will, we cannot be unhappy,
having the same evidence and assurance for our Country, some good Men have had
for their own Salvation: And if Hurricanes wreck our Ships, pestilential
Diseases destroy our Forces by Sea and Land, our Powder-Mills be blown up,
whereby, besides the loss of so great a proportion of that so necessary
Commodity, and some lives, (at which our Religious Q. was so affrighted:) If
the French take our Ships, and the Dutch our Trade, they are to be thought
acdents, and misfortunes, or any thing besides marks of the Divine displeasure,
whose favor we have Ensured by taking so great care, and doing such
extraordinary things for his Honor, and the preservation of his Truth.

Let not pressing Men be compared to spiriting, and kidnapping, nor imprisoning
Men so Pressed in the Round-houses or Goals, nor forcing Women to attend the
Camp, as Laundresses, Nurses, etc. be thought any breach of our English
Liberties. We know Necessity has no. Law; Old Forms must not hinder our
Safety. It is our our comfort that our necessity was our choice, and we cannot
reasonably complain of any but our selves; which for good Reasons we ought not
to do, least it should look like discontent, or inconstancy, though if the half
of our present Burdens had been Imposed, or threatened, by the Abdicated King,
it would have been intolerable.

I cannot forbear condemning some, who studying the Improvement of their
Country, made the increase of Inhabitants necessary thereto, and yet complain
of Foreigners coming in; for though we want many thousand Mouths to spend the
product of our Country, which were sent to Scotland, Ireland, and our
Plantations; yet this defect is supplied with the better, and more numerous
supply of Danes, Dutch, and Strangers of other Nations, with their Wives and
Children; so that we are in hopes, though we may want Natives, yet we shall not
want numbers of Inhabitants, even such as will ease us of our cares, and
hazards of Trade and War. Our courteous and civilized Neighbors will Fight
for, and defend us, will Trade for, and supply us; and those Commodities which,
with danger of crosing the Seas, we fetch from all parts of the World, may be
brought us from Holland, and our Countrymen may be trained to Husbandry; and
when our running Cash is gone, we may supply our want of Money by the old way of
Trade, and Traffic by exchange of Commodities.

And indeed more Foreign Forces will be necessary to keep us poor, till we are
better accustomed to, and prepared to relinquish that too long, yet Factious
Pride, whereby we have been so uneasy to our Kings, and we are not like to
quit that Vice, which Peace and Plenty has Nursed us in, till we are brought
to some degree of Slavery. Poverty will keep of Envy, and Popish Emissaries
will no more trouble us, when we are well settled, than Bees do the Mustard Pot.

So long as our Religious King and Queen encourage long Praeyers before
Sermons, and like Preaching so well, as to have Afternoon-Sermons at
White Hall, though he be forced to keep many Papists in pay, and has been
reconciled to, and communicated, as some confidently affirm, with the Church of
Rome; we must not doubt but he has cleared himself of all his Engagements of
that kind to the late Pope, and is wholly in the true Protestant Interest,
having allowed the deprivation of the Bishops, and wilful Clergy in Scotland,
abolished Episcopacy it self, and we may reasonably expect the like Settlement
and Reformation here, after he has reduced Ireland, and expelled his
Rebellious FATHER out of that part of his Dominions: And if we supply him with
Money enough, he will be Victorious over the French, and extinguish all hopes
of his Enemies.

Our late Kings have been so unfortunate with that ancient Motto, Dieu and mon
Droit, as they claimed the Government from God and their Right, that our Wise
King had no reason to keep it; but being resolved to support us by his own Arm
and Interest, he has not only covered some of the Royal Arms of England with
his Eschucheon of Pretense; but, as a Motto of better Proof, has substituted
his, instead of the other, and the Wagons carry upon them these Words, Je
meinteindra: I will maintain it. And this Family, which from a small
Principality, attained to the Dignity of Stadholder. is in him advanced to
possess a Title to 4 Crowns, which he and his Posterity will maintain; and we
have great cause to think our selves happy under his Government, who adventured
his Life and Fertunes to deliver us from Popery and Slavery, and will again
hazard his Sacred Person, an Infirm Body, and Great Soul, for our Preservation.

FINIS.

