By the Lords Justices, A PROCLAMATION For putting the Laws in Execution
against Forestalling, Regrating and Engrossing of Corn.
Tho. Cantuar. Summers C. Romney, Cha. Montague.

WHereas several Good Statutes have been made against Forestalling, Regrating
and Engrossing of Corn, and amongst the rest, An Act in the Fifth and Sixth
Years of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, whereby Buying any Corn coming by
Land, or by Water to any Market or Fair, or to any City, Port, Haven or Creek
of this Realm or Wales, from any Parts beyond Sea, to be Sold, or Bargaining or
Contracting before the same shall be Brought into the Markets, Fairs, City,
Port, Haven or Creek, to be Sold, or Moving by Word, Letter, Message, or
otherwise, to any Person for the Inhauncing of the Price, or Dear Selling of
the same, Dissuading any Person from Bringing his or her Corn to any of the
said Markets, Fairs, Cities, Ports, Havens or Creeks, to be Sold, shall be
Adjudged a Forestalling. And by the same Act it is Declared, That the Buying of
Corn in any Fair or Market, and Selling the same in any Fair or Market held in
the same Place, or within Four Miles thereof, shall be Adjudged Regrating. And
by the same Act it is likewise Declared, That the Buying or Contracting for any
Corn, to Sell the same again otherwise than as is herein after Mentioned, shall
be Adjudged an Unlawful Engrossing, (that is to say) Buying of Barley, Bigg or
Oats, (Except by Forestalling) to be Converted into Malt or Oat-meal in the
House of the Buyer; Or the Taking of any Corn reserved without Fraud, upon any
Lease for Term of any Life or Years; Or the Buying of any Corn (Except by
Forestalling) by any Badger, Ladder, Kidder, or Carrier, who should be Licensed
so to do, and who should sell the same to any Victualler or other Person, for
the Provision of his or their Houses, within one Month after the same was so
first Bought; Or the common Provision made of Corn by Person for any City,
Borough or Town Corporate; Or for Provision (Except by Forestalling) for
Victualling any Ship, shall not be Judged an Offense against the said Statute;
Nor the Buying of Corn (Except by Forestalling) by any Person Licensed so to
do, to be Transported by Water from any Port or Place within this Realm or
Wales, unto any other Port or Place within this Realm, so that the same he
without Fraud Shipped within Forty Days after the same shall be Bought, and
Carried with such Expedition as the Wind and Weather would Serve, to the Port
the Cocquet of the same shall Declare, and there to Disbarque and Sell the
same, and Bring a Certificate thereof from a Justice of the Peace of the
County, or Mayor, or Bailiff of the Town, and of the Customer of the Port of
the Place, and Day where the Corn was Vnladed and Sold, to the Customer and
Comptroller of the Port where the same was Shipped; Nor the Engrossing of Corn,
when under the Prices in the said Act Mentioned; which since by an Act made in
the Fifteenth Year of the Reign of King Charles the Second, are Enlarged to be
Wheat at Forty Eight Shillings, Rye, Pease and Beans, Thirty two Shillings,
Barley, Malt and Buck Wheat, Twenty eight Shillings, and Oats, Thirteen
Shillings and Four Pence the Quarter. The Punishments of which said Offenses
were Enacted to be, for the first Offense Imprisonment for Two Months without
Bail or Mainprize, and Forfeiture of the Corn so Bought or Contracted for; for
the second Offense Imprisonment for the space of half a Year without Bail or
Mainprize, and Loss of Double the Value of the Corn so Bought or Contracted
for; and for the third Offense Setting in the Pillory in the Place where the
Offender shall Dwell, and Forfeiture of all his Goods and Chattels, and
Imprisonment during the Kings Pleasure; the one Moiety of all which Forfeitures
was to be to the King, and the other Moiety to him that would Sue for the same;
but the whole Forfeiture to be to the King where the Conviction should be at
the Kings Suit only. And it was thereby likewise Enacted, That if any Person,
having sufficient Corn for Provision of his House and Sowing of his Ground for
one Year, did Buy any Corn in any Fair or Market, for the Change of his Seed,
and did not Bring to the same Fair or Market the same Day so much Corn as he
Bought for his Seed, and Sell the same, if he could, at the Price the same then
went in the said Fair or Market, that he should Forfeit double the Value of the
Corn so Bought: All which said Offenses the Justices of the Peace at the
Quarter Sessions for the County where such Offenses shall be Committed, have
Power to Hear and Determine. And whereas by an Act made in the Fifth Year of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, it was Enacted, That no Badger, Ladder, Kidder,
Carrier, or Transporter of Corn, should be Licensed but in the General Quarter
Sessions for the County where such Person should so Dwell, and had Dwelt for
the space of Three Years before the Date of his License, and was then or had
been a Married Man, and was, at the time of such License, a Householder, and not
a Servant or Retainer to any Person, and of the Age of Thirty Years; which
Licenses were to continue but for a Year, and should be Signed and Sealed by
Three of the Justices then present, whereof one to be of the Quorum, on Pain of
such Person Taking such License Forfeiting Five Pounds, and the Licenses not
Taken pursuant to the said Act are by the same Declared to be Void. And the
said Justices by the said Act were Empowered to take Bond and Surety by
Recognizance of the Person Licensed, That he should not Forestall or Ingross,
or otherwise Practice contrary to the said Statute of Edward the Sixth. And it
was likewise Provided by the said Act, That no Person should Buy any Grain out
of Open Fair or Market, unless such Person was thereunto Licensed by Special
Order and Express Words, upon Pain of Forfeiting Five Pounds; the Offenses of
which Act the said Justices of the Peace at the Quarter Sessions for the
County, where such Offenses shall be committed, have likewise Power to Hear and
Determine. And whereas the Prices of Corn do already Exceed the Rates in the
said Act of King Charles the Second, and is likely to grow much dearer, to the
great Oppression of the Poor, in part because the said Acts are not duly put in
Execution, if the same be not timely prevented: Wherefore, and forasmuch as it
will much Conduce to the Good and Benefit of His Majesty's Subjects, and Relief
of the Poor especially, that the said Laws, and that all the Laws in Force for
setting the Poor or Work throughout this Kingdom, should be duly put in
Execution, We have thought fit, by the Advice of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, to Issue this Proclamation; And We do hereby Charge and Command
all and every His Majesty's Judges, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, and all other Magistrates, Officers and Ministers whatsoever, and
wheresoever, within this Kingdom, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, that they and every of them, within their respective Places and
Jurisdictions, do cause the said Acts made in the Fifth and Sixth Years of King
Edward the Sixth, and the said other Act made in the Fifth Year of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, and all other Acts relating to the same Matters, and all Laws
now in Force for Setting the Poor on Work, to be in all and every the Parts and
Branches thereof put in Speedy and Effectual Execution; And that they do take
Care that no License be Granted to any Badger, Ladder, Kidder, Carrier or Buyer
of Corn or Grain, but according to the Directions of those Acts, and to such
Persons as are or shall be Qualified for the same, and under such Surety as
those Acts Require; And that they do take care that all Offenders against the
said Acts be effectually Prosecuted according to the Purport of the said Acts.
And We do hereby Require and Charge all His Majesty's Officers, Ministers, and
Loving Subjects whatsoever, to be Aiding and Assisting in the due Execution of
this Proclamation, on pain of His Majesty's High Displeasure, and of such Pains
and Punishments as may by Law be inflicted upon the Contemners of His Majesty's
Royal Authority.

Given at Whitehall, the Thirteenth Day of October, School. In the Tenth Year of
His Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. School.


