One Antidote more, Against that Provoking SIN of SWEARING, By reason of which
this Land now mourns. Given forth from under the Burden of the OPPRESSED-SEED
of God, By way of REPLY both to Henry Den's Epistle about the Lawfulness,
Antiquity, and Universality of an Oath, and his Answers to the Quakers
Objections against it, Recommended (by him) to all the Prisons in this City and
Nation, to such as choose Restraint, rather then the violation of their
Consciences. And also to Jeremiah Ives his Printed Plea for Swearing,
entitituled, The Great Case of Conscience opened, etc. about the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of Swearing. Which said REPLY to these two Opposers of the Truth,
as it is in Jesus, is recommended not only to all the Prisons in this City and
Nation, and to all such Real Christians, as choose Restraint rather then the
violation of their Consciences; but also, to all such Nominal Christians out of
Prison, as, rather then restraint, choose to purchase their Earthly Liberties by
Swearing, to the violation of the Command of Christ, who says, Mat. 5. 33.
Swear not at all: Iam. 5. 12. Above all things my brethren swear not.

By Samuel Fisher, now Prisoner in Newgate for his Testimony to the Truth of
Jesus, this 20th. day of the 12th. Month, 1660.

For the Land is full of Adulterers. For because of Oaths the Land mourns,
etc.

Jer. 23. 10, 11, 12, etc. By Swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing,
and committing adultery, they break out, and blood touches blood.

Therefore shall the Land Mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall
Languish,

Hosea 4. 2, 3. Lond^^ Printed for Robert Wilson, in Martins near Aldersgate.

One Antidote more against that provoking Sin of Swearing, by reason of which
this Land now mourns, etc.
THe Ministers of Justice ( so called) taking occasion (whether justly or no,
God will judge) by the KING's late Proclamation, (occasioned through that late
desperate attempt in this City of London) to fly with great force and violence
upon thousands of People living peaceably and quietly, professing Godliness;
and more fiercely then on any others, upon those called Quakers, whose
Practice, Principle, Profession, Purpose and Promise it has been, and is, to
forgo all fighting with Carnal Weapons, so as never to lift up an outward Sword
against the King, or any other man, so much as in the Defense of themselves,
much less the Offense of others, nor to learn War (in that kind) any more; have
driven the^ by droves into prison, insomuch as ( England never saw the like)
the prisons are so full, that there is hardly any room for more.

And though the Innocence of the foresaid People appears many ways, as well
by the Confession of the dying offenders, as their own Protestations, and the
Confession of the men that would be glad to find occasion against them, but are
not able, neither will they in any thing, save pertaining to the Worship of
God; yet are they kept in Bonds, as with a Snare, which at this day holds them
in, and shuts the prison doors upon them, in that, though they are taught by
Christ and his Apostles, Matthew. 5. 33. Iam. 5. 12. not to swear at all, or in
any wise, no not by any Oath whatsoever; yet that Oath of Allegiance* (required
at first for no other end but the finding out of Popish Recusants, and the
trial of men's faithfulness to the King, after the discovery of that Papistical
piece of Treachery in the horrid Powder Plot in K. James his days) is now
(besides the first true intent and purpose of it) by some (who more deeply
despited and dis-served the late King, his Father, then they can ever serve the
King now reigning by their furious drivings) more in malicious hatted against
the Quakers, his truest friends, then in any right love or friendship to him,
most illegally and unduly imposed on the Quakers, who by Hen. Den himself, in
his Quaker no Papist, are proved to all men to be no Papists; and of whose
active obedience to him in all things lawful, as well as of their passive
obedience, or patient suffering under the Imposition of things unlawful,
without violent resistance, both the King and his Council, as well as most
sober-minded men throughout this Nation not only may be, but (I verily believe)
even are also, by this time, informed sufficiently to satisfaction.

I say, the said Oath is unduly imposed, or rather unjustly used, as a Spiders
Web, as some Net or evil Engine, wherewith many envious minded men design the
entrapping, entangling and ensnaring such harmless, honest, innocent, and
tenderhearted people, against whom they bear any private grudge, particular
spleen, or personal enmity; so that when they would (in way of revenge) express
themselves to the terrifying of such fools as they think will be frighted by
it, Some that judge themselves to be Justices, more by their Commission from
the King to do Justice, then by their doing it, threaten them with the
imposition of the Oath; Which silly doings of some men, that know not how
rightly to rule themselves in their place of Power when they are got into it,
made (as I have heard) one, who was not ^o tender of taking the Oath, as his
Adversary thought he was, when he received this threatening Message from the
Justice, viz. Tell him, I will tender the Oath to him, Very readily return this
Answer to his foe, who hoped to fright him by it, viz. Tell him, that I will
take it, if he do.

Thus crookedly and cruelly are things carried among the unjust Justices, and
that Seed of evildoers which is never to be renowned, in the dark places of
the Earth, which are full of the ^abitations of cruelty, against the Righteous
Seed, and the Children of the Light, who are more Conscientious then to be (as
the other are) Conscious to themselves of evil-doing; yea, and so partial in
the Law, and in the administration of that they call Justice, are some of the
Ministers of it, that such as they have a spite at, though living ^ar from
them, and known in their Enemies own consciences to be both peaceable and
unsusp^tious persons, shall be pulled out of their friends houses, and picked
up in the very streets, to have the Oath, on pain of imprisonment, and loss of
all, imposed on them; when others whom they are willing to wink, and very
careful to connive at; yea, professed Popish Re^usants (in security of the King
against whom only the Law for the Oath was at first intentionally and directly
made) may sit securely under the very Noses of some of these newfound lawless
Justices of neither Peace nor Truth.

Insomuch that though the Quakers generally, and some few Baptists (while at
liberty) rather choose Imprisonment, then to take that Oath, or any other; and
those thousands of Quakers, and some of those Baptists who are in prison, and
have Liberty proffered upon condition of taking the Oath, do rather continue
there, then purchase their Liberty with Swearing: Yet very many Baptists both
in prison and out, in Kent, and elsewhere, being misled by the crooked
examples, and mis-taught by the crude conceptious of their untaught Tea. chers,
that it is lawful to swear in some cases, do choose rather to purchase their
Liberty by Swearing, then either to come into, or continue in prison: Yea, and
three or four of those who have sometime gone under the denomination of Quakers
also, to the great terror, distraction, and wounding of their spirits, so that
some of them have cried out for horror of heart, and have confessed they were
in greater bonds then those in prison A Copy of a Letter from one that
professes the Truth, but fell from it, and took the Oath.

MY dear Friends,
I desire to lay before you this my condition in this my fall: that my fall may
be no cause for you (...) stumble, but that you by it may be the more ^*ouraged
to stand; for I have yielded to the ^etrayer, and so betrayed the innocent Seed
in ^ne; ^or I forsook the counsel of the Lord, and ^onsulted with flesh and
blood, and so I fell in^o the snare of the world, and yielded to ^he ^ovenant;
and so I rested satisfied in what I ^ad done, for some certain hours; but when
^he Lord in his Power looked back upon me, ^hen I remembered what I had done;
then I remembered that I had denied Truth, which once I had professed, though
once I thought I should have stood when others fell. So the terrors of ^he Lord
have taken hold on me, and I lie under the judgments of the Lord.

And now I feel the truth of ^he words that were spoke by Christ, Tha^ h^ that
fails in one tittle, is guilty of all; and now I feel the truth of that, That
it is better to forsake wife, and children, and all a man bath, even life it
self, for Christ and the Truths sake, then to break one tittle of the Law of
God written in the heart. So I hope tha^ by mercy and judgment the Lord will
redeem me to himself again. The Lord may suffer some to fall, that the standing
of them that stand faithful, may seem to be the more glorious, and for them to
take heed least they fall.

Now I know and feel, tha^ it is better to part with anything of this world,
though it be as dear to one as ^he right hand, or the (...), ^hen to break our
peace with God.

Pray for me, for my Bonds are greater than yours.

Windsor the 22. of the 11th. Month. 1660. Edw. Chilton.



[Witness the tenor of a Letter from one of them at Windsor, for a Warning to
such as yet stand, set down here in the Margent] have rashly subjected
themselves for fear, to man's will, against God's in that particular.

Now that I may prevent the impendent evil consequences necessarily following
those men first or last, who for fear of man shall venture to violate Christ's
Command against Swearing; to which not only I. Tombs in his late trifling
Treatise, (replied to already by my self briefly in the Epistle to my Book,
styled, the Country correcting the Clergy; and more fully by R. Hubberthorn)
but also more lately H. Den in his Epistle to all Prisons, and more lately yet
Ier. Ives, in proof of the lawfulness of Swearing, have done their best to
persuade men.

I shall first examine the weakness of H. D's, and I. ^'s. proofs for it.

2. Strengthen those of ours against Swearing, from those two Capital Texts,
Matthew. 5. Iam. 5. which, they two with as little strength of Reason, as to
little purpose labor to overturn.

I shall begin first with H. Den's Dolittle, (since his Sheet came came out
first) a man that was wont to do better, and much more, (being a man of more
than ordinary ability) when he disputed against the Priestly Darkness behind
him, yet here left justly of the Lord to bewray great weakness, for his pushing
at a people that are in the Light before him: So let all the Wisdom of such, as
know not thy hidden ones in that, in which alone thou and thine can be
manifest, perish from them (O God) and be converted into foolishness.

Next I shall show the n^rrowness and shallowness of those two sheets under
which (lest H. D's single one should not be enough) Ier, Ives having shamed
himself among the Saints by Swearing, (seeks more subtly and shufflingly then
su^cessfully) to shroud himself out of sight, that the shame of his nakedness
may not appear to all men.

Yet where their words and arguments are coincident, I shall take notice of
them so, as to return answer to them both together.

In proof of the Lawfulness of some Swearing now, Henry Den propounds two
things: First the Antiquity, Secondly, the Universality of that practice.

In proof of its Antiquity he propounds two Periods: The first is about three
hundred years after the Moon, in the days of Seth. The second about four
hundred years after the Flood, in the days of Ahraham. From the first of which
he conjectures only that probably it might be. From the second he concludes
undoubtedly that it was then in being.

As to the first of these two Periods, I have two things to say to it, whereby
to discover its invalidity to evince the now lawfulness of that once
(confessedly) lawful, or at least allowed Course, or Custom of Solemn Swearing.

First, that it is but upon a mere fallible, uncertain, unwarrantable conjecture
at best (by H. D's own confession) on which he derives the now-warrantableness
of solemn Swearing from so high as those days of Seth; witness his own words
here under-cited, out of p. 3. of his Paper, viz.

For the Antiquity of it, although I cannot say that the practice is as old as
the Moon; yet I have cause to conjecture, that it is not above 300 years
younger: Indeed what the old world did in this case the Scriptures do not speak
plainly, and therefore I will pass it by.

By which we plainly see as concerning the first P^riod pitched upon by H. D.
as his proof of the Antiquity of Swearing, that, were it an Antiquity high
enough from whence to argue the lawfulness of that Ceremonious Custom; yet it
is but doubtfully conjectured, and but probably concluded by him, That it is so
Ancient, as to be in use at all in the Old World before the Flood; for he
confesses, That what the Old World did in this Case, the Scriptures do not
speak plainly: And can H. D's cloudy conjecture, that probably it is not above
300 years younger than the Moon, be a cogent consequence to 20000 tender
Consciences in a Case of such Concernment as this; wherein they prizing their
peace of Conscience, with prison and confiscation, before Liberty and All they
have, with the violation of them, do lack no less evidence to their Conviction
and Satisfaction, then infallible and Scientifical Demonstration?

Secondly, That if it were as certain, as it is but conceived by H. D. that That
practice of Swearing, by him now pleaded for, was then in use; and were it as
undoubtedly, as it is but doubtfully derived thence* yet that is not a Period so
Ancient, as can serve to prove the now-lawfulness of any sort of Swearing since
Christ, who put an end to it, any more then it may serve to prove the
lawfulness of now sacrificing the fruits of the ground, and the firstlings of
the flock in that Ceremonious manner as was once, and that long before that of
Swearing, apparently in use, till Christ the substance of all Ceremonies and
Sacrifices ended it by the sacrificing of himself; yea, no more than it may
serve to prove the lawfulness of sin it self, which (though not de jure, yet de
facto) was apparently practiced by mankind before either Sacrificing or
Swearing. Which said Ceremony So called, of (...) and (...), for a season
only. So H.D. himself seems also to call it, p. 3. quoting, Genesis 14. 22. I
have lifted up my hand, etc. i. e. I have sworn to the most high God; because
the Ceremony of lifting up the hand was used in Swearing.
of Swearing, as now used and imposed, with the hand laid on a Book, with
kissing, or lifted up, is now ended in Christ, the Witness, Covenant, or Oath
of God.

That it was used de facto, before Christ (had it been clearly derived from the
time pretended to by H. D.) cannot clearly prove, that it now is in use de jure.

God under Moses and the Law, as he suffered other things that were not so from
the beginning, because of the hardness of men's hearts; so because of the
hardness of men's hearts to believe each other, while they are besides the
Light and Truth, in the fall, in the lie, in the deceit, in the darkness and
the strife, and so under the Law; suffered it so to be as it was in the case of
Swearing, in order to their satisfaction of each other; but from the beginning,
before sin entered, it was not so; nor is it now so among the Saints and true
Churches, that are in God; nor shall it be so in the end, as men by the Light
come back out of the strife, and other deeds of darkness, into Christ the Image
of God, after which man was at first made; the substance of all shadows, the
end of the Law, that Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and
end of all things.

And as to H*D's second sort of new Antiquity, wherein he sinks well nigh two
thousand years lower, and falls almost as far below the Flood, as he fell below
the Moon in the former, (which second period he mainly insists, and puts the
greatest stress upon) though it is not denied, but that Swearing was then in
use, (and so H.D. might have spared his pains in proving it, for I know none
deny it to have been used from that time to Christ's) yet it is such a young
piece of Antiquity, as is not worthy to bear that denomination of Antiquity,
being but a time of mere novelty to the former; which former yet, is but mere
novelty with us.

Much less then is it an Antiquity old enough to be urged in proof of the
Lawfulness of all such actions, as were used i^ its days. For, as when H.D.
argues probably from Seth's time, thus; Then began men to call on (i.e.)
(according to his mere Conjectural Construction) to Swear by the Name of the
Lord: Therefore swearing by the Lords Name is now lawful: I might lawfully by
way of Argument from Seth, yea higher, from Cain and Abel, urge thus: Then
began men to burn Sacrifice to the Lord; therefore to burn sacrifice to the
Lord in the old ceremonious way is now lawful; yea higher yet, from Adam, thus;
Then began men to Sin against God; therefore to Sin against God is now lawful:

So when H.D. argues more positively from so low as Abraham's time, thus:
Abraham swear by the Name of the Lord; therefore to swear by the Lords Name is
now lawful: Let him but excuse me in stepping but two or three Rounds low^r, i.
e. two or three generations further, viz. to Joseph from Abraham, who was but
his Great Grandfather, and (on the same account of but a little younger
Antiquity, if any man's practice, and not Christ's Precept only, were a
Christians Rule) a man may prove it now lawful to swear by other matters, which
all men judge it unlawful now to swear by, as namely by the Life of Kings and
Princes, on this wise, viz. to swear by the Life of Pharaoh, was in use in
Joseph's days, and usual also with Joseph himself; therefore the Christians who
are Brethren of Joseph, whose afflictions men mostly forget, may now lawfully
swear by the Life of Charles; the lawfulness of which, H.D. himself, I deem,
and all his Brethren also, the modern Baptists, do utterly deny.

I have done with H.D.'s Argument of Antiquity, which he makes so much of, as
to judge it clearly carries the case his way, glorying in it in this manner, (
viz. Ye see the practice may justly plead Antiquity) as if he had urged some
great, important, and impregnable matter; whenas, as it brings not a jot of
Prejudice to our purpose, who implead that practice of Swearing; so it adds not
a pins worth of profit or proof to his own, who is pleading for it; since as the
highest Antiquity he pretends to, can (by his own confession, for ought appears
from Scripture) at best but probably, and therefore not justly plead its
patronizing of, or claim any acquaintance with that practice of Swearing, so
(were it as infallibly evidenced, as it is but dubiously conjectured) that it
was at all before the Flood, or but three hundred years younger then the Moon,
yet) even this, much more that, which was since the Flood, is but an inferior
Antiquity in comparison of that from which sacrificing and sinning may both be
proved to have had a being; yea, but an upstart piece of novelty in the eye of
that Church, which is now coming out of the Wilderness, fair as the Moon, clear
as the Sun, terrible as an Army with Banners; even the Woman that bears the
Man-Child, and is clothed with the Sun of Righteousness himself, by whom the
Moon was made; and has the Moon also, even all movables, under feet: Thus
H.D. has faultred fowly in ipso limine, at the very entrance of his Work, in
alleging that in proof of another thing, which he dares speak but
conjecturally of himself, and its ill stumbling at the threshold.

H.D.'s next is the universality of this Ceremonious course of swearing, and
that as to persons, places, times: All sorts of persons (quoth he) God, Christ,
Angels, Apostles, Kings, Princes, Priests, Prophets, righteous, holy men in all
places, Heaven, Earth, and all Nations, by Practice, Precept, Prophecy, at all
times swear warrantably without blame, therefore so may we now, Here Is the sum
and strength of H.D's second stilt, on which stands the decrepid proof of his
crazy cause, or piteous poor plea for Swearing; all which particulars, (with
most of I.I's miserable matters, which fall in very fitly with them for it) are
now to come under consideration.

Rep. 1. That God swear, we affirm and deny not; but that confirms what we deny
against H.D. and I. I. who affirm it, that swearing is now to be used among
men, as in days of old, God's Word of the Oath, which is since the Law, under
which (as a Type of the Truth of God's Word, Covenant and Promise to men in
Christ) men used to swear by God one to another, which Word of his Oath also
consecrateth not such men High Priests, as were of old, who were subject to
change, and had infirmity; but him who is holy, harmless, undesiled, separated
from sinners higher then the Heavens, a perfect High Priest for evermore, after
the Order of Melchisedec, of Salem King of Righteousness, and also King of
Peace, made (not as they, after the Law of the Carnal Commandment, but) after
the power of the endless life; I say, That Word of Gods Oath, is that one
Eternal, Substantial Oath, that ends all strife, of which all Oaths used for
confirmation by men, that are in strife with God and one another, were but the
Figure, Ceremony, or Shadow for a time, and before which at Christ's coming in,
they (though ( de facto) they do not) yet ( de Iure) ought to end, cease,
decrease, vanish, and flee away, as sacrifice, and all other fleshly Forms and
Figures, Ceremonies and Shadows of Christ, the Truth, ought, which are not the
very Substance or Thing it self, Heb. 10. 1. for the Law, or Letter in the time
before Christ, having but the shadow of things to come, and not the very
substance of the things themselves, gives way with all its sacrifices and
ceremonies, to Christ; wherefore it is said when he comes into the World,
Sacrifice and offering thou delightst not in, but a Body have thou prepared me;
in which (as it is written of me in the Volume of thy Book, (or everlasting
Counsels) Lo, I come to do thy will O God: So God takes away the first Will,
Testament or Covenant, that he may establish the second; the first sacrifices,
that he might establish the second, the sacrifice of himself; the ceremonies
and shadows, that he might establish the substance; the Type, that he might
establish the Truth; the first kind of Oaths, or course and custom of swearing,
which Oaths men brake by forswearing themselves often, that he might establish
that of the second or New-Testamnet, even the unchangeable Oath of God, which
can never be broken, made by God himself to men, between whom and him, through
sin, the strife and enmity was, that they might have full satisfaction that he
is in Christ, in whom all his promises are, Yea, and in him Amen, reconciled to
the world, not imputing trespasses to them, but as they shall persist in
irreconcileableness to him, and that they might have strong consolation
concerning his love to them: For as under the Law of old (as in these days
also it is (but not lawfully) used among men that are under the Law, i.e. in
the strife, and other works and lusts of the flesh, and unbelief toward each
other, which who are in, and led by, and not of the Spirit, are under the Law)
an Oath for confirmation was used to end strife; so Gods Oath or Swearing,
which is without repentance, (as men's rash oaths and swearing now-a-dayes will
not be) for he swear, and will not repent of what he has by Oath confirmed in
Christ, I say, God's Oath for confirmation to us, may end the matter among any,
but utter unbelievers, and give satisfaction and full assurance to any, but
such as being out of that love, which believes all things, and in the hatred
and enmity, which believes nothing, that Christ is the High Priest for ever, by
whom his Wrath, who has had the wrong, is appeased, and is his well-beloved
Son, in whom, with all that will be reconciled to him, he is (all their enmity,
rebellion and iniquity notwithstanding) well pleased: Therefore it is said Heb.
6. We desire you to give all diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the
end, that ye faint not, ( i.e.) in your faith; but be followers of them who
through faith and patience inherit the promise; for when God made the promise
to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he swear by himself; for
verily men swear by the greater; and an Oath to confirm, end^ the strife: So
God, willing more abund^ntly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability
of his Counsel, as concerning peace with them, though they have acted enmity
against him, added an Oath, that by two immutable things, i.e. not his bare
Word, or single Promise only (which had been enough, if man by his enmity and
hatred of God, had not made himself hard of belief that God should now love
him) but his Oath also; in either of which two 'twas impossible for God to lie;
we might have strong consolation, who have fled to the hope set before us,
(Christ in us the hope of glory) which hope we have as an Anchor of the soul,
sure and steadfast, which (...) into that within the vail, where the forerunner
is for us entered, even Jesus, who is made an High Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedec.

And now forasmuch as the very stress of H.D.'s Argument from the example of
Gods swearing, lies in this unanswerable Question (as he supposes it) p. 4. Can
that be accounted an evil (if not easily undertaken) whereof we have the Lord
for a President?

I answer, That may be accounted an evil in us to do by way of imitation of
God, because we read he did so (how uneasily soever undertaken by us) which yet
was only and purely good in God when he did it, unless we have him in that,
propounding himself, as our President, and have his express command to do the
self-same; God both slew his own Son, and as a Type or Figure of it, in the
same Chapter wherein he is recorded as swearing by himself, Genesis 22. 2. 16. 17.
bad Abraham slay his own Son; yet though 'twas good in God, 'twould be evil in
us, and the worse, by how much the more seriously undertaken by us, to bid any
one slay his only Son, upon the account of Gods bidding Abraham do so, without
Gods express Commission to us to command another to do the same; so though God
swear, and (as a figure of his Oath, to end the strife between men and him)
allowed men under the Law that Ceremony of Swearing; yet it is evil in us either
to swear, or enjoin men to swear now, without Gods special and express command
for it, whose express Prohibition against it we have in his New Will or
Testament, which we are now under, who are not under the Law, but under Grace.

Finally, To H.D's Question, What thing God did, which can be evil in us if we
do it?

I reply; Some things are prohibita quia mala, forbid to us because evil in
themselves, as lying, doceit, etc. and such things God never did at all,
(muchless as a President to us) Some things are mala quia prohibita, evil to us
merely because forbidden, yet were good when commanded; and such if God should
do, we may not; and of this sort is that of sol^mn swearing, which to us is now
as unlawful and evil, as circumcising children in the flesh, and requiring the
old customs of the Jewish Law, and the Letter, which now the Gentiles are crept
into, to whom is given the outer Court of carnal Commandments, shadows, signs,
figures, types and ceremonies, fleshly, empty formalities, beggarly rudiments,
bodily exercises, diverse baptisms, eatings, drinkings, and other outside
observations, and ordinances of divine services performed in worldly
sanctuaries, in which the old Covenant stood, imposed only till the time of
reformation, restoration, regeneration, and restitution of all things to the
beginning by Christ, the Substance and End of all those, Acts 21. 22. Heb. 9.
1. 9. 10. Psalm. 23. 2. Matthew. 19. 28. Acts 3. 21. Such God once permitted, yea
commanded, as dark, obscure, external, and temporal representations of future
more clear, spiritual, substantial, soul-saving, powerful, internal, and
eternal truths; but now forbids; the one sacrifice of his Son, the one
circumcision of the heart, the one Baptism and Supper; his own one immutable
Oath to us, and our yea and nay in Christ, standing among the holy Seed, which
is the substance of the Oak, whose fair leaves are now falling off, and instead
of all these, and as the Substance of them all, and that for ever. Isa. 6. 13.

2. And as for the Angels swearing, which is alleged by H.D. as an ensample to
us; for (quoth he) An Angel swears, Rev. 10. 5. 6. What Is that to us? If an
Angel from Heaven should preach any other Doctrine then what is preached by,
and received from Christ and the Apostles, let him be accursed; I say it again,
let him be accursed: Yet I say not that the Angels, who are Ministers of the
Law, (for the Law was given by the dispensation of Angels in the hand of the
old Mediator Moses) though they swear, are accursed; for that Ceremony of
Swearing belonged to the Law, that was given by them; but I say, this is no
President for them who are under the Doctrine of the Son himself, who are not
to go back, so as to rebel against the Commands of the Son, to follow the bare
example of the servant Moses, in whose hand the Law was given by the
dispensation of Angels: Moses was faithful in all his house (the old Israel) as
a servant, for a Typical Testimony of those true things that were to be spoken
after Heb. 3. 5, 6, but Christ, who is counted worthy of more glory then Moses,
is the Son over his own House, the true Israelites indeed, in whom is no guile;
the Great and chief Shepherd over his own sheep, who hear his voice; on whom
the servants and their Law, i.e. Moses and the Angels, have now nothing to do
to impose, read Heb. 1. 1 God who, etc. to the end.

We see how the Angels are inferior, not only to the Son himself, the heir of
all; but also (as Ministers and servants) unto the least of those, who are
heirs of Salvation, and of all things, both with, in and through him, whom yet
H.D. represents as inferior unto them, as those, who are but on Earth, may be
said to be to such as abide in Heaven: For when he comes on to tell of the
swearing of Christ from the Angels, which Angels he ranks with God among such
as swear in heaven, Come we (quoth he) to the Earth; as if the Being of Angels
were only in Heaven, and the Being of Christ only upon earth; whereas that
very Angel he instances in, as a President of Swearing to us, is in that very
place, Rev. 10. recorded as standing no higher then on the Sea, and Earth; but
Christ the Son (were H. D. capable to read the mystery and riddle of it) had he
sworn in that John 3. 5. where H. D. reckons on him as swearing on Earth, might
well have been rankt among the swearers in Heaven, being at that very present
in heaven, as he says himself ver. 13. The Son of man which is in Heaven.

But H. D. being yet where I once was with him, among those who look for the
Kingdom of Heaven, which is ((...)) within men (even those men that never enter
it, as Christ said to the Pharisees, bidding his Disciples not to go forth to
look for it among them, who drew outward with their Lo here, and lo there) in
outward observations, with which it comes not, is so innocently ignorant where
heaven is, that (though more darkly and diminutively, then some others, who
open wider) in some degree (witness his two secret jerks at the Quaker, and the
Light within, p. 5, and 8. of his perverting Paper) he rather blasphemes the
name of God, and his Tabernacle, i. e. the Light in which God dwells, is, and
is known; and those, ( i. e. those Quakers) who dwell with Christ in Heaven.

3 The next Argument then, ab Exemplo urg*d in proof of swearing now, is that
of Christ, of whom H.D. and I. I. both do intimate it (as their own conceit at
least) that he swear; and therefore lawfully may we now, think they. In
evidence of his thoughts that Christ swear, H.D. alludes to Ioh. 3. 5. saying
(not positively, but suppositively only, p. 3.) If the Verily, Verily of the
Son of God, and our Redeemer, should not amount to so much as an Oath, as some
think; yet is it more then a bare Yea and Nay: In evidence of his more
confident conceit and thoughts that Christ did swear, and consequently that we
now may, I. I. cites and alludes to Matthew. 26. 63. and that in two places of
his prittle prattle, des^anting as emptily as amply on it in them both, viz. p.
2, 3. and again p. 7. whose words are here set down, that he may have no just
occasion to say I wrong him in my Answer.

A man may be solemnly sworn when he is adjured by another, for to adjure
(quoth he) in plain English, is to charge one to swear, or to exact an Oath,
and therefore we read Mat. 26. 37. that the High Priest Adjured Christ by the
living God: Beza more plainly reads it, that the High Priest charged him to
swear by the living God, if he were the Christ the Son of God: So p. 7.
Swearing was used by Christ himself, Mat. 26. 36. the High Priest adjures him
by the living God; or as it is in plain English, he charged him to swear by the
living God, to tell him whether he was the Christ the Son of God; (...) which
adjuration Jesus answers, Thou say, or I am; for so it is (quoth he) Mar. 14.
62. Now to answer to a matter when one is adjured by the living God, though it
were but Yea and Amen, is sweating.

Rep. To H.D. and I.I. I return two things; 1. That if Christ had sworn in the
two places and times respectively, in which these two men seem to say he did;
yet it proves not the legality of it now to us. 2. As it is but doubtfully
delivered by themselves, so it is utterly denied by me, that in th^se cases,
phrases, and places of their alleging, Christ did swear at all. First, had
Christ's Verily, Verily, and his answering I am, when the High Priest asked and
charged him to tell him whether he were the Christ, amounted to a formal Oath,
such as is now imposed and pleaded (but it was far from it; for there was no
requiring to lay his hand on a Book, and kiss it, and swear by God, and the
Holy Evangelist, and such like; without which our present Iustic^ will not own
any man as giving sufficient satisfaction or confirmation to end the strife,
let us speak never so solemnly as in the sight of the living God, but strive
endlesly with us, as suspicious persons, from whom the King cannot be secured,
unless we take the Oath in that old mee^ shadowy way) yet this was all in the
time of the Law, and under it, before Christ by his death had put an end to it:
For though in the last and latest of the two Terms which these two men take
their texts and talk from, to prove Swearing lawful under the Gospel, from
Christ's Example, he was so nigh it, as to be summoned before the Priests in
order to it; yet he was not actually offered, no^ had as yet actually suffered,
and so not actually put an end to the Law, which till he had, he was under the
Padagogy of it, as the Jews were, and therefore might use some such swearing as
was used under the Law, and that be no warrant neither for us now to swear, who
together with him that was once made under it himself, are now redeemed from
under the Law, to under the Gospel, and are now no more under the Law, but
under Grace, Romans 6. 14. The Heir himself under age, differs not from a
servant, though Lord of all, but is under Tutors and Governors, etc. so we,
when children, were in bondage to the Elements of the world; but when the
fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under
the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the
adoption of sons, Gal. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. So that if Christ had sworn before he
was offered, yet to argue thus; Christ while under the law, a little before he
dyed, did swear; therefore may we swear now under the Gospel; is as poor a
piece of proof, as to say, Christ under the law before he dyed, was
circumcised, had two Turties offered for him, eat the Passover just before he
was betrayed, and was subject to other Rudiments and Ceremonies of the law;
therefore we now must be circumcised in flesh, offer sacrifice, eat the
Passover carnally, and be subject to the other carnal Ordinances of the Law, in
these days of the Gospel.

But secondly; Howbeit H.D, says, some (of whom himself surely is one, or else
it were silly in him to cite other men's think-so's, which are not his own, in
prosecution of his own Argument) do think that Christ's Verily, Verily, was an
Oath: Yet verily, and of a truth it is but their bare, unwarrantable, and
groundless thought; which bare thought also H.D. is so far from backing with
any matter of evidence to prove it sound, that he rather falls back from it,
sinking through this mere supposition, ( viz. If Christ's Verily be not an Oath)
at last into no other then this slender Position, ( viz. Yet its more then Yea
and Nay) In which he miserably mistakes himself too; for though (as to degree,
which varies not the nature of any thing) it is a more strong one, yet (as to
its nature) its no more then a strong Asseveration, which amounts no more to
the nature of an Oath, then Yea or Nay does: Or if H.D. and others, who impose
it upon us to swear, will needs have it so that Verily, Verily, is an Oath, we
are willing to any truth we testify, whether in an Assertory, or Promisory
way, before either Magistrates, or any other men, to do it under that form of
Verily, Verily, might that be taken; but we have experience sufficient, that so
much as that, and much more, will in no wise satisfy H.D. who fights without
an Adversary in quarrelling with the Quakers, as un-free to say verily, verily
(for they are free to that) or those Magistrates whom the Quakers have to do
with; for how free soever any of us are to assure them with Verily, Verily,
that is to say, Truly, Truly, which lies in the Yea, that we have no evil
intents toward the now King; and both truly and sincerely to acknowledge him,
before any other man, to be the right Heir to these his Kingdoms; and to
profess, testify and declare in our Consciences before God and the World,
against the Pope, That the Pope neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the
Church or Sea of Rome, or by any other means, has any Power or Authority to
depose the King, or to dispose of any of his Kingdoms or Dominions, or to
authorize any Foreign Prince to invade, or annoy him, or his Countries or to
discharge any of his Subjects of their obedience to him; or to give license or
leave to any of them to bear arms, raise ^umult, or to offer any violence or
hurt to his Person, State or Government, or to any of his subjects within his
Dominions; and to declare from our hearts, according to our often professed and
published Principle, That, notwithstanding any Declaration, or sentence of
Excommunication or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or granted by the
Pope or his successors, or by any Authority derived, or pretended to be derived
from him or his Sea, against the said King, his Heirs or Successors, or any of
the Popes Absolutions of the said Subjects from their obedience; yet we will be
faithful, trusty and peaceable toward him and all men, and, though for
Conscience Sake we cannot take up Arms nor Carnal Weapons for our selves nor
any man, yet in what ways we are capable with good Conscience to God, we will
seek to secure him against all Traitorous Conspiracies and Attempts made
against him or any man, by reason or color of any such Popish Sentence or
Declaration: And to declare, that we do from our hearts abhor, detest and
renounce as Impious and Heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Position, That
Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deprived or
murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever; And to declare as in the
sight of God, who is Witness that we lie not, and knows the truth of our
hearts, and in the presence of the living God, which H. D. says at least is an
Oath, ( for an Oath is nothing else but a Religious Promise, quoth he, p. 3.)
our real intentions as much as is possible, and in us lies, to live peaceably
with him and all men, and to wrong, injure, defraud nor him, nor any man, etc.
and to submit our selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether
King as Supreme, or those that are sent of him for the punishment of
evildoers, and the praise of them that do well; and to be subject in Civil
things, to all just Laws made by that of God in the Conscience; and where
unjust Laws are made, to suffer patiently without Rebellion or violent
resistance; which is such a passive, as is equivalent to other men's active
obedience.

Yet all this, though most substantial, (if accepted by H.D.) shall in no wise
be accepted by those Oath-Imposers with whom H.D. and I. Ives side aginst us,
unless there be a conforming to the Ceremonious Customs of the Nations, which
are vain, so as to swear upon a Bible, and kiss the Book, and lay one Finger at
least upon it, and to be sworn by So help me God, and the Holy Evangelist, and
his holy Gospel, which (though the Copy of it may) is more spiritual then to
have Carnal hands laid on it, and a number of such superstitious superfluities,
which issued forth from the Womb of that dismal Darkness, which dwelt here in
the time of the Popes undue Power over this Nation; which Romish relics all
true Protestants against his Peterdom, may in these days of Light be ashamed
of; yea, though they tell us it is Oath enough to assert, deny, or promise as in
Gods presence, and to say, God is Witness that we lie not; yet if our Testimony
be given forth freely from our selves in any such form as this; that is not
then owned for swearing by themselves who do so call it, if the Book be not
fingered: Witness the case of one Friend called a Quaker, who calling God to
Witness, See (quoth the Magistrate* he swears: But when the said Friend replied
thus; Will ye take that for an Oath? 'twould not then be owned as an Oath by the
said Magistrate who so called it; and if any Magistrate in this City or
elsewhere, upon the reading hereof, knows assuredly that I speak of him, I
speak of him indeed.

2. Howbeit I. Ives (not for want of Ignorance) Asserts, That the High-Priest's
charging of Christ by the living God to say whether he were the Christ, was a
charging Christ to swear; and that Christ answering, when he was charged by
him, did swear, and so that Christ's answer was an Oath; yet to any but such a
one whom the fear of Suffering drives to swear, and the shame of swearing
drives by hook or crook to defend it when he has done, These two things are
clear enough: 1. That neither the High Priest did command Christ to swear. 2.
That Christ in his Answer to him did not swear at all, as I. I. more ^naingly
then clearly suggests he did. I. I. says the HighPriest adjured him by the
living God; or (as it is (quoth he) in plain English) he charged him to swear
by the living God. 2. That to this Adjuration Jesus answers, Thou say, or I
am; and so swear.

Rep. Both these two things are false. 1. The High Priest did not charge him to
swear by the living God. 2. He did not swear by the living God.

In proof of the first, that the High Priest did charge Christ to swear, I. I.
insists at large on the word adjure; for to adjure (quoth he p. 2.) in plain
English is to charge one to swear; or, to exact an Oath: The High Priest
adjured Christ by, etc. Beza (quoth he) more plainly reads it, Charged him to
swear by the living God.

Rep. Both I. I. and Beza also are besides the business; for how beit the Greek
word (...) is Englisht, I Ad^ure, yet it is not absolutely necessary it should
be so (as it must be, if it be demonstrative of I. I's Assertion) but as it may
and does signify strictly to Adjure; so it properly may, and often does
signify to charge, command, or oblige one, as by Word, or Promise only: for
(...) being either of (...) to (...): or (as some) of (...) a bo^nd, or limit;
signifies originally to bind, limit, confine, or engage one any way; viz. as by
b^re promise as well as Oath: And no less does Io. Tombs in a m^nner plainly
intimate and confess, to the consutation of himself in his Trivial talk for
swearing, by saying that Paul's charge to the Church, 1 These. 5. 27. where the
word (...) is used and rendered I Charge; and those his two charges to Tim^hy,
1 Timothy 6. 13. 2 Timothy 4. 1. where the words (...) and (...) are used, and
Englished* I charge, are all alike; for the two last Greek words are at most no
more then to engage one, as in the sight of some Witness, ( God or Man) or
solemnly to charge or command, not so strictly as to swear one, though (...)
may be taken in the more moderate sense, i. e. any way to charge one, as well
as in that rigid way of swearing, and is at most no more then thus, viz. I
en^oin thee as strictly as if thou had promised or sworn.

Moreover its most evident to the contradiction of I. Ives and Beza also, from
whom, and Ainsworths mere Opinion, if not male-Construction, he furtively
fetches two or three of his sorry shifts, wherewith to salve the absurdity of
his own sorry sayings; that to adjure (if we render (...) in that strict sense)
is not (as I. I. says it is) in plain English to charge one to swear, or exact
an Oath; and that the High Priest did not (as Beza says he did) charge Christ
to swear by the living God: For if the phrase; I adjure thee by God, be to
charge or command one to swear by God, then to say I adjure thee by Jesus, is
to command one to swear by Jesus; which sense is as absurd, as 'twould be most
absurd to read that passage where the Vagabond Jews imitating Paul, charged the
evil spirits in the Name of Jesus to come out of men, Acts 19. 12, 13. thus,
viz. We charge you to swear by Jesus whom Paul preaches; for 'twould suppose
the whole design of those Exorcists was to cause the evil spirits to swear by
Jesus, whereas their design was to cause them to depart out of the men; and
'twould suppose that the commands of Paul* Acts 16. 18. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 27. 1 Timothy
6. 13. 17. 2 Timothy 4. 1. who says to the Thessalouians, to Timothy, to the
Spirit of Divination (respectively) (...), I adjure or charge you that this
Epistle be read, etc. I charge thee in the sight of God, or before God and
Christ, that thou preach, that thou keep the Command without spot, that thou
come out of the Maid, (which Io. Tombs himself says were charges all alike) I
say, 'twould suppose that Paul's charges there, were not charges of the foresaid
charged ones, to do the things which he commanded them to do respectively; but
commands or charges of them only to swear by God and Christ Jesus, that they
would do them; which to suppose, is absurdity in the abstract.

It being so then (as is evident against I. Ives bare conjecture to the
contrary) that to say, I adjure, or charge thee By, Before, or in the sight of
the living God, is not I charge thee to swear by the living God, or I exact an
Oath of thee; it will consequently follow, that to answer Yea, or Nay to him
that should say, I adjure, or charge thee before God to speak to a Case in
Question, is not to swear, or to take an Oath, as I. I. supposes (who (put his
words together) says, To answer to a matter when one is Adjured, alias,
Charged by the living God, though it were but Yea, or Nay, or Amen, is as
solemn an Oath, as if one swear by the living God with his own mouth. That if
the Judge in our Common Law ask a question of a party sworn, and testifying his
consent to the Oath, by his kissing and laying his hand on the Book, and the
party do but answer, and give in his testimony in naked assertions, without
saying, I swear by the Lord, or by the Oath I have taken, or the like, his bare
answering to the Question, is as much as if he had pronounced an Oath with the
highest asseverations that could be thought on, p. 3, 4.) as I. I. (having
pinned his Faith first upon Ainsworths sleeve) says p. 3. He could wish this
were seriously considered by those that make conscience of Oaths, as if himself
were now grown past making conscience of them, so I could wish this were as
seriously considered by I. I. himself, and those whom he would have to make no
conscience of Oaths, that if it be so as I. I. asserts it is in our Common
Courts, then so many several answers as the party (once sworn) makes by Yea, or
Nay, to the Judges questions, so many several Oaths with the highest
asseverations that can be, are by him taken; and so if he answer Yea, or Nay,
an hundred times, being so many times asked in the case in hand (as one Witness
may be at one Court) he takes no less then an hundred solemn Oaths, and so his
first Oath (he once assenting to swear) like sin, which is ever of a
multiplying nature, when man once begins to fall under it, spawns it self
quickly into an hundred; and consideratis considerandis, our Courts of
Judicature, which H. D. and I. I. will both confess ought to be places of
punishment for that common swearing, or swearing commonly, ordinarily, wholly,
frequently (as H. D. frivolously descants upon that phrase of Christ, Swear not
at all, Mat. 5.) which ordinary, common, frequent Swearing all men grant also
Christ there forbids, will rather appear to be the most common places of
swearing commonly, frequently, ordinarily, that are in all the Land beside
them. And besides I.I.'s instance in the Oath in our Common Law, reaches not
the case he brings it in evidence of; for there the party answering is supposed
by I. I. first to be sworn by his own consent, and then to answer yea or nay;
but the case in hand supposes the party only answering yea or nay, to one that
says, I adjure thee, without showing his consent to the others adjuration, by
that assenting Ceremony, which I.I. when he was charged to swear, declared his
assent by, of kissing and fingering of a Bible; which if I.I. (for customs
sake) had not done, he would have found the Court he swear in, would not have
counted him a person sworn sufficiently to their satisfaction, had they said,
We adjure thee, we charge thee to tell us whether thou renounce the Pope, and
wilt be true to the King, yea or nay, and I.I. answered, yea, or I will, no
less t^n an hundred times over.

So we see that if Christ had answered, I am (as Ior. Ives falsely says he did)
to the High Priest, when he said, I adjure thee by the living God to tell me
whether thou be the Christ, or not, he had not sworn; since by that word, I
adjure thee, he said (in effect) no more then I command, or charge thee, as in
Gods presence, as strictly as if thou had promised or sworn; and its silly to
think that Christ who says, Swear not at all, no not by Heaven, for its Gods
throne, which whosoever swears by, swears by him, even God that sits thereon,
Matthew. 18. would swear by the living God that he was the Christ, at the command
or charge of the High Priest that was his Inferior, (as being but the Type of
himself) to tell him whether he was so or no.

But secondly, in very deed when all is done, there is no such matter as I. I.
affirms; for when the Priest barely asked him only whether he was the Christ,
or not; he answered, I am: In that place of I. I's own quoting (which had he
not been in haste, he might have seen also Mark 14. 7.) but when the Priest
said, I ad^ure thee by the living God, he is recorded by Matthew, Mat. 26.* 63.
as answering not, I am (as I. I. says he did) but Thou say; which seems to
be a waving of all positive answer, rather then such a positive answer, as, I
am; which yet had he said, he had not sworn. Thus as he that is blind cannot
see; so he who is not cannot but see the shuffling ways whereby H D. but
specially I. I. seeks to prove Christ to have sworn, that he may shroud and
shelter himself from the storm of his guilty Conscience, under some Shrub;
under a shadowy show of Christ's example, when he had stooped to man's command,
contrarily unto Christ's.

The other examples from whence H. D. and I. Ives endeavor to prove the
lawfulness of swearing now, are those of Kings, Priests, Prophets, righteous
and holy men of God in old time, as Abimelech, Abraham, David, and others; in
which they belabour themselves to no purpose, since this was all under the Law,
under which (among those that were under it) we deny not that swearing to be in
use, which has now no use nor place among them that are not under the dominion
of the Law, but under Grace, and the teachings, power and domin^on of Gods
Grace, which redeems from the strife, and other fleshly works, which it is one
of: Which consideration confutes I. I's Fifth Reason for swearing, viz. Because
strife continuing, still there is as much need of Oaths, the use of which is to
end it, as ever there was; quoting Heb. 6. 16. An Oath among men for
confirmation, is an end of all strife.

Rep. 1. To say nothing how much our Courts are in that case of Tithes, beside
the end of Oat^s, if that be the true end thereof; to end strife; since they
use Oaths to begin the strife with; for if a man will not swear how many (...),
and Ducks, and Hens, and Eggs, and Piggs, etc. he has had in so many years
together, they admit him not to answer to his (...).

An Oath when used to its right end, i. e. to end strife, is so used among men
only in the fall, who live in hatred, variance, strife, and such deeds of
darkness and the flesh, but not among the Saints, that are saved from it, and
live in love and peace, and do (as Christ Disciples are bid to do) to others as
they would be done by, and no evil nor injury to any, which they would not have
done to themselves, which is the sum of the Law and the Prophets, etc. For here
both the Law, which is owned by us as good in its place; but is not for the
righteous, but the unrighteous, and murderers, stealers, etc. has no place,
nor Oaths, nor Lawyers neither, who can live no longer in that calling of
theirs, which they much corrupt and spoil, as blind Priests do the Gospel, then
while men live in trespasses and sins; For if men live by the light of Gods
grace in their own hearts, which has appeared to all men, bringing salvation
to them from the sin, leading and teaching such as learn of it, to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live godly, righteously and soberly in
this present world; they will need no longer (as the World does, while it
chooses to lie in Wickedness, and in the bondage of its own corruption) to throw
away their estates on Lawyers, to end their strifes about them, nor to be such
slaves to their own wills and lusts, as to spend 20. l.* upon them, to recover
20. s. for themselves; but will see (as some have done who have been where
others now are) the way out of strife, which is the Light; and come to that
love, innocence, honesty, righteousness, peace and pity to themselves, and one
another, as shall end all strife without Oath^ or more ado: Yea to see that in
the Light of the Gospel, which under the Law was not seen by Prophets and
righteous men, while under that Paedagogy: Yea, as Christ said to his
Disciples, so say I to those that are turned to learn of him now; Blessed are
your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear; for verily I say unto
you, that many Prophets and Righteous men in former days of the Law, have
desired to see and hear those things which ye do, and yet have neither seen nor
heard them.

And this above may serve for a return to H. D. who insists much on it, that
this Testimony that an an Oath is to end strife, is after the Law; the Apostle
says men do swear; and I have written do swear ( quoth he) because the Greek
word Heb. 6. 16: is in the present tense; and the rather, because one Preacher,
persuading his Hearers against all swearing, told them it ought to be read did
swear, and was a confirmation, not is.

Rep. Who that was, I know not* I can afford to grant it is written do and is,
and yet give H. D. and I. Ives no ground in their controversy against us;
against whom in two respects that consideration of Oaths being used in Paul's
time, cannot prove the lawfulness of them among the Saints, either then or now;
there were many customs in use, and contended for by many Naturalists, about
which the Apostle says, But if any man list to be contentious; yet we have no
such custom, nor the Churches of God. It Is but among men still, though 'twas in
the Apostles days, and now is, and not among the Saints and true Churches of
God, which are in God, who is light and love, and not in the enmity, the curse
and strife, where the oaths are used; among men under the Law, and so under the
curse, as all are that live in sin and strife, but not among Saints, who walk
and live in, and are led by the Spirit, and bring forth the fruits of the
Spirit, love, joy, peace, meekness, etc. such are not under the Law, but Grace;
and against such there is no Law, Romans 6. 14. Gal. 5. 18. 23.

But H. D. and I. I. makes much a-do, to as little effect, to evince it, that
the Apostle Paul himself swear, yea and that very frequently too: Some have
noted it (quoth H. D. p. 5.) as frequent with the Apostle Paul in serious
matters to use such expressions as are equivalent to an Oath, as Romans 1. 9. God
is my Witness whom I serve, etc. with many more of the like nature, which are
well known to you. And quoth I. I. page 9. 10. (as one of his brown-paper
Pellets against our proof of no swaring, from Matthew. 5. 34.) some such swearing
as was commanded under the Law, not only Christ, but the Apostle Paul did both
practice and enjoin, using his words, 2 Cor. 11. 19. As the truth of Christ is
in me, Romans 1. 9. God is Witness. Phil. 1. 8. God is my record. 1 Cor. 1. 23. I
call God to record upon my soul. Romans 9. 1. I speak the truth by Christ, (quoth
J. I. because Beza says so; though it is (...), in Christ, most properly in
the Greek) I lie not, my Conscience bears me witness in the holy Spirit;
(there he renders (...) right, in, and not by; and why not in the former part
of the verse?) Gal. 1. 20. Before God I lie not: And as they practiced
swearing, so they did exact it in the like solemn cases upon others; for to
adjure (quoth J. I.) is to exact an oath, or charge one to swear, 2 Timothy 4. 1.
Paul charged Timothy before God; and These. 1. 5. 27. I charge you by the Lord
that this Epistle be read; Beza reads it Adjuro vos per Dominum, I charge thee
to swear by the Lord: to this agrees that of the High Priest who adjured
Christ. Now if all swearing now were forbidden by those two Texts, Mat. 5. 34.
Iam. 5. 12. the Apostle would neither have done it, nor charged others so to do.

Rep. 1. That to use such expressions as these above was frequent with the
Apostle is well known to us indeed, as H. D. says; but that this was at all
such swearing as is contended for by H. D. and I. I. who has sworn upon a
Book, and kissed it (as the custom is) I am yet ignorant, and yet not so
ignorant as to give such an Answer as I. I. says some do for want of a better,
viz. That the Apostle did evil in swearing; for I as verily believe, as I. I.
says he himself does in the same place, That he that will swear wickedly, and
contrary to Gods Law (and so he does in my judgment that swears at all, since
Christ, Mat. 5. 33. 34, etc. forbids it (...) omnino, in any wise, or
altogether) the same will Lie also upon occasion: yea it is my Faith, and the
Faith of some who are set to swear others also, that thousands of those who now
swear out their present and future saithfulness to the King, for fear of some
malicious Magistrate that exacts it, out of envy more then any true love to
him, would for all their swearing prove more unfaithful, if occasion should
happen suitably to their hopes of insurrection in arms against him, then those
Thousands of Quakers who living in the true fear and love of God, can in
conscience neither for fear or love of themselves or any man, either take up
arms at all for themselves against King, or any man, or, to escape the loss of
all they have, swear at all.

But the Answer I give shall be as follows:

1. Some things (though swearing is none of them) Paul did by permission then,
which we are not now to do because he did them, witness his circumcising
Timothy, shaving his head and taking a Vow upon him according to the Law, Act.
16. 3. 21, 23, 24, 25. which things were parts of the Law, then (by right)
abolished, in favor of the Jews weakness, who yet could not bear the actual
abolition of them: For as for the Gentiles that believe we command (say the
Apostles) that they observe no such thing: So that if Oaths had then been ( de
facto) used by the Apostles, that of it self would not prove they now are ( de
jure) to be used by us.

But 2. That Paul either swear, or exacted Oaths upon others I deny.

1. As to his not enjoining or exacting swearing on others, which I. I. draws
by the head and shoulders from the place where Paul says to the Thessalonians
and Timothy, I charge you by the Lord, I charge thee before the Lord (in which
places (quoth he) he charges them to swear by the Lord) I have said so much
before, that here I shall add only this consideration, viz. That Paul did not
charge them to swear there, but to read his Epistle, and to preach the Word. 2.
If he had commanded them to Swear, or exacted an Oath of them, his command was
not answered by them; For shall we think the Thessalonians did swear to him,
that they would read his Epistle, before they did read it, or that Timothy
swear to him that he would preach the Word, before he preached it? Or if they
swear not to him, did they swear before any other that were his Proxies at that
distance which they were in from him, who was at Athens when he wrote to the
Thessalonians, and at Rome when he wrote to Timothy, then Bishop among the
Ephesians? And if there were no Representatives of his person then with them,
to tender the Oath to them, then it appears, That I. I's eyes are out, who
cannot see that the commands of Paul to them, which they ( respectively)
obeyed, were to read his Epistle, and preach the Word, and not to swear that
they would do so.

2dly, As to Paul's own swearing, though I will not say (as I. I. says some
say) he did evil in swearing; (for he swear not) yet in swearing he had done
evil, had he sworn in those many expressions wherein H. D. and I. I. assert he
did swear; and no less then this, H. D. and I. I. must be forced to confess
with me (if each of them will own his own Book in other places) for H. D. and
I. I. (as busy as they be in banding against our interpretation of Christ's
Prohibition universally against swearing at all, allowing swearing only before
Magistrates to end strife) yet they both confess, that at least it extends to
the forbidding of ordinary, frequent, or common swearing, or swearing in our
common communication, when we are not called before Magistrates: But if Paul
did swear so often as J. I presents him to us as swearing, in the many Epistles
of Paul above cited by him; and if it were so frequent with Paul to use
expressions equal to an Oath (that is to say, to use Oaths) as H. D. says some
have noted, it was from Romans 1. 9. with many more of like nature; then he had
come under the guilt of that, swearing commonly, ordinarily, frequently, or in
his common communication with the Saints, and in his Letters to them, uncalled
to it by any Magistrate; which kind of swearing, these two strict sticklers for
Oaths in some cases, do both confess, are by Christ Matt. 5. 33. 34. condemned
and forbidden.

Obj. But quoth J. I. p. 10. If calling God to witness what we say, be not
swearing, I confess I am ignorant what swearing is; but if it be, then it was
not only used under the old, but under the NewTestament.

Rep. If it be not, then J. I. stands condemned here under his own hand, as
ignorant of what Swearing is, and so is unfit to meddle so much as he has done
in that matter, who (witness his Title Page) takes on him to open that great
Case of Conscience about the lawfulness or unlawfulness of swearing: But if it
be, then (methinks) H. D. and J. I. should sit still, and save themselves the
labor of writing so much as they do against the Quakers, in vindication of the
lawfulness of some swearing; for such swearing (if they will needs have it to
be swearing) as Paul used when he said, God is my witness; God is my record; I
call God to record; I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not; my Conscience
bears me witness in the holy Spirit; and such like, the Quakers gainsay in
solemn cases no more then themselves; yet they have put themselves to so much
pains, as to prove the lawfulness of that, the lawfulness of which, we know
none that do deny. 2dly. If it be, then, methinks the wise, prudent and potent
imposers of the Oath upon the Quakers, and others, who have been ever willing
to express their Renuntiations of the Pope, and all foreign Powers, and their
Fidelity to the King, by any of those strong Asseverations, or fervent
Expressions which Paul used, and J. I. calls Oaths, should accept of the like
from them; but that they neither do, nor will, as they would not have accepted
the like from Jer. Ives himself, so as to have excused him from falling under
the danger of the like Praemunire with such as cannot conform to that
ceremonious kind of swearing, which he has sworn in, without kissing, and
laying one of their fingers at least upon a Bible,

Object. But, quoth J. I. if any one should confirm the truth of what he
speaks, after this rate (meaning the rate at which Paul spoke in the places
forecited) what did ^e less then Swearing? However it were more then Yea and
Nay.

Reply; If it was more then Yea and Nay, as it was in sound of words, but not
in substance, ( yea and nay being spoken solemnly as in Gods sight, amounting
in substance to no less then all that) yet it was less then swearing, however
less then such formal, customary, ceremonious, superstitious swearing, as that
J. I. is found in, which was no less foolish, needless, vain and superfluous,
then it was superstitious, if less then that of touching and kissing the Book
(as aforesaid) might in the Court (where he was sworn) have passed for swearing.

So then all H. D.'s and I. I.'s instances in proof of Oaths, being practiced
and used in old time, before Christ, and since, prove altogether useless to
that purpose.

Obj. But (quoth H. D. p. 4.) it is warranted not only by Practice, but by
Precept also, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and
shall swear by his Name.

Rep. Under the Law it was (as other types, shadows and ceremonies also were*
warranted not by practice only, but precept also; but still we demand, where
is there either practice of it, or precept for it among Christ and his
Disciples under the Gospel? If there had been any precept for it (for practice
of it, I have proved there was none) among any but men (yet degenerate) in the
New Testament since the death of Christ, we should surely have had it cited by
H. D. in this, wherein he stood concerned to have cited it above all other
places of his Paper-work; but since he mentions none here, we may safely take
it for granted he had none to mention; and since H. D. among all his
Old-Testament-talk for swearing (which had been better spared then spilt in
proof of what none denies) nor does, nor can possibly produce one pittance of a
precept for it in the New; we shall rather adhere to Christ's and his Apostles
plain precept against it, or positive prohibition of it, in the two Texts,
which these two men, H. D. and J. I. (as will be seen anon) traduce, Mat. 5.
33, 34. etc. Jam. 5. 12. then either to H. D's nameless Scripture- Precepts, or
J. I.'s deceitful, self-saving shuffles, for a practice that is now as flatly
forbidden (with other ceremonial customs of the Law) in the Gospel, as ever it
was required in the Law.

Obj. It is also confirmed by Prophesies (quoth H. D. p. 4.) the Prophets
prophecy that some swearing shall be used in the time of the New Testament
(quoth J. I. p. 9. of his piece of proof) and to make good their ground against
us who plead Christ's Precepts, both these two Archers who plead old prophesies,
1. Unite their strength, and discharge at us with one single string. 2ly. Lest
that should prove too slender for it, one of them viz. J. I. has two more
strings to his Bow, wherewith he hopes to carry the Cause without control. 1.
They jointly urge that one prophecy, Isai. 65. 16. He that swears in the
earth shall swear by the God of Truth, because the former troubles are
forgotten, etc. the mere mention of which H. D. deems enough, and therefore
actually urges nothing from it; but J. I. dilates at large upon it, insisting
over and (...) that circumstance of time which H. D. hints (as that where the
stress lies) which J. I. thinks clears his case beyond all controversy.
Here Is a prophecy (quoth J. I.) that foretells some swearing shall be lawful
in those times that are to come; after the Ascension of Christ, and the death
of the Apostle James, then he that swears shall swear by the God of Truth, THEN
when the former troubles are forgotten. When shall that be? the 17 ver. resolvs
us, It shall be when the New Heavens and the New Earth are created, and the
former Heaven and Earth is forgotten; So that here is a Concatenation of Divine
Truths; Men shall swear by the God of Truth, because the former troubles are
forgotten; their former troubles shall be forgotten, because the former Heaven
and Earth shall be forgotten: That this prophecy respected the times of the
New Testament, let Peter witness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. We look for a new Heaven, and a
new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness: So that these Scriptures foretell,
that though under the former Heavens, and upon the former Earth men swear by
false Gods; yet in the times of ^the new Heavens and new Earth, wherein
dwells Righteousness, men shall swear by the God of Righteousness. To all
which, somewhat must be said by way of Reply.

Reply; That this is spoken with reference to the time of the new Heavens and
Earth, I deny not; but I deny that this clause, He that swears, shall swear
by the God of Truth, is understood of swearing at all ( formally and properly
so taken) much less (as I. I. says it is) of such ceremonious swearing, as was
under the Law, and as I. I. (contrary to his former professions, as I have
heard) conforms himself to now in this day of the Gospel.

1. Because often the name and phrase, which is peculiar and proper only to the
Type under the Law, is by the Prophets speaking of the times of the Gospel,
attributed to the Antitype or Thing it self thereby deciphered; yea how
ordinary and usual was it with the most Evangelical Prophets to speak of
Evangelical matters under the ( then) usual, though but legal phrases, and to
hold forth the substantial, eternal and everlasting Gospel truths, under the
dark, shadowy forms of ceremonious and legal phrases, which if any should now
interpret as spoken of the mere ceremony or figure, by the name of which the
truth figured out only with reference to Gospel times is expressed; one might
thereby usher in well nigh the whole bulk of outward eatings, drinkings,
divens*baptisms, circumcision, passover, sacrifices, and other carnal
ordinances and ceremonious Rites, which belonged to that Paedagogy of the Jews,
as well as that ceremony of swearing.

See Ier. 31. and compare v 31. 32. 33. which none deny to be spoken of the
Gospel glory, which transcends that of the Law, which is done away (though a
glory) with v. 38. 39 40. Will any take that as spoken of the old legal
Jerusalem, that was in bondage with her children, and not of that only which
is above, free, and the Mother of all Saints; for it is not a truth of the
other, for it (though built after the Babylonish ruins) was plucked up, and
thrown down again.

So Zach. 14 from v. 9. 10. to the end.

How are the Pots of the Lords House now as bright as the Golden bowls before
the Altar; but as those that have lien among the pots (as black as they have
been) shall be as a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.

So Ezekiel. 36. 25. There speaking of the Gospel purity, I will sprinkle clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean. Will any think this is that water only
that puts away the outward filth of the outward flesh?

So Ezekiel. 40. to the end of that Prophecy; The Temple Worship, Sacrifices, and
orders of the holy City, of which its said, Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there,
are described under the legal phrases, and according to the old ceremonial
orders: Will the Baptist think therefore there is a material Temple made with
hands? Rev. 21. confuteth him, where its said, I saw no Temple there; but the
Lord God and the Lamb are the Temple of it.

An hundred more there are of the like nature; yea all the Prophets speak over
the external type and ceremony of that eternal Truth, which is one, one
sacrifice, one passover, one oath of God, which ends all strife and wrath to
such as look to it, one circumcision for ever; and yet under the name of the
temporal Type only which was in the times of the Law, wherein they wrote, and
wherein those were used.

That of Circumcision was called an everlasting Covenant, and an everlasting
sign in the flesh of Abraham's Seed; yet we are that Seed, that Circumcision,
they but the Concision, and the bastard Seed of scoffing Ishmael, not of Isaac,
nor of Israel; yea in that very place of these men's quoting, and those
following, many things are said, which (in words) found out the Laws, by which
is intended only the Gospel-services, and the Gospel-superstitions; He that
sacrifices a Lamb, cuts off a Dogs neck; He that burns Incense, blesses an
Idol, n^w, as well as then, if his soul delight in abomination; yet the
Sacrifices and Incense now, is not of fed Beasts, and sweet smells, but prayers
and praises, which who offers to God from an unclean conscience, is in it
abomination to the Lord, as the sacrifice of the wicked is ever said to be,
Prove. 15. 8. They that eat Swines flesh, and the abomination, and the Mouse,
shall be consumed, in the Antitype that's done in these days, to which that
Prophecy ultimately relates: I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, her people a joy;
yet the Jerusalem which then was, is now a curse among Gods chosen, and her
Name translated unto these: Semblably he that swears in those days, shall
swear by the God of truth, is not spoken of the Ceremony which these times
practice, and these men plead for; but of a substance, a speaking, (though
called by that name of swearing, which was the shadow) the truth from the heart,
a speaking in righteousness (though by no more then yea and nay) in his sight,
in whom Gods oath and promises are all yea, or truth itself; as Christ is said
to do, of whom the Saints are, Isa. 63. 1. a saying, (though called a swearing)
the Lord lives, in truth, and in righteousness in these days, by such as know
their Redeemer living. In old time there was a saying, called also a swearing,
the Lord lives, in falshoold, unrighteousness and deceit, by such as know him
not living in themselves, of whom God says, Though ye say God lives, yet ye
swear falsely; i. e. who though ye say the truth, yet ye know not that to be
truth which ye say, while ye say it, not feeling him living in your selves. Men
swear then by the God of Truth in a sound of words, and ceremonious forms
(though J. I. says they swear by false Gods, as if they had not at all swear
by the God of Truth) but they did not swear by him in truth and righteousness
when they mentioned his Name, but in deceit, as a company of hypocrites; so
that God counted them as swearing falsely, when they uttered the very truth.

And that those Oaths these men plead as necessary to end strife, are in no
wise meant here, is evident by that very circumstance on which they insist most
strictly in proof thereof, if considered but a little more exactly. For 1.
whereas they both intimate it, and I. I. very strenuously urges it as a clause
necessarily clearing the present lawful use of such oaths, because it is
foretold there shall be such swearing; at that time (says H. D.) THEN, yea
THEN (says J. I.) when Jacob and Judahs former troubles, and the former
Heavens and Earth shall be forgotten, in the new Heavens and Earth wherein
dwells righteousness, Any of those wise men whose eyes are in their head when
the fools are abroad in the ends of the Earth, would from that self-same clause
have seen clear ground to conclude no less then the very contrary; i. e. the
unlawfulness, because the utter uselesness of any such oaths at all in those
days, as among men are for confirmation and end of strife; seeing that very
place expresses, that all the former troubles, which arise from strife, which
is it self the most troublesome thing to it, and the grand ground of all other
troubles in the World (for where envying and strife is, there is the confusion,
and every evil work, Iam. 3. 14. 15. 16.) shall in those days totally be done
away. See also Rev. 21. 1. I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth, for the first
were past away, and there was no SEA; that is, trouble, strife, tossing,
tempests, tumults; wars, hatred, nor contention. Where trouble is forgotten, or
ended, there all strife, which is its cause, must be forgotten and ended, (else
as posita causa ponitur effectus, where the cause is, the effect will be; so
where strife is, confusion and trouble will be) and where all strife is
forgotten and ended, there those Oaths, which these men plead for, the very e^d
of which is (as themselves say) to end all strife, must necessarily cease, end,
and be forgotten also.

Again, this Prophecy (say they truly enough) relates to the time of the new
Heavens and Earth wherein dwells Righteousness, when the old, wherein
unrighteousness dwelt, together with its unrighteousness, is removed. Which if
so, where is any room or use for strife, and the oaths that are to end them,
when strife, which is unrighteousness, and the root of all unrighteousness is
buried in the bottomless pit from whence it came?

J Ives argues p. 11. in his fifth Reason (as is above said) from the being of
strife, to the necessity of a being of Oaths to end them; but to run down and
rout that reason, I shall render another reason out of J. I's paper p. 9. viz.
in the latter days, when the new heavens and earth are created, wherein
dwells righteousness, and former troubles are forgotten, there shall be no
more of that unrighteousness, those fleshly works, which strife is none of the
least part of; therefore no more need of Oaths then to end all stri^e.

Thus as of those that argue against our Tenet of perfecting holiness (as to
purging from sin) here, from the necessity of sins continuance in them to this
end, that they may be kept humble, I would fain know what need of sin to
humble, when perfect holiness, which cannot be without true humility, which is a
prime part of it, is brought in? and what shall become of Pride, when all sin,
which it is not the least of, is done away? So of them that say in the new
Jerusalem there is need of Oaths to end all strife, I would as fain know (if
they be able to tell me) what must become of all strife, (which is such a
troublesome piece of unrighteousness, and the root of all other trouble and
unrighteousness also) in the day when all such sin and transgression as strife
is, must be finished and made an end of, and nothing but the everlasting
righteousness brought in by Christ, who to such as wait for it in his Light, is
bringing near that his righteousness, so that it shall be revealed, and his
salvation from sin so quickly, that it shall not tarry?

We see then how these two men make one head against one man, viz. H. Den and J.
Ives against J. Ives, to push him down; and how both these men (well weighed)
interfeer and hack their own shins, so as to come limping home in that lame
cause they ventured out in: What need we any further witness against them? Ye
your selves (O people) who have but half an eye, and do not shut it, may see
their confusion under their own hands; and how instead of building their house
(as Wisdom does hers) they have with folly pulled it down with their hands. So
(as H. D. and J. I. has done) let all hasty Opposers of Christ's plain Commands
in print, when (to save themselves a whipping) they have violated them,
contrarily to their own comfort, if not their Conscience, make Rods for their
own tails, and soundly slash themselves with them when they have done.

H. D. does no more (as to this point of Prophecy) in proof of Swearing; but
J. I. doubles his Files, and fights on as follows, page 9.

J. I. That Text Psalm. 15. 4. is by many understood to respect the time of the
New Testament; and if so, then one of the great Qualifications that is required
of those that shall dwell in Gods holy Hill, is that they shall swear to their
own hurt, and change not.

Rep. If so, that it relates to the New Testament, as its understood by many to
do? This is a supposition only, therefore can be no sound proof of the point,
unless I. I. durst lay it down in a position, that so it is. 2. Yet (to take it
as I. I. would have it) let I. I. consider again whether this be one of the
great qualifications that is required of such as shall dwell in Gods holy Hill,
viz. that they shall swear to their own hurt? Does God, or did he ever require
any man, on pain of exclusion from his holy Hill, to swear to his own hurt? I.
I. says so, and the simple may believe every word that he says; but the
prudent will look well to his going. And if I. I. says I abuse him in taking
the two Clauses as under that he puts together; affirming it a blessed duty
when a man has sworn (though to his own hurt) not to change, I grant that,
unless it be so that ( no Oath being any bond at all to any iniquity) a man
has sworn to do any sin, as I do not say I. I. has in swearing to be
peaceable toward the King (though I judge he has so far sinned in swearing
that, which, had he feared God more then man, he (speaking the truth in his
heart) should but have promised or asserted, that he may lawfully change, so as
to repent of his rash act of swearing) otherwise, if a man have rashly sworn or
spoken to his loss or damage in outward things, it appears by this place he had
better keep that oath or word, then break it: But what will I. I. get by all
this, if to swear in this Text were not (as in truth it is) to be understood
the same way as in that above spoken, viz. for speaking in righteousness, or
uttering no more then the very truth from the heart, viz. thus much and no more
then we freely do, and can afford to grant, namely, that this Text commends
in no wise (much less commands) swearing, any more then Matthew. 5. which
condemns it altogether as no Gospel-duty, but only condemns Forswearing (a
thing in use in these days, and in fashion well-nigh as much as swearing is)
which sin of Forswearing (though its feared it may befall many seeming Saints,
that for have and fear, make no conscience of some swearing) both we, and
Christ also approves not in that place, where he downrightly (as an evil)
reproves the other.

I. I. Isa. 45. 23. God swears, That to him every knee shall bow, and every
tongue shall Swear; and because sacred swearing by GOD is a confessing of him,
the Apostle translates every tongue shall Confess, Romans 14. 11. plainly
expounding the prophecy to relate to New Testament times.

Rep. This I. I. says proves what I said above as fully as I need, or can
desire to have it proved my self: for it shows to him that is willing to see it,
that the Antitype now in the times of the Gospel, answering to the Ceremony of
Swearing, which was the Type of it under the Law, is Confessing, and not
denying when we witness affirmatively, though by but Yea; or denying only,
though by but Nay, when we witness negatively to any truth: If confessing and
denying to God, from our hearts, or before God now, who knows our hearts, but
by yea or nay be so under the Law, then confessing or denying from our hearts
to men by but yea and nay (as before God who knows our hearts) is the substance
of those shadowy Oaths that were under the Law, and that eternal Truth into
which that Temporal Type or Ceremony is now resolved; so that whereas J. I.
says thus, viz. And because sacred Swearing by God is a confessing of him, the
Apostle translates every tongue shall Confess; I return thus, viz. And because
the confessing (in truth) of the spirtual holy Seed, (which is the substance of
that carnal holy Seed which was the Type) is the Sustbance of that sacred,
ceremonious Swearing which was under the Law, The Apostle who wrote in the
days of the Gospel, expounds that thus, Every tongue shall confess; which the
Prophet that wrote in the times of the Law when the Type of Swearing was in
use, expresses thus, Every tongue shall swear.

H. D. in pursuit of the proof of his propounded universality, proceeds to the
eonsent of all Nations. I will add one thing more (quoth he) which is the
consent of all Nations whatsoever, whether Jews or Gentiles, Greeks or
Barbarians, between Princes and Subjects, Enemies and Friends, for the
reconciling differences, ending controversies, assuring of faith one toward
the other: This appears among the Greeks by several unquestionable Authors, and
Authentic Records amongst the Romans by the Laws of the twelve Tables, among
all other Nations under Heaven, by sufficient evidence and demonstration, which
is able to put it out of all doubt. Now how great is this Authority, namely,
the consent of all Nations? It is doubtless a demonstraiion of the second rate,
some there are that account it of the first rate, viz. That the consent of
Nations is taken for Divine Evidence, and in many things we do so take it: What
does it speak less, then that the taking of an Oath is one of the dictates
written and engraven in the heart of man by Nature^ finger, seeing that there
is no Nation so barbarous, but does acknowledge the solemn and religious use of
an Oath, in calling their God to witness, which considered, I have sometimes
wondered why the people distinguished by the name of Quakers should say, that
the Light within them teaches them to deny an Oath, when as that Light which
is Universal, teaches all the Nations of the earth the contrary.

Rep. This seems to be given out by H. D. with more pomp and triumph, and show
and ceremony, then all its fellows, as some grand ground that adds weight to
all those as light, as lightless ones that went before it; but mole ruit su^
(saving its greatness) it has not so much goodness in it, as will make good
the ground against the Qua, who by H. D. (like as Joshua and his fellows of old
to the Light-hating Professors) are as men wondered at, nor so much force as
will save it from falling by its own falsehood to the ground: and were it as
true (as H. D. only says it is) that Swearing was used amongst all Nations
under heaven, by sufficient evidence and demonstration which is able to put it
out of all doubt, yet that would not put it out of all doubt, nor be sufficent
evidence and demonstration that Swearing is now to be used among true
Christians: But alas, as great as H. D. says this Authority is, namely, The
consent of all Nations; which (quoth he) is a demonstration of the second rate,
at least, and some account it of the first rate; yet as 'twil not prove
Swearing lawful among Saints, were it true that it has been so used, so
neither is it true that it has been so universally used (as he supposes) by
universal consent among all Nations.

There Is yet no demonstration or evidence scientifical afforded by H. D. that
there is the use of an Oath among all Nations whatsoever, Jews or Gentiles,
Greeks or Barbarians, especially that it has been used as universally in all
times and places, as by all persons, which is the uuiversality of swearing, at
first propounded by H. D. to be proved, in prosecution of his proof of the
universality of the use of Oaths by all persons in all times; who after he had
only conjectured that practice of swearing to be not above 300, years younger
then the Moon, falls a confessing p. 3. (as is showed above) that (for ought he
knows by Scripture, which speaks not plainly what the old world did in this
case) it is no elder then about 400. years younger then the Flood: Now how can
that be said to be universally used in all times and places, by all persons and
Nations by consent, of which it is not plain by Scripture-evidence that 'twas in
use at all for 1600. years together in the old world, nor till 400. (which with
the other amount *to 2000 years in all) were spent and gone even of the new?
Who is so blind as not to see how H. D. dashes himself against himself, by
pinching his own propounded universality into a mere particularity, as he
renewed his first propounded high Antiquity, into no less nor more then that
mere novelty of 2000. years after the Moon.

But 2ly. admit it had been 2000. years elder then H. D. makes it appear to be,
and so in all times, yea and by Consent of all Nations used also; yet was it
used neither by the consent of all, nor without the dissent of sundry persons
and parties in sundry Nations; and so H. D.'s Authoritative Doctrine still goes
down the wind, and cannot be owned at that high rate, at which he prizes it.

Now that it neither is, nor has been so universally assented to by the
Nations, as H. D. nakedly affirms it has, but dissented from by sundry in the
Nations where it has been used, and that not single persons of note only, but
whole parties, and by those persons and parties still that were grown to
discern best between the Ceremony and the Substance, and to prefer the truth,
power, equity and end of the Law, before those thin, empty, threadbare, trashy
and chaffy forms and formalities, which (like as Pharaohs seven lean Kine, and
blasted ears of corn, that* did eat up the fat and well-liking) devoured ever
the equity it self, and destroyed things (as to their first good, honest,
innocent and true intents) is evident enough to be seen in sundry instances of
men eminent in their generations, among whom was Philo, who says, It is best
and most profitable, and to the rational nature most convenient to abstain from
Swearing, and so to accustom ones self to veracity, that ones Word may be
taken for an Oath.

Also we read of the Essaeans, the honestest of the three Sects of the Jews in
Christ's time, of whom some judge most of the believing Jews came in Christ's
time, that by faith in him became Christians; because the Scripture mentions
none but the other two, viz. the Sadduces and Pharisees, few of which heeded
Christ, and most of which did ever vehemently oppose both him and his few
followers; Of those Essaeans I say we read in Josephus, That Whatsoever they
say is firmer then an Oath, and to Swear is among them accounted a thing
superfluous.

Also from the Essaeans and those Hebrews whom the Essaeans followed, the same
seems to be received by Pythagoras, whose sentence was on this wise; Let no man
swear by the Gods, but every one take care of his credit, that he may be
believed without an Oath. And whereas H. D. speaks of all Nations, yet if he
had heeded what Curtius writes and relates of the Scythians in their sayings to
Alexander, he would have found them testifying to him thus of themselves, viz.
Think not that the Scythians confirm their friendship by Oath; they Swear by
keeping their Word.

And because H. D. speaks so much of the Laws of the Greeks and Romans, by
which they in their twelve Tables so strictly ratifying and injoining that
practice of Swearing, he might have considered, how (according to Cicero's
relation in one of his Orations) when one at Athens, who had lived among them
in great repute for his gravity and sanctity, had publicly given his
testimony, and approached the Altars to make his Oath, all the Judges with one
accord reclaimed, and would not let him swear upon this account, viz. Because
they would not have it thought that Truth depended more upon the Religion of an
Oath, then upon the Word of an honest man: All which serves to refute H. D. his
peremptory position concerning the consent of all Nations under heaven, to the
solemn and religious use of an Oath; at least, if by all Nations he means, as
he well may (denomination being ever more ex meliori, then ex majori) the best,
most solemn, and truly religious persons in those Nations. Thus we see to the
confusion of H. D. that

Heathens consent, it is needless just men swear,
Forbid it, and cry out (for shame) forbear.
However ^et it be never so universally now assented to by all Nations, yet all
in the Nations assent not to it, nor yet that peculiar people, and holy Nation
that is redeemed unto God by the blood of the Lamb from among the Nations,
Tongues, Kindreds and People of the Earth, even the holy Seed, that is the
substance of that holy Seed, or Jewish Nation, which with their Ceremonies were
but Types for a time of them and their more spiritual and substantial services.

And this dissent from that practice of Swearing upon a Bible; with fingering,
kissing, holding up the hand, or other vain, superfluous customs of man's
imposing, so much consented to (as H. D. says) among all Nations, is not now
so newly entered in this Nation of England, but that we can give Presidents of
holy Martyrs suffering for it, as well as for other things before us, even in
Q. Mary's days, and before; whose sufferings H. D. and I. I. do what in them
is to make of none effect.

Take some Examples and Testimonies of some Martyrs concerning Swearing.

In the Reign of Richard the second,

William Swinderby said, The Pope, the Prelacy, neither any Ordinary, can
compel any man to swear by any Creature of God, or by the Bible Book.

In the Reign of Henry the fourth.

William Thorp was accused, that the second Sunday after Easter he said openly
in St. Chaddes Church in his Sermon, That Priests have no title to Tithes, and
that it is not lawful to swear in any wise.

Again, Will. Thorp accounted it not lawful to swear upon a Bible-Book, it
being made up of diverse Creatures; and that he ought not to swear by any
Creature. The Archbishop menaced him with great punishments, and sharp, except
he left that Opinion of Swearing. He replied, It is the Opinion of our Savior
and St. James, and does conclude, if Chrysostom counts him worthy of great
blame, that brings forth a Book to swear upon; it must needs follow, that he
is more to blame that swears upon that Book.

Then (as William Thorp relates) the Clerk said, Lay the^* thine hand upon the
Book, touching the holy Gospel of God, and take thy Charge. Then said William,
I u^derstand that the holy Gospel of God may not be touched with man's hands:

Walter Bruce in his Answer concerning Swearing, says, I believe and obey the
Doctrine of Almighty God, and my Master Jesus Christ, which teaches, that
Christian men in affirmation of a Truth, should pass the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees of the old Testament, or else he excludes them from the
Kingdom of Heaven; for he says, Unless your Righteousness exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.

And as concerning Oaths, he says, It has been said to them of old time. Thou
shall not for swear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord what thou vowest;
But I say, Thou shall not swear at all; but let your communication be, yea,
yea, nay, nay; for whatsoever shall be more then this, proceeds of evil.
Therefore says he, as the perfection of the ancient men of the Old Testament
was not to for swear themselves; so the perfection of Christian men is, not to
swear at all; because they are commanded of Christ, whose commands in no case
must be broken. Although that the City of Rome is contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ.

Likewise in Queen Maryes days, in the fourth Examination of one Elizabeth
Young, before the Bishop of London, Docter Martin, and others. See Fox 2d. Vol.
page 1874.

D. Martin said, She has a certain spirit of the Anabaptists; for she refuses
to swear upon the four Evangelists before the Judge; for I my self, and Mr.
Hussy, have had her before us four times; but we cannot bring her to swear, etc.

Then said the Bishop, Will thou not swear before a Judge? that is the right
trade of the Anabaptists. It seems the Baptists in these days, many of whom do
swear for fear against the ^nsciences, to their terror afterward, as I could,
instance in some at Nor*thampton, and elsewhere) and many of whom plead in
print for swearing, are now degenerated from that integrity, which the Baptists
of old (coli'd then* as now, by the name of Anabaptists) did keep to at the
first in that point of swearing: And as for such (for there are a few, and but
a few of those) that are counted to the Quakers, (whose fall I mention, that I
may not seem partial, as one justifying them more then the Baptists, in their
denial of the truth) who have taken the Oath, they fall into the same
condemnation with them; witness not only the ^etter above printed, but also
this Relation that came concerning two or three more lately from Ilchester, and
is here underprinted in way of warning to such ^s stand, that they may take
heed let they fall.


Eliz. I will not swear that this hand is mine. No, said the Bishop; and why?

Eliz. Christ says, Whatsoever is more then yea, yea, or nay, nay, it comes
of evil.

Then said Cholmly, Twenty pound it is a man in woman's clothes. Twenty pound it
is a man.

Eliz. I am a woman.

Bishop, Swear her upon a Book, seeing it is but a Question asked.

Then Doctor Cook brought her a Book, commanding her to lay thereon her hand.

Eliz. No, I will not swear, for I know not what an Oath is; but I say, That I
am a woman, and have Children.

Bishop, That know we not; wherefore swear.

Cholmly, Thou ill-favored Whore, lay thy hand upon a Book, I will lay on mine.

Eliz. So will not I mine.

D. Cook, Swear before us whether Ilchester 5th. d. of the 1. m.
ONe R. Moon at Perin in Cornwall, formerly owned a friend, took the Oath
through slavish fear; but afterward had no peace till he went to a Justice, and
denied what he had done; and now he has some peace in Lanceston Prison, in
denying what he has done in disobedience to Christ's Command; and the last week
two on the same account were sent to this Prison. So that all people may see
the eminent hand of the Lord in it; for we know none else in all these parts
that deny the truth, and the Lord has found them out, and executed judgment
speedily upon them.

T. S.



thou be a man or a woman.

Eliz. If ye will not believe me, then send for women into a secret place, and
I will be tried.

Then Cholmley called her ill-favored Whore; and the Bishop began to question
her concerning the Sacrament of the Altar.

This last passage of those Popish Priests and Bishops, I was the more free to
relate here, because it is so resembled to the life, or rather to the death, by
that light, unsavory deportment of some in these days, who, when they should
reprove or punish, at discountenance rather then i^tate that lewd demeanor of
those Massy Ministers (which is indeed unbecoming meaner men, much more either
Ministers or Magistrates, when they sit in Judicature) do put sober Maids, when
they are brought before them about the Oath of Allegiance, to swear whether
they are Maids or not.

Thus we see these Dying Martyrs, that lived and died in their measure of the
Light of Christ to them then given (whose Testimony one would think H. D. at
least should take for divine evidence before the Consent of the Nations that
are universally erred, and universally alienated from the life of God through
the ignorance that is in them, and because of the blindness of their hearts,
and are past feeling, being in the Fall from the Light of God) did enter their
dissent in this case of Swearing, and seal to their dissent from it with their
blood.

What a miserable thing is it then that H. D. should now dissent from the holy
Martyrs and Suffering Saints of God both now, and of old, in their Testimony
against Popish Superstition, and cleave to those customs (as the Truth of
Christ) which (excepting by the Saints) are universally consented to by the
Nations: As he says, What Nation so barbarous, but does acknowledge the
solemn and religious use of an Oath, in calling Their God ( mark, Their God)
to witness; so may we not as well say, What Nation so barbarous, but that it
has some false God to worship, some false way of Worship? What Nation so
barbarom, but it commits Idolatry, and approves it as good? What Nation so
barbarous, that will not fall down before some golden image, or superstitious
worship or other with approbation, if the Kings and Powers think fit to impose
it? What Nation so barbarous, but it will alter, or for fear fore-go the
Worship of their God, and their Religion, if their Rulers require it? But
what is this to the few Saints? Are they to fashion themselves therefore
according to the Nations, as H. D. would have them? When Nebuchadnezar made a
Decree for it, all the people and Nations (it is said) and the Languages
consented, with their Princes, Governors, Captains, Judges, Counselors,
Treasurers, Sheriffs and Rulers, and fell down and worshipped the golden Image
which Nebuchanezar the King set up, excepting the three children of God: Was
truth, therefore (...) the Nations sides? Was their consent to be taken for
divine evidence, or the dissent rather of those Three? And when all the people
forbore to pray to their God, except Daniel, because Darius forbad them, was
his dissenting and praying, or their consenting to leave it off whether, to be
taken for divine evidence? Judge O Saints, Dan. 3. 3, 7. and 7. 7, etc. Yet
what does it speak less then that the taking of an Oath (quoth he) is one of
the dictates written and engraven in the heart of man by natures ^inger, seeing
there is no Nation so barbarous, but does acknowledge the solemn and religious
use of an Oath? Has he forgotten that the Nature and Image which the Nations
are now universally degenerated and gone out into, from that of God, after
which they were at first created, is that of the Devil, by which all (till they
be renewed and regenerated back unto the other) are children of wrath? Is he
ignoran^ that the vail is over all hearts, and the face of a covering and cloud
of darkness is spread over all Nations; till it be removed and destroyed by the
Light of him, who is manifested a Light to the Nations, and is come a light
into the world into men in their own consciences by a measure of his Grace,
that he might destroy that nature, image, work and kingdom of the Devil, who is
the Ruler of the darkness of this world? Is he ignorant that the world lies in
wickedness, 1 John: 5. excepting those few who know they are of God? Is he
ignorant that the whole world has wondered after the Beast, and worshipped the
Dragon that gave his power to the Beast, excepting those few whose names are
written in the Book of life?

What a thing is this that H. D. should bring the consent and customs of the
Nations which are va^n, that lie under a corrupt nature, none doing good in
that, no not one; that are all gone out of the way, altogether become
abominable, as a President for Christ's people to be conformed to, who are
charged not to be conformed unto this world, but to be transformed by the
renewing of their minds, Romans 12. 2.

He might almost as well have alleged this to prove the lawfulness of
profane, ordinary, frequent, common swearing, and exorbitant, extravagant
Oaths, which himself condemns, as in proof of any swearing now, since all the
Nations are consented (though they make Laws against it) yet to live and dye
together in that ungodly practice, which the Light within them (but that they
heed it not in one, nor yet in the other) teaches them to deny as well as
the other.

What the corrupt natures finger writes in man's heart, is as corrupt as the
Nature by which it is written. Yet (quoth H. D.) Considering the use of an Oath
is writ in man's heart by Natures finger, I have sometimes wondered why the
People, that are distinguished by the Name of Quakers, should say that the Light
within them teaches them to deny an Oath, when as we see that Light, which is
universal, teaches all the Nations of the Earth the contrary. And p. 8. If the
Quaker say the Light within forbids him to swear, the consent of Nations
confuteth him.

Monstrum horrendum, cui lumen ademptum! What confusion is here! Will H. D.
make Natures finger, and the measure or beams of the true Light that comes from
the living God, and enlightens (...), every man that comes into the world* John
1. 9. all one? Or will he not blush to argue, that what the Light of God within
men forbids, and teaches to forbear, that the consent of the Nations (as
they are fallen) and that corrupt Nature they are fallen into, approves and
commands men to practice, and therefore they may practice it; as if it were
safer to follow the imaginatious dictates of the Devils nature, which man has
contracted since he is gone out from that of God in which he was created, then
to follow God's own Counsel, which is the Light in the Conscience? Does he not
know, that what is according to the consent of Nations in the fall, is not
according to the Light, and and so not according to God the Author of that
Light, and so stands condemned by them both?

Does the Baptist say the consent of Nations confutes the Quaker in the point
of Swearing, which the Light within him bids him to do? Does not the consent
of Scripture herein confute the swearing Baptist, while it says, Swear not at
all, and that the customs of the Nations are vain? Is not the Law that is in
Heathens hearts, whereby they are accused or excused, the Law of God, whose Law
is Light? And is not that Law spiritual, (though universal?) yet will H. D.
here call it natural, Natures finger? Which, if he speaks of the Nature that
the world (excepting the f^ ^aints) is found in while in the fall, and in the
imagination of man's heart, is a Nature, and a Finger that writes only evil,
vanity and deceit; for whatever is good, holy, true and just, is written in man
by the Law, by the Light and Spirit of the living God, by the finger of ^od in
the fleshly Tables of his heart, of which his writing with his finger in Tables
of Stone of old, was but the Type, 2 Cor. 3. but Swearing and Oaths which are
of no use where strife has no place, which has place only in the fall, are
none of those things that are written there thereby: But if by Natures finger
H. D. intends Nature in its primitive purity, while man stood in innocence, (as
perhaps, yea probably and very likely he does) and by the writing of Natures
Finger, he means what was written in man, when he was made upright by God
himself, who made him, and gave him light and understanding.

If he will needs have that to be natures finger, and that Light and
understanding to be but natural (which being God's Law in his heart, was purely
spiritual, and flowing from God by gift, and not ex traduce, nor ex princip^s
nature) what gets he by it in his cause? For till Strife came in, Oaths could
not come in, which were to end it; and therefore no strife being before the
Fall, after which the enmity had its being in man, before the Fall the Light
that was natural (let him call it natures finger, or what he will) could not
write in man's heart the solemn and religious use of Oaths: nor does when man
(the enmity being slain in him) recovers purely out of the strife and hatred
back again into the love and peace.

Obj. But quoth H. D. p. 7, 8. How can that be accounted evil which is approved
by all Nations? Recollect your thoughts, and consider whether you can give me
one instance of any one evil which has been allowed and approved among all
Nations: if you cannot, then 'twill be a sufficent demonstration that the
taking of an Oath is nothing simply evil.

Rep. But if we can, then 'twil be a sufficient demonstration, that (for ought
H. D. has at all urged to the contrary) the taking of an Oath may be something
that is simply evil, and that we may think it unlawful to swear, though the
consent of Nations does confirm it as lawful.

I shall therefore give one instance of something that is not lawful to be used
among the Saints and Church of God, and Christ's Disciples, which yet is
allowed, and approved, and judged, and called good among the Nations.

Luke 22. 25, 26. The Kings of the Nations (says Christ to his Disciples)
exercise Lordship over them, and they that exercise Authority upon them, are
called Benefactors, i. e. Well-doers: Here Is a thing agreed to by consent of
all Nations, that their Kings, alias, Rulers, should exercise Dominion over
them.

Yet it shall not be so among you; but he that is greatest among you, let him
be as the yo^ger; and he that is chief, as he that does serve: Yea, Paul said,
the Apostles had not dominion over the Faith of the meanest; and Peter* forbids
the Ministry to Lord it, or have Dominion over the Clergy, or Heritage of God
((...)) yet that is a thing commonly consented to among the Nations, that their
very Priests, as well as Princes, shall Lord it over them and their Faith,
which they universally (excepting the Saints still) do pin upon their Priests
and Chemarims sleeves. Here Is an instance of one thing universally approved of,
and allowed by consent among all Nations, which yet is an evil that ought not
to be found among Christ's Disciples, nor true Christians.

I have done with H. D. as to his disputative doings in this point of Swearing
from these two Common places, or Topics that are common to him and Papists,
viz. Antiquity, and Universality; neither of which can prove the things they
plead for, so Catholic, as to either time, place or person; but that we can
show both when, where, and by whom they were dissented from, and both impleaded
and disproved. So that how lame these two legs are, upon which H. Dens false
witness walks, he must be well-nigh as blind as they are lame, who cannot see.
We have seen also how pedlingly these two men have proved the lawfulness of
that practice of Swearing, from the consideration of its being prophesied of,
and also its being practiced by precept in former days by holy men, viz. the
Prophets under the Law, and the Apostles under the Gospel: Under the Law we
grant holy men used it as they did the other types, figures, shadows and
ceremoni^s that pertained to it; but its being practiced then by precept, pr^es
not that there is any precept now for its being practiced: Under the Gospel it
would prove it practicable now, had it been both practiced and enjoined by
either Christ or his Apostles; but here they can give us neither President nor
Precept for (though we bring them no less then express prohibition of) such a
practice.

Obj. Christ forbids not swearing by God, but swearing by any thing besides
God, as Heaven, Earth, the Head, the Temple, the Altar (as Ier. Ives says, p.
14.) whose words are these, They did not matter what they swear by, so they
performed the things they promised; therefore Christ forbids their swearing any
Oath, either by Heaven, or Earth, or the Temple, or Jerusalem, or by their
Head; but would it not be illogical to conclude from hence, That therefore we
must not swear by the Lord in things lawful? So that by this Text, and that in
James, we are forbid to swear by anything below God; it also forbids all
voluntary Oaths, which they swore to perform to the Lord by any Creature. And
p. 13. All swearing: in our common communication is forbidden, (quoth he) as
appears by these words, but let your communication be yea, yea: Our Savior and
the Apostle forbid all common swearing in our ordinary conversations, and not
solemn and sacred swearing. Also, as H. D. says, p. 7. It appears to be the
aim of our Savior, not to forbid solemn Oaths before the Magistrate, etc. and
between man and man upon grave and mature deliberation; but only to put a stop
to common and frequent, light and trivial swearing. And p. 6. Christ's words in
proper speech should be read, Let not your whole Conversation be interwoven
with Oaths. And p. 8. Christ indeed forbids those exorbitant and extravagant
Oaths (meaning whether by the Name of God, or other matters in ordinary
conversation) whereof the streets and Houses are full.

Rep. Christ does indeed forbid all such voluntary Oaths as were in use under
the Law, and all swearing by any thing besides, or below God; also all swearing
in common communication, and ordinary conversation (as I. I. confesses) but
that he does not forbid also all swearing, even that which H. D. calls solemn
Oaths before the Magistrate, and which I. I. pleads for under the term of
solemn and sacred swearing, is more then H. D. and I. I. have yet made good, or
ever will; whose confession of that, which none can deny, viz. That common and
frequent swearing, and also all swearing, even by God himself in common
communication, and ordinary conversation, is forbidden, will serve us
sufficiently to make it good against H. D. I. I. or any other, that he does
forbid all that swearing before Courts and Magistrates, which H. D. and I. I.
having of late so publicly practiced it, begins now with shame enough, as
publicly to plead for; for if Christ forbids (as I. I. pleads he does) all
swearing by God in our common communication, and ordinary conversation, wherein
yea and nay should serve the turn, and all swearing commonly, frequently,
ordinarily, (as H. D. to the same tune phrases it out) does he not then forbid
that ordinary, common, frequent swearing by God, which is now in Courts, and
imposed by Justices, then which, nothing almost is more ordinary, frequent and
common? If our Communications and Conversations must be without swearing, and
not interwoven with Oaths, is not this exclusive of swearing before Justices
and Magistrates, as well as other men, in Courts and Consistories, as well as
other places, where men have their Conversation and Communication with each
other, as ordinarily, frequently, and commonly as elsewhere? Which considered,
I have often mused why these men are so inconsiderate, as to interpret Christ's
Prohibition as exclusive of men's swearing in their ordinary converse and
discourses, and not in their entercourses with Magistrates, and in Courts,
where Oaths (whether de jure they ought so to be, or no) are yet de facto, as
ordinary, frequent, and common, as in any places whatever; especially that some
men plead so much for Oaths before Magistrates only, and yet can bring no
proof for swearing before them, nor of their right to impose Oaths, more then
others, among the many false Instances they bring of Paul's swearing frequently
in his ^etters to the Churches, and imposing Oaths upon them.

2dly, As to H. D. Christ does indeed forbi^ all such exorbitant and
extravagant Oaths, as H. D. means; let him by those phrases of exorbitant and
extravagant, mean what he can o^ will.

I say, Christ forbids such exorbitant and extravagant Swearing, (as
abovesaid) but whether more swearing then that only which H. D. accounts on,
for which the Land mourns, be not by Christ forbidden as exorbitant and
extravagant now, is worth H. D. and I. I.'s most deep inquiry; yea whether
swearing by God now, be not as exorbitant and extravagant, i. e. beside Rule,
forbidden, as well as by ought else, and that as well in serious, as in
trifling matter: Wshich if it be, then swearing at all, or all swearing (though
some is much more so, then some) will seem to be beside the Way and Will of
God, as well as some; and that it is there, needs not much proof to him that is
not minded to wink* against Matthew. 5. 33. Iam. 5. 12. And here I shall take
occasion to fall in with H. D. and I. I. about those two Texts from whence (as
to our Scripturegrounds) we conclude against them the now unlawfulness of any
swearing; yea, the cessation of such swearing as not only was then in use, but
(by permission and commission from God, as a Type for a time) is yielded by us
to have been lawful under the Law; and to the end it may be the more clearly
seen on which side the Truth lies, whether ours, who speak plainly according to
the Text, and the true intent of it; or on theirs, who most palbably pervert
it; I shall set down the words as they lie in both those places, of both Christ
and the Apostle James; Matthew. 5. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. Ye have heard that it has
been said by them of old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall
perform unto the Lord thine Oaths. But I say unto you, Swear not at all,
neither by Heaven, for is is Gods Throne, neither by the Earth, for it is his
footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King. Neither
shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make on^ hair white or
black. But let your communication be, Yea, yea, Nay, nay; for whatsoever is
more then these, comes of evil. Iam. 5. 12. But above all things my brethren,
swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath;
but let your yea be yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into c^demnation. In
which two Texts say we (in the affirmative) all manner of swearing is
forbidden; for the truth of which construction there are many reasons to be
given, as

1. Because All manner of swearing is expressly instanced in those Disjunctive
clauses, which are expressly conclusive, and confequently (because spoken by way
of Probibition) exclusive, exceptive of all swearing that ean be thought on.
Swear not, swear not at all, say the Texts; that is enough to any save such as
list to be contentious; ye^ that none might imagine (as H. D. and I. I. would
make men do) that this general Rul^ here admits of any exception, but all know
that the prohibition is so strict, as to allow of no permission in that point,
to swear by any thing but God, he adds^, either by Earth, neither by Jerusalem,
neither by the Head.

And lest any should think he forbids only and no more then the extravagant
Oaths of such as swear by the creatures; as Earth, Jerusalem, the Head, and
such like, when as who ever swear lawfully under the Law, was to swear by none
but God himself; he adds, not by heaven, for it is Gods Throne; Which is
exclusive of all swearing now by God himself, by whom men might swear in old
time: For 23. 22. He that shall swear by Heaven, swears by the Throne of God,
and by him that sits thereon. And lastly, that there may be no root at all
left for any reasoning for swearing against this flat prohibition of it, he
concludes and shuts up all in such universal terms, as exclude both all Oaths,
and all possible pretense of plea at all also for any swearing; adding, neither
by any other Oath, when these are?

What words so few as these (if one would devise a form of speech to speak in
to such a purpose) can be more expressly exclusive both of all kinds or sorts of
Swearing, and of all sorts of particular Oaths of every kind.

2. It Is most evident that Christ prohibits somewhat more here then was
forbidden under the Law, yea whatever Oaths were lawful under the Law;
therefore it must be either all swearing at all, or else none at all; either
all such swearing as was lawfully used and allowed as a type for a time in the
Law, Oaths made lawfully and acceptably to God, or else nothing more at all
then what was forbidden in the Law: for all false* swearing and forswearing, or
breaking solemn Oaths made (as unto God) was forbidden in and by the Law; see
Numb. 30. 2. (the place which Christ seems to allude to) therefore here
swearing it self, or nothing. Mat. 5. Ye have heard it said by them of old
time, not of late by the Scribes and Pharisees only putting their false
Glosses on the Law (as I. I. intimates out of other authors, with whose Heifer
he plows, p. 13. saying the words [But I say] Imply not that there was any
thing in his precepts which was not in the Law, but rather somewhat that he
would reinforce from the Law, which by reason of their false Glosses upon it,
had no force upon their lives) but of old by Moses and the Law, Thou shall not
forswear thy self, but shall perform to the Lord thine Oaths; But I say, Swear
not at all, no not by any Oath at all: Note the opposition in that adversative
particle [ But] which is between the old, lawful, legal swearing, and no
swearing at all; not between no swearing, and such profane swearing as was
unlawful under the Law. The sum is thus; The Law said, Break no Oaths; but I
say, Take none: For if he intends no more in these phrases, Swear not at all,
not by any Oath, etc. Then thus; Swear not vainly, profanely, ordinarily,
exorbitantly, extravagantly in your common communication, forswear not your
selves; What forbids he more then the Law forbad? which Law he came not to
destroy, but to fulfill, by taking away the Ceremony of swearing, and
establishing the substance in its stead, which is, speaking the truth, as in
the sight of God, from the heart: yea what says he more to his Disciples else,
then the Scribes and Pharisees from the Law to theirs? For they said, Swear not
profanely, exorbitantly, but by God only; Swear not falsely, forswear not*
swear and perform to the Lord thy Oaths; they were as touching that
righteousness which was in the Law blameless; therefore Christ says more to
his Disciples, and that must be, as it is in express terms, swear no Oath at
all; otherwise how could their righteousness exceed that of the Scribes and
Pharisees, which except it did, they could in no case enter the Kingdom. The
perfection and righteousness of the Law therefore in this point of swearing was
Not forswearing, the perfection and righteousness of the Gospel in the same is
Not swearing at all: So the Gospel exceeds the Law in every point; the Law
says, Kill not; the Wisdom of the Gospel, Be not angry; the Law, Commit not
Adultery; the Wisdom it self in the Gospel, Look not on a woman, lust not; the
Law, Love thy Neighbor, hate thine Enemy, (for the Jew that was of the Law,
might spoil the Gentiles their Enemies, but must lend to each other) the
Wisdom, Love Enemies: Which thing, though it might be spoken in the time of
the Law, yet 'twas the Wisdom and the Spirit spoke it, and not the Law, which
allowed the Israelite to spoil the Egyptian and the Amalakite; he was to help
his Enemies Ox or Ass under a burden, i. e. if he were belonging to a Jew,
that personally hated him, and not an Amalakite, one of the cursed race: But
this Type is a riddle, I see, too hard for I. I. to read and unfold, who says,
the Law required to love the Enemy. The Law said, An eye for an eye, a tooth
for a tooth: The Gospel, Resist not ev^l; but put up, pass by, bear; In all
points the Word of the Wisdom went beyond the Law, also in this of Swearing;
yet it did not, if now there be any swearing at all.

Moreover I. Ives his words would imply, as if the Law had no force on the
lives of Christ's Disciples now, as if they were short of its righteousness, but
they were not now; and it is his Disciples to whom he here directs his speeches,
and not the Pharisees, and such as were guided and gulled by their Glosses. So
it is Oaths lawfully taken of old time that Christ here forbids, which the Jews
when they had taken, did not keep, though they should have kept them; as in the
points of that Circumcision, Passover, Sacrifice, etc. which were injoined
before; so in that of Swearing by God to end strife, Christ puts an end to the
Ceremony and the Type, fulfilling it, and resolves it by the sacrifice of
himself into the very substance and Truth it self, the Circumcision not made
with hands, Himself our everlasting Passover, the everlasting Word, Covenant,
or Oath of God: So that (saving that men make so much ado about the shadow) we
indeed are in the very substance of all Oaths, ^n Christ Jesus the Truth it
self, in whom all the promises of God are Yea, and in Him Amen. We are in that
Truth, in which and from which speaking, promising, and witnessing, though but
by Yea or Nay, we witness more Evangelically, more acceptably to God, more
credibly to men, more substantially, more unchangeably (our Word standing
without variation, when once past from us; our Yea being Yea, and our Nay, Nay)
then all the unconstant, shuffling, shadowy and ceremonious Swearers upon a
Bible with touching and kissing, or by the sacred Sacrament, by the blessed
Eucharist, by the holy Evangelist, etc. that are in all the world.

Yea our Yea and Nay is as firm, as free from change and fit to be trusted, as
all their Oaths upon a Book, with whom there is nothing but yea and nay, so and
no, and subjection to forswear and lie, (our Adversaries themselves being
Judges) so that as there is not cause for it, since (as I. I. says) he that
will swear wickedly, or against his conscience, will lie; and he that cannot
violate his conscience so as to swear against it, cannot violate it by lying
neither; so there is not more belief begotten in each others hearts by their
own Oaths, then is by the bare word of an honest man; yea they confess they
believe we are innocent as from Plots, faithful to the* King, peaceable with
all men. But alas! Heu quam facile est invenire Baculum ad caedendum canem; we
are made worse then Dogs by the misrepresentations of malicious men, and then
it is an easy matter to find a matter against us, and a staff to beat us: Et
Damnati lingua vocem habet, vim non habet; the tongue of a condemned man, let
him speak what he will, has a voice, but little force to free him from such as
have more resolution of mind, then reality of ground to persecute him;
otherwise Christ who had more innocence, would have had more indemnity then any
man, if innocence might indemnifie a man from the envy and merciless cruelty of
the wicked, who watches the righteous, seeking to slay him, and gnasheth upon
him with his teeth; but though the Lamb has the clearer, and the better Cause,
yet the Wolf has the longer, and the bigger teeth; and therefore the Lamb
must be worried and devoured by him, for no more then merely drinking at the
Fountain.

Many more circumstances there are that clear the 2. Texts aforesaid, to be
intended as we take them, as an universal Prohibition of all swearing; but
verbum sat sapienti, a wise man's faith needs few words to confirm it. I shall
therefore only take notice of what H. D. and I. I. our joint opposers herein,
do make against it; and so shut my hands at once of these two shufflers and
their shuffles, beginning first with I. I. who last appeared.

1. This Text (quoth I. I. p. 7.) of Matthew. 5. 38. cannot be understood to
forbid all such swearing as was under the Law. His reasons, which are five
(four of which have been spoken to above already, and therefore need no more
refutation) are as follows:

R. Because some such swearing was used by Christ himself.

ep. 1. That Christ did not swear. 2. That if he had sworn to the High Priest
(as I. I. falsely says he did) yet it being before the Law ended at his death,
to which, till then, Christ was conformable, it had been no more president for
us, then his eating the Passover, and other things, is showed above.

Reas. 2. The Ordinances of the Law, or Old Testament, of which Swearing was
one, ended not till Christ's death, the Testator; but swear not at all was
spoken before his death; therefore all such Oaths as were commanded under the
Law, are not forbidden by that Text, Matt. 5. 38.

Rep. Though spoken before his death, yet with reference to the Gospel Times
after his death; And ( ad hominem) if all that was uttered or instituted by
Christ, before Christ's death, ended at his death, let I. I. leave baptizing in
water, and breaking Bread, which both were enjoined, and actually used before
Christ's death; but that he will not do to this day: And if he plead a
reiteration of the Commands for Water Baptism and breaking bread. Acts 10. ult.
1 Cor. 11. let him own the prohibition of swearing to be reiterated, Iam. 5.
12. after Christ's death. Moreover if I. I. had had his wits well about him
when he wrote this Reason, he might clearly have seen how it renders his
foregoing Reason reasonless, as to the end he renders it for; this weakens the
force of his argument for some swearing, from the example of Christ's swearing;
for the time wherein I. I. (but falsely) says Christ swear, was before his
death, for he had not yet suffered; and that first Testament which the Ceremony
of Swearing belonged to, continued till the Testators death; And after his
resurrection J. I. himself (who falsely says he swear before it) will not say
he swear. God concerning him swear once for all, even that Oath of which
there is no repentance, which stands for ever, saying (as concerning the
everlasting Righteousness and Peace that ends all strife) Thou art a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedec; And (as concerning the day of his
Resurrection) Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Psalm. 110. No
more Oaths now to him that stands fast in this Oath or Covenant of God, which
is of Truth and Righteousness, Life and Peace.

Reas. 3. The Prophets prophecy some such swearing shall be used in the times
of the New Testament; therefore neither Matthew. 5. nor Jam. 5. forbid all such
swearing as was lawful under the old.

Rep. That the Prophets in the places cited by H. D and I. I. intend not such
swearing as was under the Law, but the substance it self, i.e. speaking the
truth in righteousness, denominated by the name of the shadow, or type of
Swearing, is showed so abundantly above, that here needs no more.

Reas. 4. The Apostle Paul both practiced and enjoined such swearing, and
exacted Oaths.

Rep. How false all that is, is sufficiently declared above against both H. D.
and I. I. to which satis-diction I refer the Reader for his satisfaction.

Reas. 5. As much need of Oaths now to end it, as ever, because as much strife.

Rep. One sin ever begets another; the men of this world are in strife, hatred,
hard-heartedness, and unbelief one toward another; in fears, jealousies,
suspicions of treachery and deceit among themselves, every one measuring others
by himself; and therefore they lack such sinful security from each other, as
that of Swearing against Christ's Command. Thus the Creation in the fall from
the Light within, which would lead it forth into love, truth and peace,
wrestles in the chains of its own darkness, groans heavily under the bondage of
its own corruption. But where the Light and Spirit is walked in, there the
lusts of the flesh are not fulfilled, but the hatred, strife, envy etc. denied,
and the love witnessed, which believes and hopes the best of all things, and
thinks no evil of others, because it is true, honest, innocent, pure and
peaceable within it self; and there is no lack of Laws to make such swear to be
faithful to each other, every one living by that, by which he is before God and
men made a Law to himself: But to this Reason more is spoken also in the Book
before.

Having proved (quoth J. I.) that all swearing is forbidden, it necessarily
follows, that those general Terms [Swear not at all] do admit of an exception.
Sometimes Universal Prohibitions are taken with Restrictions, as Exodus 20. 10.
compared with Matthew. 12. 5. and Numb. 28. 9. Matthew. 23. 9. 15. 42. 44. Luke 6.
30.

Rep. How well I. I. has proved all swearing not forbidden, is seen above; and
the wise in Christ, though never so weak, will judge, when they read the
foregoing disproof of all his Reasons. As for general terms, and universal
Prohibitions admitting of exceptions and restrictions, I know well enough they
do so now and then; but when they do, those exceptions and restrictions are
usually in one place or other of the same Testament, where they are made,
either expressed, or at least most manifestly and apparently employed by him
that gave out those general terms or prohibitions; and so are all or most of
those very exceptions from, and restrictions of those generals, which I. I.
himself has instanced in. As for example, the exception of such works as
pertain'd to sacrifice, that the Priests profaned it by, from, thou shall do
no manner of work on the 7th. or Sabbath Day, is abundantly elsewhere expressed
in the Law, where the Priest's services on every Sabbath are appointed them,
and the exception of dressing what every one was to eat, was expressed.

And the exception of doing good, and of works of mercy in saving the life of
man or beast, which was to take place ever against the Typical Sabbath, and all
its service ( I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, says God) was expressed (as
I. I. also intimates against himself, citing Luke 14. 5.) though the Scribes
and Pharisees, more out of malice to Christ then out of ignorance of those
expressions, would not see all those express exceptions that were made against
that general Rule and Prohibition, viz. In it thou shall do no manner of work;
and therefore grumbled at Christ's healing on the Sabbath (as I. I truly notes
from Luke 13. 14.) and forbad the people then to come unto him.

And when Christ says to his Disciples ( as so) Call no man Father on Earth;
it is a Prohibition that universally holds among them ( qua tales) for the
Saints have no Earthly Father, but one is their Father in Heaven, even God the
Father of Spirits, who of his own will begat them into the Image of himself, in
holiness; in which capacity no Fathers of their Flesh are by them to be called
Fathers: The Rule is general without exception, to him that rightly reads it;
not requiring so much express exception as yet is expressed, if other Texts be
consulted, which speak of God only being the one Father of all believers*

As for his two Texts that talk of giving to all that ask, and not turning from
any that would borrow, which I. I. is loath so generally to understand, as
Christ would have him, for fear least he should turn himself (as he says) out
of doors, and be reduced to a morsel of bread, and therefore pleads a necessity
of a restriction in that case: Seeing he lacks to be restrained here, or else
(in his common Reason) he thinks he must needs perish; let him consult but his
own confession of it, and he will find enough (at least to serve his own end and
turn, so as to save himself from sinking into a morsel of bread) of express
exception in other Scriptures: For to Christ's saying, From any one that would
borrow of thee, turn not thou away; Do not other Scriptures (quoth I. I.)
inform us that these general terms must be restrained?

The general terms also wherein H. D. asserts the antiquity and universality of
that practice of Swearing, which ( says he) was used by and in all persons,
places and times, admits also of exception and restriction; yet that exception
and restriction from his general assertion is expressly made by H. D. himself,
who excepts all the old world, and the persons that lived therein for the time
of 1600 years together, of whom and which (after his avouching, in proof of the
lawfulness thereof, the ancient and universal use of Oaths) to show that his
general terms do admit of an exception, and are to be taken with restriction,
expresses that exception, p. 2. on this wise (as is showed above) viz. What the
old world did in this case (i. e. of Swearing) the Scriptures do not speak
plainly, and therefore I will pass it by: which is as much as to say, Swearing
was ever generally and universally used by all the world and Nations of it; by
all persons, times, and places, excepting only all such persons, times and
places by whom, and in which it was not used, or ( exceptis excipiendis)
excepting all such as are to be excepted, which is all the old world by whole
sale (for ought appears by Scripture to the contrary, quoth H. D. himself) and
except so many persons in the New, as used it not at all (say I) which, as
appears above, were Christ and his Apostles and Churches, the Sect of the
Essaeans, many holy Martyrs in Mary's days and upward, and (as appears at this
day in this Nation, as well as others) the many thousands of sincere hearted
Saints and Christians of this Age, called Quakers, who consent not with the
world, and actions of it, in that or any other vain and evil customs, being
chosen and redeemed by Christ's blood from among them.

So Christ uttered many Truths in general terms, which must admit of exception,
but then those exceptions also are expressed* Christ said Luke 13. to all the
sinners that stood about him in these general terms, ye shall all perish, this
was not without an exception of such as should repent; but then that exception
was not without an expression; viz. Except ye repent: he said often to all his
hearers, Ye cannot enter into the kingdom of God, that was not without
exceptions, nor those exceptions without expressions, viz. Except ye be
converted, and become as little children, and Matthew. 5. Except your
righteousness exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, many of whom yet were
blameless, as to that righteousness of the Letter of the Law.

Yea in the Verses immediately before this universal prohibition, Swear not at
all, Matthew. 5. 30, 31. Christ says, ' It Was said of old, if any will put away
his Wife, let him give her a Bill of Divorce: but I say whosoever shall put
away his Wife, causes her to commit Adultery: this general term admits of an
exception, but then that exception is thus expressed, viz. Saving for the cause
of Fornication; i. e. Except she play the Harlot.

But now as to this general term and universal prohibition, Swear not at all,
it cannot be taken with restriction, or as admitting of any exception; because
there is not only no expression made any where (after it) of any such
exception, but a fuller amplification of it by such particulars, as are more
particularly exclusive of all kinds of Oaths, and of all Oaths of any kind,
thus, viz. Nor by Heaven, nor Earth, etc. nor any other Oath: And also by the
Apostle James 5. 12. a reinforcement and reduplication of the said universal
prohibition: Whereas if Christ had intended any exception here, he might as
easily have expressed it, and would as assuredly, as he did immediately above, in
the case of Divorce by, Except in the case of Fornication; and so have said,
Swear not at all, except it be solemn and sacred Oaths, in Courts, when ye
are called to swear before a Magistrate upon a Book: But as I said, in stead of
expressing any exception, he adds that which more strengthens and clears,
beyond all exception, the universality of his prohibition.

Thus we see in how mean a manner J. I. has managed this matter he has
undertaken, of informing those who are tender, conscientious and dis-satisfied
in that great Case of Conscience concerning Swearing, and those two difficult
Texts (as he calls them, truly enough in reference to himself, on whom they sit
too hard, for him to wind himself from under the condemnation of) Matthew. 5.
James 5. Which instead of opening, he has by his silly shuffles, and blind
blurres about them (which yet have a golden gloss in the eyes of such as,
rather then imprisonment, choose to purchase their Liberty by Swearing) what in
him lies, rather shut many men out from seeing into the true mind and meaning
of the Spirit in them: So running himself upon both those two Rocks, he
pretends to carry people from suffering rack upon, viz. Ignorance and Scandal,
which he, in the same ignorance in which he wrote all the rest, likens to
Scylla and Caribdis (whcih are not two Rocks, but the one a Rock, the other a
Gulf) 1 Ignorance in as blindly defending that sin of Swearing, which in the
blindness of his mind he had before fell into. 2. Scandal in offending and
stumbling the tender Consciences of many an honest man, by his both taking and
talking for the same.

And howbeit he hopes he has the price he runs for, and so ( in words) wishes
that God may have the glory; yet in deed and truth God's Name has dishonor,
and his Truth shame by his dawby doings. And if he have the price he runs for
(as he has not, if it be no more then the proving of Oaths now lawful, for he
fails in that, but yet has (for a time at least) if it be the saving his
Estate, as some not ungroundly suspect it is) yet what will that profit him,
had he not only saved his own, but gained the whole world to boot by it,
seeing thereby he has lost himself (unless he yet repent and recant his
rashness in so running) in the sight of God and good men.

And now a word or two more with H. D. as to his doings in denying the true
mind of Christ, which we defend from Mat. 5. 33: Iam. 5. 12.

From whence when we argue, though 'twere lawful in former times to swear, yet
it is unlawful to us now, having received here a countermand from the Lord Jesus
Christ. H. D. answers as follows:

H. D. Have patience I entreat you, while I take liberty to examine your
grounds, and to weigh them in the Balance of the Sanctuary.

Rep. Whoever is out of the Light of God which is in himself, wherein God
dwells (as H. D. yet is, or else he would justify both it, and the children of
it, more then he seems to do in his two last pages, where he Quips at the
Quaker and his Light within him, as confuted in the case of Swearing, by the
consent and common custom of the Nations in the fall, whose customs the
Scripture says are vain, Ier. 15. as if wha^ the Nations say and do in their
state of alienation from the Light, were more consonant to the Light, then what
they say or do, who are come to it, and continue in it.) He is out of the
Sanctuary, and has none but the uneven Balance of his own Brain to weigh
what is truth withal; and condemns the Generation of the Just, and is himself,
by such as abide in the Sanctuary with the Lord, weighed in the Balance of it,
and found too light: And so is H. D. in his driblings about the point in hand.
Howbeit we shall have so much patience as to weigh his Exceptions against our
Translations of the Texts aforesaid.

And first to our Saviors own Prohibition, Swear not at all; That which I
bring in answer to this (quoth he) is an exception against the Translation; the
Greek word At all, is (...), which signifies wholly or altogether, rather then
at all; so that in the proper speech it should be read, Swear not wholly, or
altogether; let not your whole communication be interwoven with Oaths.

Rep. H. Den peradventure may seem very bold indeed to some (as he says p. 3.
about his rare rendition of that other place Genesis 4. 26.) in taking on him to
translate this against the common course and consent of Nations, and their
Commentators, so selfishly and singularly, as he does, to his own turn also;
and though he seems as bold to my self as any, yet is he in what he does, not
very much more bold then welcome to me; for though I will not allow every one to
read it so (for it is rather to be read at all, then altogether) yet I can
afford, him without prejudice to the truth we plead, to wrest and scrue it so
far as he does bedsies it self; since swear not, nor is, nor can be denied to be
a Prohibition of Swearing: Let H. D. put his terms wholly or altogether to it;
what then will it appear to be to any (but such a one as H. D. who does as it
were, Jurare in suam ipsius sententiam) but an injunction totally to forbear
it, an universal Prohibition of it, that is, a Prohibition of Swearing, even
totally, alias wholly or altogether? What gets H. D. then by this? What
difference is there here (if the case be heartily considered by one that is not
devoted to cast Clouds in clear Cases over Christian Consciences) between swear
not, and forbear swearing, (these two Phrases being both Prohibitions of one
and the same thing, i. e. of swearing, it is undeniably forbidden in them both;
and though by the unusualness of the promiscuous use of those phrases at all,
and altogether, in our English Tongue, it seems at first somewhat harsh,
course, odd, uncouth, and well-nigh non sensical to use them indifferently, or
one instead of the other in all places; yet, in reality, being rightly heeded,
there is no more difference (as to their sense and signification, though not
their sound) between at all, or in any wise, and wholly, totally or altogether,
then there is between (...): and (...), yea between (...) and (...), omnino and
omnino, the self-same Greek, and the self-same Latin words, which are rightly
enough Englished by them all.

And though to H. D. whose fancy works so strongly to fetch it about his way
(that he might maintain that swearing now, without which men are not like to
be maintained) says, Swear not wholly, or altogether, seems to vary so much
from swear not at all, or in any wise; making the first exclusive, of some
swearing only, and the last only exclusive of all swearing; yet (hovvever it
does in sound) in sense verily it varyes no more then (...), and (...), ne
jurate omnino, and ne jurate omnino; that one Greek, and that one Latin
phrase, which is truly Englisht by them both: And let any man that confesses
swear not to be the same in English with forbear to swear (as who does not)
put that term at all, which is in universum, totaliter, omnino, after one or
the other, and he shall see it amounts to the same in sense (though not in sound)
for forbear to swear at all, and swear not at all, are (as to their
signification) are one and the self-same prohibition, in which swearing at all
is forbidden, and in which swearing at all is wholly, totally, altogether, or
universally forbidden: So I say, What such difference is there between forbear
to swear at all, or leave swearing wholly, totally, universally or altogether,
and swear not at all, if men be not minded to muddle their own and others minds
with they know not what? Nevertheless though H. D. get naught by it if we
should give it him, yet we will not give it for granted to every one, that the
Word (...) must be rendered wholly, or altogether, rather then at all; for it
may be, and is at all, as well as so; and yet at all and altogether (being both
the English to (...) or omnino) are much at one.

But H. D. that he may seem to do something now he is once entered (though hoc
aliquid nihil est, it is no more then nothing to his purpose) siddles on as
follows.

That I may show you (quoth he) what warrant I have for this interpretation,
consider three places of Scripture where the word (...) is used; the first is 1
Cor. 5. 1. (...), etc. Fornication is reported commonly among you; (...) (quoth
he) is here translated commonly, ordinarily, frequently, and it* can have no
other sense; for if it should be translated here by the word at all, it would
be sound without sense: If I may take the liberty then to translate it so in
Matthew. 5. 33. then it will run thus, Swear not commonly, ordinarily or
frequently: And you see I have good Authority (quoth H. D.) for what I have
done.

Rep. Here H. D. by a pretended Authority takes a liberty to himself to
translate Matthew: 5. 33. such a way as both varies from his own above, and
overthrows him also in his cause ten times more then that did; he translated
(...) in Matthew. 5. before, wholly or altogether; and to show (as he says) what
warrant he has so to interpret it, he brings another place wherein himself
says it is translated quite another way, viz. Commonly, ordinarily, frequently,
and according to that he would have Matthew. 5. ru^ thus, Swear not commonly,
ordinarily, frequently, which is another thing, as different from altogether or
wholly, as it is in sense and signification from at all.

What strange twinings and turnings does the Serpent here use to save his head,
by which he rather wounds it himself, the^ saves it, either altogether or at
all: For swear not wholly, altogegether, totally or universally, is one thing;
Swear not commonly, ordinarily, frequently, is another: Men may swear commonly,
frequently, ordinarily (as it is common, frequent and ordinary for men now to
swear before Magistrates) who do not swear universally, totally, wholly or
altogether, or in all manner of conversation: There Is a difference between saepe
and semper, often, and always; men may swear ordinarily, or often, who do not
swear in all cases, nor at all times.

Let H. D. then have it this way by the Authority pretended, viz. of its being
so rend^ed 1 Cor. 5. 1. (though I would have him to see it, how the Authority
of all Translators rendering a word so or so, is no good Authority at all with
him, when he is minded on his own head to vary from it; Witness Mat. 5. 33.
which though all Translators that ever I read, render it, Swear not at all; yet
the Authority of them all is not worth a rush with H. D. yea who sees not how
he wrests it from them all, to have it otherwise in his piece of wrangling for
some swearing?) But I say, let him have it this way, Swear not commonly,
ordinarily, frequently; What follows? Even this to his own confutation, ( viz)
That at least that swearing before Magistrates that is in our Courts, which H.
D. says p. 7. it is the aim of our Savior not to forbid, and which he and I.
I: (without any color of Scripture) so eagerly contend for, is forbidden as
well as any other sorts of common, frequent, light and trivial swearing; for
swearing is a thing used there as commonly, as ordinarily, as frequently as any
thing else, or as it self is in any other places; yet for this sense H. D.
contends on from his second place, viz. 1 Cor. 6: 7. (...): If this should be
read (quoth he) there is at all a fault in you, what sense is in these words:
But if I read them thus, There is wholy, altogether, commonly, frequently,
ordinarily a fault in you; the sense will be good.

Rep. Its to be noted, that the Corinthians in going to Law one with another
for their own, thought they did very well, and that there was no fault at all,
in so doing, in them: Now his business being to convince them to the contrary,
there is as good sense in answering their false Opinion by praeocupation in
these words, there is at all a fault in you ( i. e. though you think there is
none at all, yet there is) as in the other by which it is rendered, there is
utterly or altogether a fault in you.

H. D's third place is 1 Cor. 15. 20. (...), if the dead rise not at all; this
he confesses is according to the English trunslation good sense; yet he appeals
to all (among whom I am one) whether it be not better and nearer to the scope
of the place if we read it thus, If the dead rise not wholly, fully, or
completely.

Rep. I answer, Not better for this one reason (which I urge as an Argument ad
hominem only, cogent enough to H. D. since it is his own, else there is little in
it) viz. Because we have the good Authority of the Translators on our side, so
rendering as it is, viz. If the dead rise not at all,

2. Not better, nor yet nearer, but much further off from the the scope of the
place, if we read it thus, If the dead rise not wholly, fully, completely; then
if thus, If the dead rise not at all, and that for this reason, viz. Because
the Apostles business all along in that part of the Chap. where this clause is,
and downward to 35. ver. where he first begins to speak of the manner of the
resurrection, insists wholly upon the proof of the matter of it, viz. That the
dead do rise, against them who deny they shall rise at all; and not how they
shall rise, viz. Whether wholly, fully or completely, or not, till he comes
past this verse to the 35. Witness ver: 12. 13. How say some that there is no
resurrection of the dead? Now if there be no resurrection, ( i.e. none at all)
then we are false witnesses in testifying that God raised Christ, whom ^he
raised not up, if the dead rise not ( i.e. not at all.) Ver. 15. And if the
dead rise not, v. 16. ( i.e. not at all) then they that are fallen asleep in
Christ, are perished; (if they be not made alive again, and rise not; not, if
they be not fully, wholly alive, for that would suppose as if he were pleading
against a sort of men that deemed men at the resurrection must be raised by the
halves, or left half alive and half dead, which were absurd) but (quoth he)
all shall be made alive, v. 22. And then v. 29. Si omnino mortui non resurgunt,
If the dead rise not at all, (...), if they be not made alive at all, but
perish wholly or altogether; why then are we baptized? and v. 32. why do I
fight with Beasts, or beastial spirited men? What advantage is this to^ me if
the dead rise not ( i.e. at all) Besides, let H. D. tell me what sense is in
this, viz. If the dead rise not commonly, ordinarily, if they rise not
freqently, but seldom, or sometimes only, then our Faith is vain, etc. viz. as
much as is in this: The Law says, Forswear not your selves; but I say, swear
but seldom. But if we read thus, If the dead rise not at all; the word at all
bears good sense there, as he yields himself; and say I, as good as, swear not
at all*

And lastly, further to inculcate on him the sense of at all, as very proper to
(...) in the New Testament, where he says he finds it but three times; I shall
show H. D. one place where the word (...) (which no Scholar will deny to be
altogether the same with (...), both which (I confess) signify as universally
as may be, per totum, in universum, etc.) is rendered [ at all] where, if it
should be rendered his way by [ ordinarily, frequently, commonly] the absurdity
that would follow, would be intolerable, viz. Acts 4. 18. where the* chief
Priests commanded the Apostles to preach no more at all in the Name of Jesus,
(...), ^e omnino praedicarent; where if it should be rendered as H. D. would
have the Word (...), which in sense is the self-same: thus; viz. That they
should not preach ordinarily, commonly, frequently, it would intimate that the
Priests charge to the Apostles not to preach at all, was not an universal
Prohibition of their preaching (as it was) but rather a toleration given them
to preach sometimes, as they say (in effect; Christ's prohibition of them is,
Matthew. 5. concerning swearing: For to say, Preach not, Swear not commonly,
ordinarily, frequently, gives as much dispensation to preach and swear
sometimes, now and then a Sermon, now and then an Oath (which would be a plea
for some moderate vain Swearers, that rap out an Oath by God but seldom, or now
and then) as it gives prohibition to men to swear so often, so frequently, so
ordinarily, so commonly as they do in Courts.

Yet has H. D. one fetch more in justification of his singular Translation of
Matt. 5. 33. against the Qua. and all men, and in proof that it should not be
swear not at all, but swear not ordinarily, commonly; the Hebrew Text (quoth
he) in which Tongue it is generally judged Matthews Gospel was written, reads it
thus, Be col derek, which is Englished, in every way.

Rep. I have seen and can show one Hebrew Text which reads it Be col da^ar,
which (if it may not be English't in any wise (as I know not why it may not)
yet may be, in any word, or in any things though at the rate at which H. D.
reads his Be col derek, in every way, I know he will read it in every thing:
But had he well heeded the manner of the Hebrews speaking, he would have found
Be col derek to be as truly translated in any way, as in every way, and so have
seen we are at least upon even ground with him as to that; for there is an
Hebraism in the words, and Col is as well used in the Scripture to express any,
as every, and signifies not only all, but also (as the Hebrews often speak by
it) any at all; and if H. D. look into the selfsame place which his Brother
Ives urges in another case (and truly enough to a false end; but falsely, if it
be not to be rendered there as I have said) he will find Col so used, viz.
Exodus 20. 10. where in one verse it is rendered All; in the next, any at all;
six days thou shall labor and do (...) all thy work, but the seventh day is
the Sabbath, etc. in it thou shall not do (...) any work, or as it is rendered,
Thou shall do no manner of work, etc.

So that I have as much right to read Be col derek, Be col dabar, nullo modo,
ne nullo pacto, (as Munster has it) Swear not at all, not in any wise, not in
any way, or in any word or thing, as H. D. has to read it, Swear not in every
way, or every word or thing. But besides, considering the reasons in this Book
above alleged, and the circumstances intimated from the Context, or foregoing
and following passages, I appeal to all men that have not sworn away their
common sense and reason, whether there be not ten, yea an hundred times more
reason to render it as it has been hitherto, till H. D. entered his dissent,
and found out this ^rotchet whereby to cross the current of all Translators
about it, thus; viz. Swear not at all; then thus, Swear not wholly, commonly,
ordinarily, frequently, as H. D. over and over vainly reiterates it ought to be.

Now some few words in answer to H. D's and I. I's exceptions against our
reading and sense of Iam. 5. 12. and then I come to a Conclusion with them, or
rather to conclude against them both, as they two in their several senses on
that one place conclude one against the other.

To your second ground (quoth H.D,) out of Iam. 5. Above all things swear not:
I do appeal to the judgment of any rational man whether skilful or unskilful in
Languages, whether this have the sound of a true interpretation, Above all
things it is worse to swear then to commit Adultery, then to kill the King who
is our Political Father, to kill Father or Mother? I know you will not say it.

Rep. Do thou know we will not say it? Why then do thou so vainly ask
whether this be a true Interpretation, which thou know not that any body
makes? What vanity is this to frame an Interpretation which thy self confessest
is no bodies but thine own, viz. That its worse to swear then to commit
Adultery, to kill the King, to kill Father or Mother, and then to appeal to all
men whether it be true or no? Risum teneatis? This is as ridiculous a piece of
business, as if one, having rashly undertaken to disprove a man to be truly a
man, should set forth a Bull to public view, and then appeal to all men
skilful or unskilful, to judge whether that have the show or shape of one that
is truly a man, yea or nay? Who says its worse to swear then to commit
adultery, to kill the King, to kill Father or Mother? We who are called Quakers
do not say so; and I know none does; and (to the clearing of all from so saying
to whom he writes) I know (quoth H.D. himself) you will not say it.

But (quoth H. D. as objecting on behalf of his Opponents) how then does the
Text say, Above all things swear not? If you ask, how I will read it, I answer
(quoth he) the Greek is (...), which signifies, Before all things, not Above
all things: my warrant for this is (quoth he) not only the Vulgar, Erasmus,
Beza in the Latin Translations, who do all agree to translate it, ante omnia,
but also the comparison of other places where the same phrase, is used, as Romans
16. 7. (...), Col. 1. 17. (...) which is well translated, He is before all
things: many more of the like nature may be alleged (quoth he) but these shall
suffice.

Rep. 1. Many more of the like nature might have been alleged (I confess)
which had they been alleged by H. D. would too plainly have discovered the
untemperedness of that mortar wherewith he dawbs, whereupon, these seeming best
to serve his untoward turn, he was rather willing that those only should
suffice.

2. Had H. D. asserted only, that (...) signifies Ante omnia, Before all
things, I should not contradict him in that, though our concession of that
reading adds so little to that simple sense whereinto he would wrest that
phrase ( ante omnia, before all things) by interpretation, that to show how
little either we lose, or he gets by our granting him his Translation, I have
so rendered it in my Title Page, viz. Before all things my Brethren swear not:
But since H. D. asserts that (...) does not signify Above all things, herein
(if he mean neither formally nor vertually) I shall (whether himself will see it,
yea, or nay) show him his error in the sight of all men: For ante omnia, or
before all things, (and so H.D. will see if those* Logicals (called modi
prioris and posterioris) i.e. the several manners of first and last, before and
after, be not worn utterly out of his memory) signifies before in worth, as
well as time, and is as truly and properly used in one of these senses, as in
the other; and when that praeposition (...), which is ante, is (as it ought to
be in James 5. 12.) taken for before in worth, as well as time, it is as
rightly rendered by above, as by before; and as (...), which is Englisht First,
sounds out a priority, antecedency, or preheminency in place or dignity, as
truly as in time or season; so (...) a superiority in power, place or worth,
and not a priority in time and season only; and so is as ordinarily and truly
Englisht above, or over all things, as before them: In proof of which since H.
D. (whether for fear or forgetfulness) was loath to allege any places that
make against him; I shall allege one (besides this of Iam. 5.) where the same
phrase (...), which he says does not signify above all things, is Englisht
truly in the self-same way, i.e. above, and not before, which shows that if it
were rendered before all things, (as I deny not but it may be) yet it there
signifies before in Excellency only, and not in time, 1 Pet. 4 8. (...), above
all things have fervent love among your selves; I could afford to grant H. D.
if he will, to read it here before all things have love; but if he do, he must
grant me that ante omnia, before all, sounds out no other then super omnia,
above all things; for love is the last thing attained to perfectly (as to Time)
and yet in worth is above, or before all knowledge, prophecy, tongues, and
other spiritual gifts, as being indeed the more excellent way then any beside
it: So above, or before all things have love, is as much as to say, with all
your gettings, chiefly see to get it; so above or before all things swear not,
is as much as to say, Chiefly take heed to this thing, that ye swear not: In
which sayings, I say above or before, because these two sound forth the same
thing in sense, and are promiscuously and indifferently used by us, as it
happens, the one being in such cases altogether the same in signification, as
the other.

And howbeit H. D. makes such ado about his ante omnia, as if he gaind some
great ground against us by reading it before all things; yet as we can without
loss allow him to read it before all; so I. I. who writes after H. D. sees so
little in H.D.s quibble in that particular, that he leaves H. D. his own
fellow-falsifier of the Truth, and therein falls in with us against him, and
reads and renders it as we do, Above all things my brethren swear not: Only so
unhappily blind he is, as to say, that such passionate Oaths are forbidden in
Ia. 5. 12. as that of David was, when he swear and vowed not to suffer his eyes
to sleep, nor his eyelids to slumber, till he found out a place for the Lord,
an habitation for the God of Jacob; in which case David swear most innocently
and solemnly, not passionately (as he spoke in the case of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.
21. 34.) if ever he swear an innocent Oath in all his days, and accordingly
performed what he swear and vowed; for though Solomon built the House, as I. I.
intimates, yet David in his affliction going up to the Floor of Araunah, there
found out, and appointed the place for the House to be built in and gave the
pattern of it, and prepared the Materials for the building, 1 Chronicles. 21. 18.
19. 20. 22. 1. 2. etc. 2 Chronicles. 28. 10. 11. and the Lord took it well at his
hand, that it was in his heart to build it, 2 Chronicles. 6. 8.

But the scruple that seems to hang behind in H. D.s mind still, and the gnat
he seems to strein at, while he swallows Camels, is this; Why should the
Apostle say, Above all things swear not? Is that a sin worse then Adultery,
Murder, and all other sins.

Rep. We do not say it is; but if it be not, are there not more ways out of
the wood, as well as into it, then one? If that be not the reason why he says,
Above all things swear not, because swearing is a sin above all sins, can no
other reason then barely that be rendered for it?

I et I. Ives resolve H. Den in that difficulty, if it be too hard for him to
resolve himself in it: For I. I. (but that he reaches too short in his
rendering of it, while he mentions passionate Oaths only, when he should have
mentioned solemn Oaths also) renders a right reason of it so far as it
reaches, and it is this, the usualness and commonness of that sin of swearing;
he says, Above all things my Brethren swear not, for it was very usual with
them (quoth I. I.) to make passionate Oaths; and so say I, and not only (in
former times) passionate, exorbitant, and profane, but other serious Oaths
also, in which (they being Jews, who were not yet so fully informed of the
ending of the Law in Christ, under which among them some Oaths were lawful)
they were apt to think they did as well in swearing so now, as they did before,
So though adultery and murder may be as bad and worse then swearing, yet the
Law being so express against them, which yet in its time allowed some kind of
swearing, it was more hard to bring them off from some ceremonious services of
the Law, that were once lawful, then from such sins as were known and hated by
them; and held accursed by the very Letter of the Law; and so he says, Above
all things take heed of Swearing, that they might know that now to be unlawful,
which in former times was accounted as lawful for them: So it is ordinary to say
to men Above all things take heed of that to which they have been long
accustomed, and with which, through heedlesness of the unlawfulness of the
thing, they are apt most easily to be overtaken.

One thing more, which is not a little considerable to evince the now
lawfulness of any Swearing is this, viz. That by the Eternal Wisdom of God (in
that Book of Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher, wherein not the Legal, but the
Evangelical duties and righteousness, and the sins and unrighteousness opposite
thereto are written of, and the spiritualities and moralities of the
Everlasting Gospel, and not the ceremonialities of the Law pointed out) whereas
To fear an Oath is made the Character of the wise, good, clean and righteous
man that sacrifices acceptably to God, To swear (at all) is made the Character
of the wicked, the unclean, the sinner that ( so) sacrifices not, Eccles. 9.
1, 2. the bare reading of which is enough to win a wise man from the sin of
Swearing; for howbeit men shall once return and discern the happiness of him
that serves God, from his woe who serves him not, yet here one event is to the
righteous and the wicked, to the good and to the clean and to the unclean, to
him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is
the sinner; as he that swears, (mark, not he that swears exorbitantly
only, or forsweareth) so he that fears an Oath.

Much more might be said to these men's shuffles; but a little strength may
serve wherewith to overturn a little strength; and as it is superfluity to
insist too long in disproving such palpable pedling, and discovering such open
subtilty, as shows it self in their two pieces; so its but mere vanity to use a
Beetle and Wedges to kill a fly.

I shall therefore conclude much what i^ ^en. Dens words, as I began: All these
things considered, the ground for solemn swearing before Magistrates in Courts
and Consistories, appears not to be so sure as it was fancyed; if (as the
Quaker says it for bids him, the Baptist says the Light within him bids
him to swear, the consent of that holy Nation (the Quakers (so called) even
those thousands among them that truly tremble at Gods Word, hated and cast out
by their Brethren, the English nominal Christians of all forms and professions,
chosen out of all the Nations, that consent to consult against them) confuteth
him; if he or others plead the Scriptures, you see how weak it is which they
say; therefore let such as choose to swear, rather then to suffer in this case,
beware, lest they hear, Who has required these things of you? Christ indeed
forbids those exorbitant and extravagant Oaths whereof the streets are now
full; but he forbids also that ceremonious, customary, superfluous,
superstitious, vain, needless, extravagant, Anti-Evangelical, Antichristian,
ordinary, frequent, forcibly imposed, common swearing, of which all Courts are
full; A sad presage of some Judgment at hand, that Prisons, Streets, Princes
and great men's Courts, and Places, Universities, Colleges, and almost all
houses, at least all Alehouses are full of Oaths, and men's discourses
interlin'd and interwoven with worse then So help me GOD; even with GOD
CONFOUND, GOD DAMN ME, and such like; and their Conversations converted from
the Truth, so totally into perjury and for swearing: It was hoped by some, that
(as H. D. speaks) his Majesty's Proclamation would have restrained; and 'twere
to be wished (say I) that the Kings said Proclamation might yet be used to
restrain such debauchery and deceit; but alas, it is nothing so; for (as H. D.
says) such men reverence his Majesty no more then the Wolf in the fable did
St. Anthony: So many Magistrates (not to say many to one, that is otherwise)
reverence the King (say I) so little, as to take as little care to execute his
good Laws and Statutes against such exorbitant Oaths, as the most exorbitant
swearers do in their common commerce to (...) them; yea, as little, as the
Justices themselves take much care (even much more then they will have thank
for at last from either God or the King, or good men) too hastily and strictly
to execute those Laws and Statutes, that are of old extant for those forced
Oaths, or those ordinary, frequent and common swearings, which are imposed by
them in their Courts and Sessions: And indeed, how can it be expected that such
as ^ear not Gods Majesty (as few of the subordinate Powers, Priests, and
Priest-beguil'd People do) should regard [as H. D. speaks] the Kings Majesty,
who is but as the drop of rain in comparison of him; or regard the Kings Laws
and Proclamations against swearing, whose Prohibitions of it are but
subordinate to Gods own, which they regard not: Besides, they are so totally
taken up now-adayes with over-executing those entangling Laws, and (as they
dream and deem them) most profitable Proclamations, that (under pain of
forfeiture of Estates) are extant for Oaths, and for swearing, that there is no
leisure left to look after those most truly profitable and wholesome Laws and
Proclamations of both God and the King, which cry out against both Oaths and
Forswearing; though in this case if they acted all as legally, honestly and
earnestly, in order to the increasing of the Poors poor-^x in every Parish, as
many do illegally, dishonestly and (...) to^ards the decrease of that little
which the righteous (...) with which more good is every way done, then with the
(...) ^venues of many wicked, who (while poor men pe^h) expend many thousands
on vainshews and kick-shaws, there might accrue ten times more money to the
maintenance of the poor, were that lowest penalty of 12. d. an Oath, according
to the Law, exacted from every profane Swearer, then will ever accrue to the
enriching of the Kings Coffers, by punishing the poor Quakers for keeping
Christ's Command, so as not to swear at all, with the loss and forfeiture to the
King (to whom the least part of it commonly comes also) of no less then All
they have.

But what times do we behold! Nothing but extremes of evil are presented to our
eyes and ears; Some do little but swear ordinarily, frequently, commonly, in
all kind of communication and conversation, not only in their usual
entercourses in Courts with Judges and Magistrates, but in their hourly
Discourses also, with other men, contrary to the Laws of both Christ and the
King, and such are most mad in prosecuting the Laws of the King for swearing,
on others who will not swear at all, contrarily to the Laws of Christ the King
of Kings. Some fill their mouths with direful execrations upon every trifle,
though therewants no good Laws against either Drunkenness, Cursing, Swearing;
or other profaneness (as the late Irish Proclamation given out at the Court at
Dublin, very well and wisely observes) but only this one, That all those good
ones that are made to curb these exorbitances, might (as carefully and speedily
as the more unwholesome ones are) be put in execution. Others fly with
fierceness upon such as for Conscience of an Oath only will not yield to
swear when w^ighty Causes are before them, wherein they could declare enough,
and with cruel threatenings vehemently urge them. Who shall heal these
distempers? Surely none can do it without the mighty Power of God break sorth
in all your Consciences (O thou much pityed King and thy Council, thy Judges,
Justices, chief Captains, Sheriffs, and all other Ministerial Officers under
Thee) to convince You and all People not only of the unlawfulness of all, but
of the utter unnecessariness of any swearing, since as it is evident, that a true
Christians word was wont to be taken for a true Testimony without an Oath, in
that Testament which we are under, 2 Cor. 13. 1. So it is no less evident, that
his witness of his own peaceableness toward the King and all men, who walks in
truth, and (to preserve his peace with Christ) makes Conscience of an Oath, is
more worthy acceptance (seeing such a one will not lie, and can do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth, 2 Cor. 3. 9.) then that of those
unpeaceaceable and deceitful spirits who walk not in truth, who making no
Conscience of either Swearing or Forswearing, will (to preserve themselves
merely from a present suffering) swear future faithfulness to that, to which
upon occasion they would prove unfaithful. Of the first of these, most
Magistrates in their Consciences do (without their Oath) believe verily they
are Gods people, and Children that will not lie, and that God also is their
Savior. As for the second, few that are concerned to take security from them
(for all their Swearing) either will, do, or can trust them one jot further
then they see them.

The Laert. in vita Pythagorae.
Ppthagoreans forbad Oaths, so did the Essaeans Philo Iudaeus.
, because they thought him A noted Liar who could not be believed without an
Oath.

The Lord open the eyes of all men; to whose Grace I commend this Work, and
resolve to remain, as well

Your Friend, ( H. Den and I. Ives) against whom I write, as Your Friend, (O
People of all sorts) to whom I write, S. Fisher.

POSTSTSCRIPT.
HEre follows so much of a Letter of Jeremiah ives, as is sufficient to show
him his deep Degeneration in Spiritual Matters; Dated about five days before
he himself took the Oath, while he (in that Case) stood in his Integrity, and
was imprisoned himself for not taking it; and directed to two of his Brethren:
In which he declares what great Scandal they brought upon the Truth, and
Offense to him, and his then Fellow Sufferers for it, by their Swerving for
fear of men, from the fear of the Great God, so as to obey their Precepts for
it, rather then Gods own plain Precept against Swearing.

Brother Pitman and Brother Shewell.
I Am at this time surprised with a holy passion; and though Jonah could not
say concerning the Gourd, that he did well to be angry; yet (if my experience in
the Word of the Lord does not deceive) I can truly say, I do well to be angry
with you; who I have had a godly jealousy of all along; viz. That you would be
as easily persuaded to part with, -- as unwilling to suffer for, your Spiritual
Liberties: Oh my Brethren! where is your first love? How unlike the Christians
in former times are you? whose zeal was so hot for God, that their eyes
prevented the morning, that thereby they might prevent the rage of the
adversary, who (as it is now) Commanded them no more to worship in the Name of
the Lord. -- I always did conclude, that those that would -- quit the Cause of
Righteousness -- would quit the Ways of Holiness, as yesterday sad experience
has taught, to the perpetual joy of your adversaries, and the sadning the
hearts, and adding afflictions to the bonds of the Prisoners of the Lord: I do
therefore conjure you, as you will answer the great God another day, to
consider, That now is the time for you to look to your Ministry, and to the
Flock over which the Lord has made you overseers, that you may be able through
grace to say, You are clear from the blood of all men; and observe, that God is
now come to prove you, to see whether you will keep his commandments or not.
Remember when that Apostates Case was debated, you had no zeal nor indignation
against him, but you smothered all with this, If it were in a matter of Faith
and Worship that he had fallen from, you would have been as one man against it:
Well, behold the Lord is come home to you; the matter now is purely for
worshipping God; now God is proving to see if you will obey him or no, and did
not yesterdays work witness, that you were willing to prefer the fear of a man
that must dye, before the fear of the great God; and the fear of them that can
kill the body, before the fear of the Lord that can cast body and soul into
Hell? I have no more to say but this, That your Cowardly Temporizing and
complying with the precepts of Men, makes me jealous, that your fear toward
the Lord is taught by the precepts of Men: I would not be too censorious, but
my Grounds are great, and my Bonds are my Crown, but your, Cowardly spirit is
my great Cross: you little think what a scandal it is amongst us to hear it
affirmed, that one of you should say, You had rather a given fifty pound then
have sworn, and yet swear that you swear willingly. Oh for the Lords sake do
somewhat that may roll away this Reproach; which that you may, is the prayers
of your Brother, who could be contented to write himself, your Companion in
Tribulation,

Ier. Ives.
Ian. 14. 1660. Brother Ward my Fellow-prisoner desires to present his love to
you, and so do some others.




Which Letter above printed, is here represented, as a Looking-Glass for J.
Ives to see himself in: not so much to shame him, as (if yet it may be) by the
sight thereof (which being his own, may yossibly have more force upon him then
another man's) to recover him again to that true Honor of taking the shame of
his fall to himself, and also of suffering shame with the Saints for the Name
of Christ, which he once stood in, and since very easily fell from; and that he
may remember from whence he is fallen, and repent, and do his first works (for
his last have not been found perfect before God) and do somewhat that may roll
away that reproach he has raised against that Righteous Cause now suffered for
by the Saints, lest the Light be at last totally taken from him; For as Humanum
est errare, so Humanius nihil est quam errantem revocare: Or at least, (if J.
I. be too far gone, and past recovery) then to recover the Honor of that Truth
which, to the utmost that in him is, he has dishonored by his shameful
shuffles; that is to say, 1. By his shuffling departure from it in his sinful
passion of slavish fear of man, so soon after his holy passion ( as he calls
it) of Anger against his Brethrens less shameful ( because less sinful)
departure; for J. I.'s suffering for it first, as (its likely) they two did
not, declares his Conscience was convinced that he should not swear. 2dly. By
his shuffling so much to defend and vindicate that same Evil of Swearing, when
it became his own, which he had but a little before so egregiously condemned,
wh^le it was found not in himself; but in his Brethren; and this in order
merely to the palliating of his mere painted Piety in that his paultry
departure: For he that builds again those legal things which once himself
destroyed, therein makes himself no small transgressor, Gal: 2. 18. 3dly. By his
shuffling so much (though with as little success among such whose eyes are in
their head) being once departed from the Truth himself, to draw all others
after him into the Ditch. Had he only (when he saw no other way to escape
suffering) contented himself rather to swear to his own inward loss, then to
suffer loss outwardly for refusing it, his recovery might likely have been more
hopeful, and his Relapse less hurtful in all likelihood then now it is: But
seeing he sets himself so zealously to solicit others to sin by swearing
together with him, the danger of its infecting others who are set to see with
his eyes, as well as the desperateness of his Disease, in respect of himself,
calls for a more desperate Cure, and searching Corrosive, then need else be
used: And if by all that is, in no less then true love to his soul, though
never so sharply, tried toward him; his wound appears to be uncurable, then

Ense recidendum est, ne pars s^cera trahatur.
THE END.

