A POSITION AND TESTIMONY AGAINST All Swearing UNDER THE GOSPEL.

In which may be seen,

I. That Christ has forbidden all sorts of Oaths.

II. What Christ has substituted instead of an Oath.

III. Reasons for that Prohibition and Substitution.

With an Answer to all the material Objections that are, or may be, alleged
from the Scriptures.

London: Printed in the Year, 1692.

To the READER.
COnsidering the Testimonies and Sufferings of several Christians and
conscientious Persons formerly, against all Swearing; and now observing of
late, that not only the Lawfulness of Oaths themselves has been disputed and
pleaded for, as by the Athenians and others, but also the Definition and Nature
of an Oath; and what an Oath is and what not, have been started and took notice
of more than formerly; and also considering, on one side, of the abounding of
Swearing and detestable Oaths, among many in this Nation, enough to draw down
Judgments and divine Vengeance upon it, as have been lately, for an Example, in
other places beyond the Seas; and also, on the other side, observing the
Moderation of many, and that in Authority too, in Condescension to a People
that have formerly suffered, because they durst not Swear at all. I could not
be easy in my mind, until I had Written and Published this to the World, hoping
it may be of some use and service to most, if not all Men. As first to the
common and profane Swearers, that now so much abound upon the Earth, by
showing such the great danger they hazard thereby to their Souls (besides the
Judgments in general they may draw down upon themselves and others in the Land)
And, Secondly, to such as are in Authority, by proposing and demonstrating to
them, by evident Reasons and eminent Authorities, the danger of imposing Oaths,
or any higher Asseverations or Expressions (instead thereof) than plain and
simple Speech; which I desire all moderate Magistrates, that love and truly
affect Liberty of Conscience (for whom I have great Respect and Affection)
seriously to consider of. And, Thirdly, to those that conscientiously scruple
any Oath, by showing such the danger of venturing to use, instead of an Oath,
any higher form or manner of Speech, than Christ has prescribed and allowed
them, lest they be drawn into an Oath unawares. So wishing and desiring the
good of every one, and that the common Swearers may leave off Swearing, and the
legal or more solemn Swearers be satisfied with Evangelical Truth speaking, and
those that are come to such Truth speaking, may never look back from the
simplicity of that Testimony: I remain a Friend to all, especially the
moderate, sincere and ingenuous, of what Profession or Persuasion soever they
may be.

Philothrenes.

The Position.
No Man ought to Swear (under the Gospel Dispensation) any kind of Oath, in any
Case; neither by reason of any Command from a lawful Magistrate; nor upon any
other occasion or respect whatsoever; for these following Reasons.

I. BECAUSE Christ Jesus, whom all Men ought to obey, and fear to break his
Commands, has commanded, Not to Swear at all, Mat. 5. 34. and instead thereof,
in Verse 37. commands, That our Speech be Yea, yea; and Nay, nay; and says,
That whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil. Now any Oath is more than
these; and therefore being also forbad before, it must be of evil.

II. In Mat. 18. 16. in Case of Trespass, where Evidences of Witnesses is
required, Christ's Command is, That in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses
every word may be established: And not by the Oath of two or three Witnesses;
nor yet in the Mouth of two or three Swearers.

III. In James 5. 12. The Apostle commands, Above all things not to Swear,
neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath; but instead thereof
bids, That our yea, be yea, and our nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation.
Here the Apostle James is also very express to the purpose, agreeing with
Christ's Command before in Mat. 5. 34. Therefore he that Swears any Oath, does
quite contrary to the Apostle's express Command, and must hazard Condemnation.

IV. A true Christian's Oath is needless; because such an one dare no more tell
a Lie, than he dare to Forswear himself (if he should Swear:) And an evil Man's
or false Christian's Oath, is worthy of no more Credit than a Lier; because he
that dares to break his Word or be a false Witness, in a solemn affirming or
denying of any thing, has no fear of God nor awe upon his Conscience; and
therefore, what should make such an one fear or scruple to break his Oath, if
he Swears? Therefore, now, to what purpose is the use of Oaths or Swearing,
among those that profess Christianity?

OBJECTIONS.
Objection 1. In Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and in 10. 20. God commanded to Swear by his
Name; therefore Christ did not forbid such Oaths as was by the Name of God; for
the Father and the Son are one, and Immutable (or unchangeable) in their Nature
and Will; and therefore how could the Son forbid that which the Father had
commanded?

Answer, That Command of God was to them that were under the Law, to prevent
them from swearing by Idols; and not to such that are under the Gospel, to whom
Christ spoke: And therefore this proves no contrariety between the Father and
the Son, any more than the Sons taking away the first Things, that were
commanded by God under the Law, that he might establish the second, which he
himself commanded under the Gospel, as in Heb. 10. 9. See also in Heb. 7. 12,
18. and 8. 13.

Object. 2. In Isaiah 19. 18. In a Prophecy relating to Gospel times, as seems
manifest from Verse 20. it is said, That five Cities in the Land of Egypt shall
speak the Language of Canaan, and Swear by the Lord of Hosts; therefore how can
Swearing, by the Lord of Hosts, be forbidden by Christ in Gospel times?

Answ. If Swearing by the Lord of Hosts be here prophesied of to be in Gospel
times, then by the same Reason from Verse 21. to do Sacrifice and Oblation,
must be also in Gospel times, as is there said the Egyptians shall do; and if
so, how is the old Testament, wherein were the Sacrifices and Oblations,
abrogated and disannulled when the new Testament came? As in Heb. 8. 13.

Object. 3. In Isa. 45. 23. The Lord speaking concerning such times, as wherein
all the ends of the Earth shall be saved (which surely must be in Gospel times)
said, That every Knee shall bow to me, and every Tongue shall Swear: Therefore
some Swearing must be lawful in Gospel times.

Answ. The Apostle Paul, in Romans 14. 11. who, without doubt, knew how to
interpret this Prophecy, yet he would not express it in such Terms as might
contradict Christ's general Prohibition to Swear in Mat. 5. 34. therefore he
words it thus, Every Knee shall bow to me, and every Tongue shall confess to
God: Here the Apostle has changed the word Swear, that was figuratively spoken
in the time of the Law, into Confess, in which it was to be fulfilled in the
time of the Gospel. Therefore now it may be evident from hence, that no
Sentence or Prophecy spoken by the Prophets, though expressed in Mosaical Terms,
or in such Terms as were under the Law, ought to be expounded in any wise, to
contradict any of Christ's general Commands or Prohibitions; but on the
contrary, they must be expressed in Gospel Terms, that agree therewith; as is
manifest by the Apostle's Example aforesaid.

Object. 4. In Isa. 65. 16. In a Prophecy relating to such times wherein new
Heavens and a new Earth shall be created (which must be in the last times) it
is said, He that Swears in the Earth, shall Swear by the true God: Therefore
it is lawful in the last times, which are under the Gospel, to Swear by the
true God.

Answ. If according to the Apostle Paul's Example, before noted in Romans 14. 11.
we change the word [Swear] by the true God, into [Confess] unto the true God,
we may interpret it right, and in Gospel terms, and then we shall not make the
Prophet seem to contradict Christ, in Mat. 5. 34. who is Lord of all the
Prophets, Apostles and Angels, And whom we are especially to hear and obey in
all things, Act. 3. 22. And also to confess him, Phil. 2. 10. And therefore if
there should seem at any time a disagreement between the Sayings of Christ and
the Prophets, or the Apostles either, Christ's Sayings ought not be strained to
comply with theirs (who were his Servants) but on the contrary, their Sayings
must yield and comply to his, who is their Lord, and whom we ought especially
to hear and obey in all things, as aforesaid.

Object. 5. In Jerem. 12. 16, 17. it is said, concerning the Gentiles, That if
they will learn the ways of my People, to Swear by my Name (the Lord lives, as
they taught my People to Swear by Baal) then shall they be built in the midst
of my People; But if they will not obey, then will I utterly pluck up and
destroy that Nation, says the Lord. Now here is a Promise of Acceptance to
those that will learn to Swear by God's Name, and a Threatening of utter
Destruction to such as will not; therefore, now, how dare any refuse to Swear
by the Name of God, upon a solemn and a lawful Account?

Answ. This was spoken under the Law, wherein Swearing was; and though it was
spoken to the Gentiles, yet it was to such Gentiles as taught Israel to Swear
by Baal; and which must be in Baal's time, that was long before the Gospel
times: Therefore what is this to Christians under the Gospel? But if it could
be proved that this Prophecy did relate to the Gentiles under the Gospel, then,
according to Paul's Exposition of the word Swear under the Gospel dispensation,
it must be expounded, that they must learn the ways of his People to Confess to
his Name, and that he lives; which is the duty of all Christians to do, as in
Mat. 10. 32. Romans 10. 9, 10. and 14. 11.

Object. 6. If Christ's Prohibition to Swear be so general, that no Oath is
lawful to Swear, in any Case, under the Gospel; why did the Apostle in Heb. 6.
16. say, For Men verily Swear by the greater, and an Oath for Confirmation is
to them an end of all Strife?

Answ. The Apostle spoke of such Men as were under the Law, and by way of
Similitude why they used an Oath, in such times as God confirmed his Promise to
Abraham by an Oath: Now here is no Command in these words of the Apostle for
Men to Swear; nor any more tolleration for Men to Swear any Oath, that live
according to the Gospel, than there is tolleration in Jam. 3. 9. for any to
Curse Men, because the Apostle there says, With the Tongue we bless Men, and
therewith curse we Men; yet this ought not so to be; as is manifest in the next
Verse.

Object. 7. If Christ's Saying in Mat. 5. 37. Whatsoever is more than these
comes of evil, proves all Oaths to be evil, because they are more than barely
Yea, yea; and Nay, nay; how is it that God has Sworn himself, and commanded
Men to Swear, as in Genesis 22. 16. Deuteronomy. 16. 13? Surely God never did, or
commanded any thing that came from evil.

Answ. The doing of any thing after Christ has forbidden it, is from evil,
though not before; because the breaking of Christ's Command is from evil, and
from the Devil; for none else will tempt any one so to do (except such as are
his Servants and obey him.) Under the Law, God allowed an Eye for an Eye, and a
Tooth for a Tooth, which then could not come from evil, because God never
allowed any thing that came from evil; but after Christ had forbidden this,
with other things that were allowed under the Law, and commanded the contrary
instead thereof, the breaking of his Command comes of evil, and from the Devil
that tempts Men thereunto.

Object. 8. If all Oaths are forbidden by Christ, and accounted then to be from
evil; how could the Angel have Sworn, in Rev. 10. 6? Which was after Christ's
Prohibition, in Mat. 5. 34.

Answ. That Angel had a peculiar Commission that extended through the Law and
the Prophets, wherein Swearing was, and spoke as God's Representative or
Ambassador (which would be a presumption for Men to imitate;) for as God
aforetime confirmed his Promise unto Abraham, and to his whole Seed, by an
Oath, Genesis 22. 16. so again by his Angel in Rev. 10. 6, 7. he seems in like
manner (as by an Oath) to confirm the same Promise, that it should then quickly
be fulfilled, viz. that Time should be no longer; but that the Mystery of God
should be finished, as he had declared to his Servants the Prophets; therefore
that was no Example for us to follow. However, if any shall still think this
Answer not sufficient or full enough to the Matter, let it be further
considered, That we read no where that Christ forbad Angels to Swear; but he
plainly commanded Men not to Swear at all: So the evil lies in breaking
Christ's Command, and in Men that so do, to whom his Command extended.

Object. 9. Christ in Mat. 5. 34. forbad only such Oaths as are made by the
Creatures, as by Heaven, Earth, etc. because he enumerates and mentions some
such created things, and all vain and rash Oaths in familiar Discourse; because
he says, in Verse 37. Let your Communication be Yea, yea; and Nay, nay; and
whatsoever is more than these (viz. in our Communication) comes of evil.

Answ. To Swear by the Creatures was forbidden in the Law, because then none
ought to Swear by any thing but by the Name of God; and to Swear by God's Name,
in common Discourse, is a taking of his Name in vain: But Christ, in the first
place, before he mentioned any Creature, forbad such Oaths as were to be
performed unto the Lord, in old time that was under the Law; which surely were
not by any Creature; but by his Name; nor yet vain and rash Oaths, for such
were never commanded to be performed unto the Lord. Moreover Christ forbad
Swearing by God the Creator, when he forbad Swearing by Heaven, Earth, etc.
because he gives that for the Reason why we should not Swear by these
Creatures, ( viz.) because Heaven is the Throne of God, and the Earth is his
Footstool; and none can Swear by the Throne of God, but he must Swear by his
Creator that sits thereon; as is manifest in Mat. 23. 22.

Object. 10. If no kind of Oath be lawful to Swear; why did the Apostle Paul
use such a form of Oath, in 1 Cor. 15. 31. as in saying, I protest, by your
rejoicing, I die daily?

Answ. There is no word for I protest in the Greek: Moreover if these words
could be made an Oath, then the Apostle must of necessity have Sworn by their
Rejoicing, and so by a Creature which was always unlawful; and therefore this
cannot be accounted an Oath, without reflecting upon the Apostle as a
Transgressor, both against the Law and Gospel.

Object. 11. If no Oath must be used, in any Case; how can Justice be
administered according to the Rule of the Gospel ( viz.) by the Testimony of two
or three Witnesses, Mat. 18. 16. in many Cases where there is but one single
Witness, by which the Controversy can be decided? As for Example, in one Case
instanced in Exodus 22. 10, 11. If a Man deliver unto his Neighbor an Ass, or
an Ox, or a Sheep, or any Beast to keep; and it die, or be hurt, or driven
away, no Man seeing it: Then shall an Oath of the Lord be between them both,
that he has not put his hand to his Neighbors Goods; and the Owner of it
shall accept thereof, and he shall not make it good. Now if in this, or such a
Case, the Man's bare word be taken for the Proof of his Innocence, the
Controversy will be decided by one only Witness, directly against Christ's
Precept in Mat. 18. 16. That in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every word
may be established. Therefore, in such Case, the guiltless Party must take in
God to Witness with him ( viz. by his Oath) that so the Matter may be decided
by two Witnesses, at least, according to Christ's Precept aforesaid, to wit, by
him that makes the Oath, and by God, whom he calls to Witness with him.

Answ. In such a Case if a Man does Swear, and call God to Witness with him
unto the Matter, yet this will not make it to be decided according to Christ's
Precept; for Christ says, Take with thee one or two more; that in the Mouth of
two or three Witnesses, every word may be established. Now the one or two more,
besides himself, must be humane Persons, and not Gods; except the Party can
call two Gods to witness with him, which is absurd to suppose; and also, in
such a Case, where there is two or three Witnesses, it may be decided by
Christ's Rule, without their Oaths: Therefore Christ's Rule, to have two or
three Witnesses, extends only to such Cases as is possible to have so many
Witnesses, and lays no necessity upon Swearing to the deciding thereof,
according to, or by, his Precept. And, moreover, if one Swearing, calls God to
witness with him; how is the Matter in Controversy decided, by the Mouth of two
Witnesses, according to Christ's Precept, when only by the Mouth of one Man,
every word is spoken, to testify the truth in question? For if God should
testify or reveal the truth of such a Matter in question immediately by his own
Mouth, there would be no need of any Man's Testimony to strengthen his
Evidence; because no Man can add any thing to Gods immediate Revelation or
Testimony, which is perfect of its self.

Object. 12. If Christ's Prohibition to Swear in Mat. 5. 34. be so general,
that it admits of no limit or exception to the Sentence, so that none ought to
Swear, in any Case, because the words are general; then, by the same Reason,
none can lay up for himself any Treasure on Earth, nor take thought for his
Life what to eat or drink, etc. nor yet take thought (or care) for the Morrow,
in any case, without breaking some other of Christ's express Commands in the
same Sermon, as in Mat. 6. 19. 25. 34. all which are as general as that against
Swearing, in Mat. 5. 34. and then if it be so; how can any be industrious in
their Employments and Trades, and take care to provide for their Families;
which he that does not is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8? Therefore for any
Persons to put such a general and unlimited Construction on any of Christ's
Commands, when, according to such of their own unlimited sense, they themselves
are daily guilty of breaking some other of Christ's Commands, and so condemn or
dissallow that in one Case which they do and must of necessity allow in another
Case, is ridiculous and great disingenuity and confusion.

Answ. Christ forbidding us to lay up Treasures for our selves on Earth, etc.
extends only to such laying up earthly Treasure as to set our Hearts on it; for
our Hearts ought only to be with our heavenly Treasure, as is manifest from
Verse 20, 21. Therefore, if any one can lay up things on Earth, where his Heart
is not with them, Christ's Command extends not to him, because such things are
not properly his Treasure; for the word Treasure most properly signifies, that
which is most precious in his esteem. Likewise, Christ forbidding us to take
thought (or care) for our Lives, etc. and for the Morrow, is not to be anxious
or too much careful, or distracted or over-troubled in ones mind about them
(which is also a setting our Hearts upon them) for so the words in the Greek
(...) and (...), properly signify; and therefore these Prohibitions are not so
general, as that in Mat. 5. 34. concerning Swearing, which is also as full
against all Oaths whatsoever, both in the Greek and Latin as in the English:
However if it should be granted (for Argument sake) that those Prohibitions
aforesaid, are as general in all Cases as that of Swearing; yet this will not
prove that of Swearing any whit the less general, nor that any Person ought to
commit Sin, in breaking a Command of Christ's in any one thing, because they
may do so in some other things; but rather such ought to repent and leave off
those things wherein they do, or have broke his Commands (if it plainly so
appears) and be more careful afterward of keeping all his Commands. But if it
be impartially and ingenuously considered, there is but little sign that those
Persons are very careful of laying up for themselves Treasures on Earth, or
taking thought for their Lives, or for the Morrow, who hazard the losing of all
their earthly Things and Enjoyments, and their Lives and Liberty too, because
they dare not do that, which they believe, will be a breaking of Christ's
Command, as aforesaid.

Object. 13. If all Oaths are forbidden by Christ in Mat. 5. 34. how could the
Apostle Paul (who without question) understood the extent of Christ's words,
and would not do any thing contrary thereunto, so often call God to witness to
the Truth of what he said (which is a formal Oath) as God is my Witness, Romans
1. 9? I call God for a Record upon my Soul, 2 Cor. 1. 23. Before God, I lie
not, Gal. 1. 20. God is my Record, Phil. 1. 8. Ye are Witnesses, and God also,
1 These. 2. 10. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not; my Conscience also bearing
me Witness in the Holy Ghost, Romans 9. 1.

Answ. If simply the saying God, or any thing else, is my Witness; or only the
mere calling God, or any Creature for a Witness or Record, etc. on any Account,
be a formal Oath, then Paul Swore by the Men he wrote to, in 2 These. 2. 10. as
well as by God, when he said, Ye are Witnesses; and God also. And by the same
Reason he Swore by his Conscience in Romans 9. 1. when he said, My Conscience
also bearing me Witness, etc. And also by the like Reason, Moses Swore by
Heaven and Earth, in Deuteronomy. 41. 26. when he said to the People, I call Heaven
and Earth to Witness against you this day: All which would render Paul and
Moses too, to Swear by the Creatures; which those that plead against the
universality of Christ's Prohibition themselves, confess, were always unlawful,
and a breach of Christ's Command in the Gospel, and also of God's Command under
the Law; when he permitted Men to Swear only by his Name, according to their
own Explication and Interpretation of them.

So if such Expressions could be proved Oaths, it is manifest that we ought not
to imitate them for the Reasons aforesaid; neither are such Examples of the
Prophets and Apostles sufficient or enough then, to invalidate to us now the
Command of Christ, for the abolishing all Swearing, no more than Paul's then
shaving his Head at Cenchrea, because he had a Vow, Acts 18. 18. or his
purifying himself in the Temple, and offering with the four Jews that had a
Vow, Acts 21. 26. or his circumcising of Timothy because of the Jews, Acts 16.
3. can warrant us to the Observation of those legal Rites and Ceremonies now;
nor indeed ought we to imitate the Prophets or Apostles in any particular
thing, without having any Warrant or Precept to us for the same, especially
when it seems against any general and positive Command in Scripture, and most
especially when it seems directly against any positive Command or Prohibition
of Christ, who is Lord of all the Prophets, Apostles and Angels, and whom we
are especially to hear and obey in all things, Acts 3. 32. for though they were
exemplary for us to imitate and follow, vet it must be in such things that we
are sure they were followers of Christ, and that are alike binding to all
Christians, according to the Apostle Paul's own Exhortation, in 1 Cor. 11. 1.
and not otherwise, as in Gal. 1. 8, 9.

But however, to find a better Exposition of the Expressions, supposed to be
Oaths aforementioned, than to make the Apostle and Prophets transgressors, as
aforesaid, let it be seriously observed what the Definition or Nature and
Substance of an Oath is, which I here propose to all Men, as well to the
Ingenious and Learned, as to the Unlearned, to consider of, with my Reasons
hereafter following.

An Oath, or the Substance of an Oath, is a Religious Tie, or a Sacred Bond,
when it is given for a Temporal or Earthly Thing: As the beseeching or invoking
of God, or any thing reverenced and esteemed for a Deity, or the expressing or
naming any superior thing as a Surety, that most properly belongs to God,
which is not in any Man's power to dispose of, and thereby binding the Soul as
a Pawn or Pledge for a Security to an Inferior, for confirming the truth of any
Human or Temporal Matter in question is a Swearing.

And this is also confirmed by the Original, or Etymology of the Word Juro, to
Swear, from the best Authorities, viz. Juro ex Jure vel quasi Jovem Oro, aut
testem invoco -- Quod jurare proprie sit ita sancte promittere ac si jus esset.
-- Seu juris servandi causa religiose assevero. By which it seems, that
Swearing being first among the Heathens, was an invoking or using the Name of
their God (or that which they reverenced as a Deity) for a Bond-tye or Security
of their Affirmations and Promises, whereby they bound their Soul to their Idol
as a Pledge, for the truth and certainty thereof; so likewise when the
Israelites were permitted to Swear by the true God, only for a time, to draw
them off from their Idols; they, by the same reason, bound their Souls to him
as a Pledge for a Security (which was better than to be bound to an Idol). And
also by the Latin definition of the word Juramentum; viz. Juramentum est
aliquod mente Juratur. An Oath is a bond or security of something understood in
the Mind, binding the Soul and implying a Curse, in case of not then speaking
the truth, though not perhaps so plainly expressed in Words at length, as it is
but in few Oaths.

And this seems further manifest, from Mat. 5. 34, 35, 36. where Christ gives
some reason why they should not Swear by Heaven, Earth, nor Jerusalem, viz.
because one was God's Throne, and the other his Footstool, and the last his
City; and none could Swear by any of these Creatures, that most properly
belonged to God, but he must Swear by the Creator, as is plain from Mat. 23.
22. He that Swears by Heaven Swears by the Throne of God, and by him that sits
thereon: So here is a Swearing by God implied, and consequently a binding the
Soul, when only Heaven and a Creature is used or mentioned to Swear by; the
like Reason is, when one Swears by his Head, because our Head and Body too are
none of our own, but the Lords, Romans 14. 8. and so properly belong to God. And,
therefore, this is plain to all Men, That none ought, in any Case, to assign
that for a Surety, Pawn or Pledge (though but an Earthly one, and much more a
greater and higher) which is another and none of their own; nor that any one
can lawfully give any thing which is not in his power to dispose of.

And so now seeing the nature of an Oath is such a binding of the Soul, for a
Pawn or Pledge in temporal Affairs; was there not great reason why Christ
discontinued the use of them, among Christians, by his Prohibition in Mat. 5.
34? For let it be considered, whether it would not be an unreasonable thing for
any one to pawn his Soul for, or upon, any temporal matter, where there is no
visible or intelligible proportion between the value of the Pawn or Pledge, and
of the thing it was pawned for? And also, would it not be a dangerous thing to
run such a great hazard, in case of any mistake, as human Sense and
Understanding is subject to, (though not designedly) as is frequently seen among
those that Swear in Courts and before Magistrates, notwithstanding the Bond of
their Oaths? And, also, might not this be one Reason too, why the Apostle James
commanded the Brethren, That, above all things, they should not Swear, seeing
it is one of the most dangerous of all things, for any one so slightly to put
his Soul into such a hazard, (like laying ones Soul for a Wager) by his own
consent and agreement? And would not all esteem it a very unreasonable thing of
any Man that should require a thousand Pounds for a Pledge or Pawn, for any
thing but of the value of a Shilling? And yet this would be far short of the
Proportion of the value of a Soul, to any earthly temporal Matter. And does it
not also show, that such as will give such an extraordinary Pledge for a small
and trivial matter (in comparison of the Pledge) when duly considered, esteem
but lightly of their Souls, or of what they Pawn; as Esau did, when he sold his
Birthright for a Mess of Pottage?

And to prove that a Surety, Pawn or Pledge of the Soul, or of eternal and
heavenly things, only makes or is properly called an Oath, when it is applied
to, or offered, or given for temporal and earthly Matters: Observe, That an
Oath, according to the Apostle in Heb. 6. 16. is such a Bond as is made by a
greater; which, consequently may not be so when made by a lesser. Therefore,
the same kind of Speech or Expressions, that are an Oath, being made b^ a
greater, may not so be when made by a lesser; as by these following Instances.

First, The calling God to Witness, to bind any Affirmation, Promise or Denial,
especially when relating to temporal and lesser Matters, most understanding
Men, and especially the Learned, in most Ages, accounted it an Oath; but the
calling a Man to Witness to any Matter or Fact, or to any Affirmation, Promise
or Denial; who counts it a Swearing? Or that one Swear by the Man so called?

Secondly, To say, So do God to me, and more also if I do not such a thing, is
an Oath, 2 Samuel 3. 35. But to say to a Man, So do thou to me and more also, if
I do not such a thing, who will account it an Oath by the Man?

Thirdly, To say, Our Life for yours I will do such a thing, is an Oath, Josh
2. 14, 17, 20. But for one to say, My Horse for thine I will do such a thing;
who will say that such an one Swears by his Horse? Except any will say, That
every one that lays a Wager always Swears by the Wager that he lays.

Hence may be seen that a temporal Surety and Security is only proper for
temporal Matters, and such a Bond or Security is not accounted an Oath; but
whatsoever is higher, as things of a divine and eternal Nature, are too high
and great to be offered for a Surety and Security for temporal and earthly
Things; and therefore such an extraordinary Bond or Security for such an
improper use is accounted, and properly called an Oath.

Therefore, according to the definition and nature of an Oath, before
mentioned, The invoking or calling God for a Witness, and many other high
Expressions of the Apostle's, that he used only in treating of divine Matters;
and indeed the appealing (after any manner) to God as Judge, or any ways using
his sacred Name, or mentioning any thing whereby it may be employed, as by
Heaven, Earth, etc. being only designed for a further strengthening and
confirming the Truth of any Speech, Affirmation, Promise or Denial, when
relating only to humane, worldly and inferior Matters, may be granted to be an
Oath; but otherwise not so, when used only upon a divine and religious Account.
For the same Words and Expressions, either such as are found in the Scriptures,
or others that are commonly used in some Cases, which are good and lawful in
themselves, when rightly used, may be an Oath or no Oath, according to their
application, design and intent in using them; as will further appear by the
Instances, Reasons and Demonstrations following.

1. If one should say in Prayer, So help me God, that I may walk in thy ways;
here the words [So help me God] who will say are an Oath? But when these words
[So help me God] are used to bind or confirm any Speech, or the truth thereof,
in humane and temporal Affairs, they make up the common National Oath, for
Jurymen, Witnesses, etc.

2. Likewise if one should say (religiously speaking) By Christ's Blood the
Saints are justified, or By Christ's Life they are saved, Romans 5. 9, 10. Who
will say, That there is the least Sign of any thing of the nature of an Oath in
these Affirmations, or in them words soused? But if any one should use these
words [ By Christ's Blood] or [ By Christ's Life] in Affirmation or Denying, or
in promising any thing relating to humane, worldly or temporal Matters; it
would amount to an Oath of an high degree, or of the worst sort, that would be
very irksome and burdensome for all sober and religious Persons to hear.

3. Also, if one should say simply, in a religious and serious manner, upon
some good occasion, By God I am still alive and enjoy my health (meaning his
Power, Favor or Mercy) who will account this an Oath? But if a Drunkard or
common Swearer should use these very words in his usual manner of Speaking,
when only to confirm the truth of his Speech; or in his accustomed manner of
Swearing, and express all the same Sentence too; would not all that should hear
him, grant that he Swore by his Maker, that he was still alive and enjoyed his
health?

4. To say or religiously to affirm, As the Lord lives he will preserve those
that fear his Name, and continually trust in him from the snares of the evil
one; who will account it an Oath? But for one to say, affirm or promise, any
thing relating to humane and temporal Matters, in this manner; As the Lord
lives such a thing is, or shall be done, etc. is called an Oath; as is
manifest in 1 Samuel 19. 6, 20. 3. and 28. 10. and also in Jer. 38. 16.

5. To assert or promise any thing, by the words [ God is my Witness or Record]
when it relates only to humane and temporal Matters, and to satisfy such
incredulity or distrust, that will be content with no less security than by the
Name of God, may be an Oath, because his Name is here mentiond and used as a
Bond or Surety for an earthly and inferior Matter; but for one sensibly and
sincrely to say, God is my Witness or Record that I have lived in his fear; who
can account it an Oath?

6. Though the Apostle Paul, Called God for a Record upon his Soul, to confirm
his Assertion of sparing the Brethren, being in some divine and religious
respect, as seems manifest in the next Chapter, and therefore might not then be
an Oath in the Apostle: Yet what good Christians, in imitation of these words,
durst promise or say in any thing relating to common and humane Affairs, I call
God for a Record upon my Soul, that I will do, or I will not perform, such a
thing; would not this be as great an Oath, as if he had instead thereof used
the words [As the Lord liveth] or the words [So help me God?]

7. Likewise, though the Apostle's saying, Now the things which I write unto
you, Behold, before God, I lie not, might not be an Oath in the Apostle,
because he treated and wrote of religious and divine Things, in which respect
Gods Name, and the appealing to him too, may be lawfully used by sincere
Christians, in many Cases: As for Instance, one may truly say, I speak or do a
thing before, or in the presence of God, if he be then livingly sensible
thereof to assist him in the performing it; yet if another should speak the
same words, that was not livingly sensible of his presence at that time, he
would Speak (if not Swear) falsely, as well as he that said, The Lord lives
(when he was not sensible thereof) Swore falsely; though the Lord lives, is as
true in it self, as that nothing can be spoken or done but it must be so before
God, as that it cannot be hid from his Presence. And, further, for one to
promise or say, Before God, I will pay thee that Money; or, Before God, I will
not stay here; who will not account either of these Expressions to be an Oath?

And, moreover, it may be observed, that being the Apostle used the word
[behold] before the words [before God] and which, in the Greek, is without any
Point or Comma after the word (...), for behold, and has also the word (...)
signifying because, or that, which is omitted in the English, as (...). This
Expression may be translated or understood in a moderater sense than it is
commonly taken in the English; as, Behold, before God, that I do not lie or
speak false; as much as to say, I do not speak false in these things I write
unto you, because I am now sensibly before, or in the Presence of God, and
therefore I cannot mistake (or be disappointed in the truth thereof, as the
Greek word (...) may also signify) at such a time. And let it be further
considered, that to use the words [before God] to promise any humane, terrene
or earthly Matter by, cannot be lawful or safe, in any sense however; for in
the first place, although a Christian may sometimes say, or has truly used them
words in the Present and Preter Tense; yet who can appoint a time in the
future, when he will approach to, or be sensibly before God, to perform any
humane Matter in his presence? And if in saying, Before God I will perform such
a Matter, could be only understood in such a common sense, as that all things
are and must be performed before him, because nothing can be hid from his
presence, it would be superfluous and using his Name in vain; because nothing
can be done, but it must be before him; as well the breaking of the Promise, as
the performing it: Or if such a Sense be excluded (the possibility of which is
not easily to be conceived) whereby God is appealed to, or invoked to take
notice thereof, as a Judge, and so consequently as a just Revenger, in case of
nonperformance of the Matter promised, which is of the nature of an Oath; to
what purpose would it be for any one to use or require such words for a
strengthening or confirming the said Promise? So by this Reason also it would be
an using or taking God's Name in vain.

8. And also, though the Apostle Paul in Romans 9. 3. after having just before
mentioned his godly Sorrow and Exercise for the Israelites, etc. said, I could
wish my self Accursed from Christ for my Brethren, etc. Yet what good Christian
durst imitate or use these words of the Apostle, in such a different sense as
he used them, as to wish himself Accursed from Christ to confirm the truth of
any Affirmation or Promise, and most especially when relating to humane and
temporal Affairs? And if any one should promise or say, I wish my self Accursed
from Christ, if I speak false, or if I do not perform such a thing; what sort
of Oaths would any sincere Christian count worser than such an Expression,
though the Party should excuse himself, by improperly pleading the Apostle's
Example for it, as beforementioned?

So it is plain, from what has been beforementioned, That we are not to
imitate the Apostles in any such extraordinary Expressions, nor yet in every
particular and extraordinary thing they might say or do, except upon such like
occasion, and that we had the same Authority or Permission, or a Command or
Precept therefore; for we are only to imitate and be Followers of them, and all
Christians one of another, in all such general Duties, as is plain we are all
alike commanded by our, and their Lord and Master, and not otherwise: For
because one Christian has a Gift and Command to Preach, it does not therefore
follow, that all other Christians must imitate him and be Preachers too; nor
because another may have a Gift of Prophesying, it will not follow, that all
the rest must be Propheciers too, by only imitating him.

But to come closer to the Matter still, if possible, and to answer the most
critical Objections as may or can be: If any would yet imitate any of the said
Apostles Expressions, in their Epistles, and use Gods sacred Name for a Witness
to, or a Confirmation of any thing; surely they ought to do it in the like
Cases and Sense, and by the same Spirit and Authority, as the Apostles did, and
wrote their Epistles in; or else it cannot have the same approbation and
acceptance (seeing Gods Name may be used amiss and in vain) but the contrary.

As for Example, Would it not be a presumption, for any Man, to Call or Summons
an earthly King for a Witness or as a Surety, to any of the Man's own
particular and trivial Causes? Yet if the same King should commissionate or
require any of his Subjects, to call him for a Witness or to be a Security for
a thing, wherein the King's Cause is chiefly concerned; it would be then no
presumption in a Subject so to do.

And, furthermore, seeing, according to several express Scriptures, that none
can Worship (or Adore or Reverence, according to the Greek) God aright without
his Spirit, Joh. 4. 23, 24. Nor can any ask or pray, as they ought, except in
Christ's Name or by the Spirits help, Joh. 14. 13, 14. Romans 8. 26, 27. No, nor
yet so much as to truly say, that Jesus is the Lord (though nothing is more
true in it self) without the Holy Ghost (or Spirit) 1 Cor. 12. 3. How can any,
considering these things (that profess either the Scriptures or the Spirit, to
be their Guide or Rule) invoke God for a Witness, or any other purpose, or any
ways to employ and use his Sacred Name for a Security in earthly Matters, if it
was not a proper Oath (which is more than barely to ask a Petition in Prayer)
in their own time? Or at the requirings of others, without they certainly know
that they have his Commission or the Assistance of his Spirit at the time, to
perform it rightly, and with such due reverence as they ought? For if none can
approach Gods presence to worship him, or so much as to ask a Petition in
Prayer, with a fit or due Adoration or Reverence, without Christ's Name or
Authority, or the Spirit's assistance; much more can any invoke God into their
presence for a Witness or Surety, etc. with a sufficient Adoration or
Reverence, without his Commission or the Assistance of his Spirit; for who are
so bold, as peremptorily to approach the presence of, or speak to an earthly
Prince, without his permission first obtained, or some one to introduce him, or
to mediate for him? Much more, how dare any to invoke God into their presence,
upon any account, when they please, and at any time appointed by Man, without
first having obtained a divine Permission, or being required thereto by his
Spirit?

Therefore, from hence it is evidently plain and clear, That we ought to have a
care of using any other form or higher manner of Expressions for asserting the
truth, and promising any thing in all Cases, especially relating to temporal
Matters, but what may plainly agree with Christ's Precept or form of Speech,
which he prescribed and commanded us to use instead of an Oath, Mat. 5. 37.
viz. That our Word or Speech be Yea, yea; and Nay, nay (as is according to the
Greek) which seems to be only a doubling of such words that we commonly use for
affirming or denying of a thing, as Christ himself often did, when he said,
Verily, verily, lest we should run into an Oath unawares, or so far as to use
or take God's Name in vain (that is not to be used customarily or formally) or
at least into any thing which Christ counted was more or higher than Yea, yea;
and Nay, nay; and said, comes of evil: Not but that I believe we may use other
Words or Expressions for Yea, yea; and Nay, nay; that are equivalent thereunto,
as truly or verily, or such like, for Yea and Amen are the same, 2 Cor. 1. but
not such as are higher; for Christ's saying, Whatsoever are more (or more full
according to the Greek) than these, comes of evil, seems plainly to intimate
that there may be other Expressions higher than these, though not in the
Superlative Degree, that are dangerous to use (if they can be lesser than an
Oath) or else why did Christ, here only, forbid what is in the Comparative
Degree to Yea, yea; and Nay, nay; after he had forbidden what was in the
Superlative Degree before in Verse 34. when he forbad all Oaths?

Now for a further Confirmation of all these Reasons and Demonstrations
aforementioned, see what several of the most learned, famous and eminent
Fathers, Doctors, Christians and Martyrs, in diverse and former Ages, have said
and believed concerning the same; and especially that we should not go higher,
or exceed Christ's Evangelical Sentence of Yea, yea; and Nay, nay; in all Cases
where Oaths are required.

1. SImoc^atus Epist. 33. F. says, Strange, that faithful Yea and Nay is
stopped, when Perfidiousness, with an Oath, can pass all Guards, Courts and
Offices.

Observation, Here this Author believed, That Yea and Nay was sufficient to be
taken, in all Cases, instead of an Oath.

2. Tertul. de Idololatria, Cap. 11. He which signs a Bill of Security,
containing and confirmed by an Oath, is guilty of Swearing as if he had spoken
it.

Observe. Here this learned Author esteemed a Swearer guilty of something, which
surely must be evil, and withal in such necessary Cases, as Bills of Security;
though the Person himself spoke not one Word, nor yet writ one Syllable of the
Oath therein contained; but only instead thereof set his Name to the Bill.

3. Clem. Alex. Strom. Lib. 7. It suffices to add unto his Affirming or
Denying this, viz. I speak truly, That he begets Faith in them who perceives
not the stability of his Answer.

Observe. Here is the utmost Confirmation that the Author allows, and that only
to such as may not at first perceive the Truth, and not to gratify such as
questions it merely from incredulity and distrust.

4. Clem. Alex. Strom. Lib. 7. Neither does he Swear, as being one who has
determined to put for his affirming Yea, and for his denying Nay.

Observe. Here also the same Author counts Yea and Nay sufficient, instead of
Swearing.

5. Athanasius, on the Passion of Christ, says, The Evangelical Sentence of
the Lord is, Let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay; thus far we, who are in
Christ, may confirm our words with Asseverations; and with no further Progress
let us flee to, or approach Oaths.

Observe. What can be said plainer against rising higher, or using any greater
Asseveration than Yea, yea; and Nay, nay, instead of Oaths?

6. Again, by the same learned and eminent Author on the same Subject; If,
therefore, he that Swears has Faith and Truth; what use is there of an Oath?
But if he has no Faith nor Truth; why do we undertake such an Impiety, that
for poor silly Men, and these Mortal too, we call to witness God, that is above
Men? For if it be a base part to call to witness an Earthly King, to the lowest
Judicature, as one that is greater than both Actors and Judges; why do we cite
him that is uncreated to created things, and make God to be despised of Men?
(...) that exceeds all Iniquity and Audaciousness; what then is to be done? No
more, but that our Yea be Yea, and our Nay be Nay; and, in short, that we do
not lie.

Observe. Here are eminent Reasons against all Swearing, and the necessity
thereof; as well for such as cannot be believed and trusted, as for those that
can, though in Courts of Judicature: And, likewise, against the using God's
sacred Name for a Surety, etc. in human Affairs: And, also, against exceeding
or going beyond the simplicity of Yea, yea; and Nay, Nay; in all humane Cases
and Affairs.

7. Hillary, on Mat. 5. 34. Faith does remove the custom of an Oath, making the
businesses of our Life to be determined in Truth, and laying aside the
affecting to deceive, prescribing the simplicity of Speaking and Hearing, that
what was, was, and what was not, was not that the business of deceiving might
be apparent between it is, and it is not; and what is more is all of evil.

Observe. Here this Author holds, That Faith prescribes the simplicity of
Speaking and Hearing, for determining the businesses of our Life; and what is
more than such simplicity, he counts to be all of evil. Therefore, whom ought
Christians to follow or imitate; Faith, that prescribed such simplicity; or
Infidelity and Distrust, that at first, instead thereof, prescribed (or was the
cause of prescribing) Oaths?

8. Chrysostom, on Mat. Hom. 17. Then verily, when they appeared unfaithful,
they called God to witness, as giving a Surety for security for their words;
for an Oath is a Suretyship, where their Behaviors have no trust or credit.
And because Men so little trust one another, they seek God for a Surety; not
Man. Secondly, he is in the same Crime who receives an Oath, if he draws God to
be a Surety for Contracts, and say, that he will not trust except he have him.
Oh monstrous thing! Oh shameful Disgrace! Thou a Worm, Dust and Ashes, and a
Vapor, dare thou snatch thy Lord, who art such an one, for a Surety, and
compellest to accept him?

Observe. Here this eminent Author, whom, and whose Authority the Martyrs often
quoted and used, shows the danger of using or invoking (or as he calls it
snatching) God's sacred Name for a Surety, etc. in humane Affairs, as well to
such as require it, as to those that so do it.

9. Further, by the Author in the same Discourse, Ye know not what God is, and
with what Mouth he ought to be invocated. But now we vainly distract that
honorable Name, which is a Name above every Name, which is wonderful in all
the Earth, which the Devils hearing, do tremble at; Oh most contemptible
Custom, which has done that! Ought not one even to dread, when God is named?
But even among the Jews this Name was so Reveverend, that it was written on the
Plate of the Mitre, and none might bear these Letters of the Name of God, but
only the High Priest: And now, also, we bear his Name tenderly. If it was not
lawful for all to name God simply; how great Audaciousness is it to call it in
witness?

Observe. Now let all consider what Reasons here are; that with what Mouth, and
with what extraordinary Fear and Reverence God's Name ought to be used, in any
respect, which surely can never rightly be done by those that have no Faith or
Credit; nor yet by all that are or may be required to use it in humane and
earthly Affairs. Therefore, from hence may be seen an invincible Reason against
all Swearing, and the naming or using God's sacred Name any ways, to confirm
the truth of any Speech relating to humane and worldly Matters. As for such as
are true Men, and dare not lie, there is no need of any more than a simple
affirming or denial; and Swearing, and also the using of God's sacred Name,
must consequently be in vain, which all Christians will grant ought not to be;
and for those Men as are false, and that their simple Assertion cannot be
believed; such are not worthy to have God's Name in their Mouths.

10. Likewise, still further, by the same Author; Tell me now if any should
call down an Angel from Heaven, and tell him, That he must stand and hear our
Sermons, as if he must be thereby instructed; would it not be a ridiculous and
confused thing?

Observe. Here is a comparison against applying superior things to earthly and
inferior uses.

11. Also, again, by the same Author; Do not use thy Mouth to Swear, nor be
familiar with the holy Name.

Observe. Here is a pretty Caution against using God's sacred Name in common and
earthly Affairs; because it is too great to be used so commonly and familiarly.

12. Jerome on Jer. 4. Book 1. Chap. 3. And what is said in the old Testament?
The Lord lives is an Oath, to the condemning of all the Dead, by whom all
Idolatry Swears.

Observe. Here the words [the Lord liveth] as they were used in the old
Testament, in temporal Matters, is counted an Oath by this learned Expositor.

13. Theophylact. on Mat. 5. says, To Swear or adjure more to Yea and Nay, is
of the Devil.

Observe. Here Is a Reproof for such as cannot be content with the simplicity of
Yea and Nay.

14. Jansenius on Mat. 5. says, Yea and Amen are the same, 2 Cor. 1. not
Swearing but Affirming.

Observe. Here Is an Authority, that Amen or Verily is but equivalent to Yea; and
so, therefore, may be used instead of an Oath.

Euthynnius Zagabonus, on Mat. 5. Page 43. says, But let your Words be Yea,
yea; and Nay, nay; etc. Let your Speech be, when you affirm, Yea; and when you
deny, Nay; and use only these for, or instead of Oaths, to Confirmation, and no
other than Yea and Nay: What is adjoined besides these he calls an Oath.

Observe. Here this Expositor is very strict for the simplicity of Yea and Nay,
and thinks that Christ esteemed any thing, which is added beyond that, to be an
Oath.

16. J. Fox, Marty. V. 3. p. 910, 911. Elizabeth Young said, I understand not
what an Oath is, and therefore I will take no such thing upon me. And in Answer
to the Bishop about it, said, Christ says, That whatever is more than Yea,
yea; and Nay, and Nay; it comes of evil.

Observe. Here this sincere Christian, because, not understanding the extent of
Oaths, dare venture no further than Yea, yea; and Nay, nay; whatever she
suffered therefore, which she then run the hazard of.

17. Erasmus on Mat. 5. Two words be sufficient, Nay and Yea; whereby thou
deniest that which thou do not promise, and whereby thou do perform that
which thou did promise by plain word, that thou would do; if there be any
more, besides these, it must needs come of Evil and Sin:

Observe. Here is this learned Man's Judgment of the sufficiency of Nay and Yea,
and of the danger of exceeding them.

18. Jacobus Faber on Mat 5. Page 23, 24. Unto true Men, it is sufficient that a
true Man gain belief, if he say, that the Lord has commanded Yea, yea, in
affirming, Nay, nay, in denying. Who ever spoke more seriously than our
Savior? Whom more necessary things? Yet he never used other Speech, than that
Verily, verily, I say unto you, or some other such like; which was a true form
or manner to them that Swore not.

Observe. Here this Author is plain concerning what we may only use instead of
an Oath.

19. Again, further, by the same Author; If it be manifest that he that is
called into Judgment be verily good and true, it is enough to hear of him, Yea
or Nay but if that be not evident, or that it b^ evident that he is bad,
perhaps that is required of him which ought not to be required.

Observe. Here Is another Testimony of the sufficiency of Yea and Nay, instead of
an Oath, to a true Man; and the danger of requiring more, though from one that
is either doubtful or apparently false.

20. Suarez De quaest. Jur. Christ. p. 276 said, Grant this were possible to
bring God for a Witness (which this Author questioned) it seems disorderly to
bring the Person of God to confirm Men's businesses, Covenants or Words; because
i^ is disorderly to order things of an higher Order, to those that are
inferior: Much more is it disorderly to mix the sacred Authority of God to the
profane, or common Words and Business of Men.

Observe. Here is a notable Testimony against using God's sacred Name to confirm
humane and temporal Affairs.

21. Joac. Camer. and P. Loseler. Villerius's Marginal Note upon Mat. 5. 37.
Whatsoever you vouch, vouch it barely; and whatsoever you deny, deny it barely,
without any more words.

Observe. Here is another Testimony for the keeping to the simplicity of
equivalency of Speech to Yea, yea; and Nay, nay.

22. Bishop Usher, If the Question be weighty, whether (says the Bishop) the
Doubt may be ended with Truly or Verily; or doubtingly, with Verily, verily, as
Christ did for you, by his Example, we ought to forbear an Oath, Mat. 5. 37.

Observe. See here the utmost that this learned and eminent Bishop allows to be
used instead of an Oath, although in doubtful Cases.

23. Bishop Gauden, in his Discourse for solemn Swearing, says or confesses
thus much, That the ancient Christians and Fathers, etc. (refusing to Swear)
said to the Heathen, Christianus Sum, I am a Christian; to each other Yea, yea;
Nay, nay; thereby keeping up the Sanctity and Credit of their Profession.

Observe. Then it is plain, those that have went, or shall go beyond this
simplicity of Yea, yea; and Nay, Nay; did, or must, decline from the Sanctity
and Credit of the Profession of the Primitive Christians.

24. There was a People in the City of Middleburgh that could not Swear at all,
called the Menists; who proffered to the then Grave of Nassau, and Prince of
Orange, that their Yea might pass for an Oath; and it was granted them in the
year, 1577.

Observe. See here, that these conscientious People proffered no further than the
simplicity of their Yea, etc. to be taken instead of an Oath.

So now, considering the demonstrative Reasons, and the many Authorities
aforementioned, so wonderfully concurring to the same thing; with what face or
pretense can any, that sincerely profess Christianity, take any Oath? Or use
any higher Expressions, for confirming humane and temporal Matters, than
Christ's Evangelical Sentence of Yea, yea; and Nay, Nay; or what is equivalent
thereto? And what Christian Men, or Magistrates, or Powers of the Earth, can
awfully prescribe or require more than Christ has permitted herein? And who
can undertake or pretend to prescribe a better form of Words or Expression,
than Christ has prescribed and allowed us, by his Command and Example, to be
used instead of an Oath?

And if Christ has not limited us thereby to them bare words, or to that
particular form of Speech, yet surely he has to a degree of Speech in our
affirming or denying, beyond which, to be sure, Christians ought not to go. But
I think it is much easier, as well as safer, for them, to practice that or such
like forms as Christ has left us, than it will be to fix and agree to
Overpluses.

Here follow a few Lines, by way of Postscript, from one that took a short view
of this Treatise; which I thought meet also to Insert.
I Have taken a short view of this Manuscript, with the Authorities therein
quoted, and it seems to me highly to favor the Doctrine of the People called
QUAKERS, who have been, and are, exposed to great Sufferings, for their
refusing to Swear in any Case; however, let none, therefore, slight the
Authorities, Arguments and Reasons therein urged, but rather, by express
Scripture, without undue Consequences and corrupt Meanings disprove; for how
mean soever the Instruments are that God makes use of, they are not to be
slighted; for the Ass was made to rebuke, with Man's Voice, the Prophets
madness, and then saw more than he did, and all his Blows could not get him
forward; and the Reason you know was, he saw the Angel of the Lord with a drawn
Sword in his Hand. And, notwithstanding, the Sufferings that the QUAKERS have
been, and are exposed to, and the Laws that on this foot have been made against
them; yet who can get them any further than a bare affirming or denying,
because of Christ's Precept and his Apostles? And although they use the Name of
God, and those very words in a religious way, which makes up the common and
formal Oaths, yet are very cautious of making use of that sacred Name in their
worldly or temporal Affairs; and urging, that none can call Jesus Lord, but by
the Holy Ghost And I have heard they have been very sollicitous to the
Government, to have their solemn Words taken instead o^ an Oath, upon
subjecting to the sam^ Punishment or Penalties that is due to Perjured Persons,
if they affirm o^ deny falsely, which to me indeed seem^ very reasonable to be
granted them on those Terms: Although I have heard the Government are for
obliging them to some Form of Speech in their solemn Affirmations, wherein the
Name of God is made use of, as these or the like words, viz. [before] [in the
presence] of God, which the tendency of this Treatise seems not to allow in any
temporal Affair, without a particular Command; and likewise to exclude that,
because it so strictly contends for the literal Sense of Mat. 5. Jam. 5. That
its not reasonable to conclude, that God will give a Command to any, to
contradict his own Son's positive Precept. Upon the whole, I must confess, The
plain and simple way of affirming or denying has a tendency to advance the
Repute of the Christian Religion; and this Cautiousness of making use of the
reverent Name of God in temporal Affairs, if duly observed, would be a good
step to put a stop to the breach of that Command, which forbids taking his Name
in vain; though that may be done, and is too much in Matters relating to
spiritual Things, as well as temporal; and if once People were come to God's
Spirit, and its Leadings in all things, as their Phrases are, they would not
take his Name in vain, in any wise.

And for those that look upon themselves concerned to stand firm in this
Testimony, and most clear and strict to the literal Sense thereof, it is certain
that not to make use of Phrases or Words* [before, or in the sight, or presence
of God] or to name God at all, is most likely to keep clear from that which is
more than Yea, yea; and Nay, nay; and comes of evil; for if once it be
allowed, that the Name of God may be made use of in affirming or denying, or
binding the truth of our Words about any temporal Matters; how shall we able to
distinguish what is more than Yea, yea; and Nay, nay; that comes of evil, and
what is not? For if I say in Evidence, in relation to such an Affair [before
God, or so help me God, in the Sight or Presence of God] this is true or false;
what do I less than Swear, and imply, by such a Speech, God should judge,
condemn or punish me, if what I affirm be not true? And wherefore do I use it,
but to beget a greater Credit to what I say, by making use of his Name that is
greater than my self? Which, as the Apostle said, is the manner of those that
Swear, to Swear by the greater, Heb. 6. 16.

Vale.
FINIS.

